CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF COLQUITT, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: September 8, 1998  Effective: September 8, 1998 
____________ 

 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
COLQUITT, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Luther Y. Clearman 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jerry Chapman 
Rita Glass 
J. C. Phillips, Jr. 
George Williams 
City Council 
____________ 
Chris M. Hobby 
City Manager 
____________ 
Ronald Rentz 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Vicki Phillips 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Colquitt, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1976 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1976 Code, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Chris Hobby, City Manager, and Mr. Ronald H. Rentz, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Colquitt, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Colquitt, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Colquitt, Georgia. 1998. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE OF SEPTEMBER 8, 1998 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Colquitt, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Colquitt, Georgia: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Colquitt, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 74, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 11, 1997, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 11, 1997, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective September 8th, 1998. 
Passed and adopted by the city council this 8th day of September, 1998. 
By: 

ATTEST: 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council of the City of Colquitt, Georgia, held on the 8TH day of SEPTEMBER, 1998. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
AN ACT 
To provide a new charter for the City of Colquitt, Georgia; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, method of filling vacancies, compensation, expenses, prohibitions, conflicts of interest, suspension and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for elections; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for oaths, organization, meetings, quorum, voting, rules, and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for the office of mayor and certain duties and powers relative to the office of mayor; to provide for administrative affairs and responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city manager, a city attorney, a city clerk, a city treasurer, and other personnel and matters relating thereto; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof; to provide for the court's jurisdiction, powers, practices, and procedures; to provide for the right of certiorari; to provide for taxation, licenses, and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for auditing, accounting, budgeting, and appropriations; to provide for contracts and purchases; to provide for the disposition of property; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for eminent domain; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal a specific Act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's charter, being H.B 950. The charter was approved by the Governor on April 16, 1999, numbered Act Number 107(H.B. 950). Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original charter (H.B. 950). Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

SECTION 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Colquitt in Miller County, Georgia, is reincorporated by the enactment of this Act and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the "City of Colquitt, Georgia." References in this Act to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Colquitt, Georgia. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
SECTION 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Act with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in the manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk of the city and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Colquitt, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the mayor shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
SECTION 1.12. - Municipal powers. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Act. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Act or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. Said powers shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinance enacted under this paragraph; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Act and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of this city; 
(4)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures not inconsistent with general law; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades except as otherwise prohibited by general law; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for the failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governments and entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation within the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Act or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers, and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefor; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(21)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Act and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and the standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right of way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge; and to impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees from those connected to the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxing or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)  Special Tax District and collection of fees, assessments and other similar taxes. The City of Colquitt is authorized to levy and provide for the collection of fees, assessments and other similar taxes for the cost of providing administrative services to the businesses and households for the City of Colquitt, the cost of providing, maintaining and improving streets and sidewalks, including maintaining and improving drainage ditches abutting thereto, the cost of providing street lights for the citizens of the City of Colquitt, including but not limited to electrical expense, and for such other public improvements and purposes as determined by the Council for the City of Colquitt. Businesses shall include all businesses receiving services within the corporate limits of the City of Colquitt, with fees and assessments being based on each service connection for water and/or sewage. Residences shall include homes receiving water and/or sewage services and as each apartment unit receiving water and sewage service. 
(37)  Ad valorem taxes. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Other taxes. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Act as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Act; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Act shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 11-11-10, § 1) 
SECTION 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Act. If this Act makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS, AND REMOVAL 

SECTION 2.10. - City council creation; composition; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers, to be known as the city council. The city council established in this Act shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the city governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall exercise their powers in such manner as prescribed by this Act, the Constitution and applicable general laws of the State of Georgia, or if not prescribed, in such manner as prescribed by the duly established ordinances of the City of Colquitt. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless he shall have been a resident of this city for 12 months immediately preceding the election of mayor or councilmembers; each such person shall continue to reside within the city during said period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
(c)  No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember who shall have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, unless such person has received a full pardon and has all rights of citizenship restored. 
SECTION 2.11. - Elections. 
(a)  The city council of the City of Colquitt which existed immediately prior to the date this Act becomes effective in 1999, is continued in existence, but on and after that date shall be constituted and elected as provided in this Act. The City Council of the City of Colquitt so continued and constituted, sometimes referred to in this Act as the "city council," shall continue to have the powers, duties, rights, obligations, and liabilities of that city council as existed immediately prior to the date this Act becomes effective in 1999. 
(b)  Those members of the city council who are serving as such immediately prior to the date this Act first becomes effective in 1999, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office, shall continue to serve out their remaining terms of office and until the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those successors and all future successors to councilmembers whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected from council districts described in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  For purposes of electing councilmembers, the city is divided into four council districts. One member of the city council shall be elected from each such district. The council districts shall be and correspond to those four numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Operator: local Client: colquittcity Plan: colqp5. 
(d)  When used in such attachment, the terms "Tract," "Block," and "Block Group" shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the City of Colquitt which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the City of Colquitt which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any council district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia. 
(e)  In order to be elected or appointed as a councilmember from a council district, a person must be a qualified elector of the city, must have resided in that district prior to election or appointment thereto and, if elected, must receive a majority of the votes cast for that office in that district only and not at large. Only electors who are residents of that council district may vote for a member of the city council for that district. At the time of qualifying for election as a member of the city council from a council district, each candidate for such office shall specify the council district for which that person is a candidate. A person elected or appointed as a member of the city council from a council district must continue to reside in that district during that person's term of office or that office shall become vacant. 
(f)  The mayor may reside anywhere within the City of Colquitt, must be a qualified elector of the city, and must receive a majority of votes cast for that office in the entire city. The mayor must continue to reside within the city during that person's term of office or that office shall become vacant. 
(g)  City Council Posts 1, 2, 3, and 4 as they existed immediately prior to the date on which this section first becomes effective in 1999 shall be designated Council Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively, but as newly described in this section. On and after the date this section first becomes effective in 1999, such councilmembers serving from those former council posts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective council districts as newly described under this section. 
(h)  The first successors to the mayor and those councilmembers deemed to be serving in Council Districts 2 and 3 pursuant to subsection (g) of this section shall be elected at the municipal general election in 1999, shall take office the first day of January immediately following such election, and shall serve for initial terms of office of four years each. The first successors to those councilmembers deemed to be serving in Council Districts 1 and 4 pursuant to subsection (g) of this section shall be elected at the municipal general election in 2001, shall take office the first day of January immediately following such election, and shall serve for initial terms of office of four years each. Successors to the mayor and councilmembers whose initial terms expire as provided in this subsection, and all future successors to the mayor and councilmembers whose terms are to expire, shall be elected at the municipal general election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, shall take office the first day of January immediately following such election, and shall serve for terms of office of four years each. Persons elected as mayor or councilmembers shall serve for the terms specified in this subsection and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(i)  Municipal general elections for the City of Colquitt shall be conducted on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 1999 and on such day every odd-numbered year thereafter. All municipal general and special elections shall be governed by Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." Except as otherwise provided by this Act, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options or duties under that Chapter 2. 
SECTION 2.12. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)  The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Act or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Upon the suspension from office of the mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant, for any reason other than expiration of term: 
(1)  If the vacancy occurs within the final 27 months of the term of office, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term; 
(2)  If the vacancy occurs before the final 27 months of the term of office, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a person to fill such vacancy until a successor is elected at a special election which shall be conducted at the time of the next municipal general election which is held following the occurrence of such vacancy. 
Persons selected to fill the remainder of a term of office shall serve until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(H.B. 419, approved by the Governor, 6-3-03) 
SECTION 2.13. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
SECTION 2.14. - Election by majority. 
The candidate receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
SECTION 2.15. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance and in accordance with Chapter 35 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
SECTION 2.16. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Act applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, object, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he has a financial interest. 
(b)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who has any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he shall disqualify himself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Act applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Act applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective city office or other city employment during the term for which he was elected. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any person holding employment on the effective date of this Act. 
SECTION 2.17. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, a councilmember, or other appointed officers provided for in this Act shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any qualifications of office as provided by this Act or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating Section 2.16 or any other express prohibition of this Act; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Act or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of any officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By the vote of three councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have such rights as provided by law. 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Miller County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Colquitt. 
ARTICLE III - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT, GENERAL AUTHORITY, AND ORDINANCES 

SECTION 3.10. - General power and authority. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Act, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this Act. 
SECTION 3.11. - Organization. 
(a)  The city council shall hold an organizational meeting at the first regular meeting in January following an election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of the office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the Act thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(b)  Upon nomination by the mayor, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore by majority vote. The mayor pro tempore shall serve for a term of one year and until the first regular meeting in January following such election and until the election of a successor. The mayor pro tempore shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during any disability or absence of the mayor. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. The city council shall by majority vote elect a presiding officer from its number for any period in which the mayor pro tempore is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor. Such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of the city council. 
SECTION 3.12. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
SECTION 3.13. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
SECTION 3.14. - Procedures. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Act and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairmen and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
SECTION 3.15. - Voting. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, the mayor or mayor pro tem and two councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. The mayor shall have a vote only in the case of a tie vote by council members. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(c)  Once a quorum is established, the quorum cannot be defeated by a subsequent departure of a councilmember. 
SECTION 3.16. - Ordinances. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Colquitt hereby ordains..." and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in Section 3.18. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
SECTION 3.17. - Effect of ordinances. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
SECTION 3.18. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance shall not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance shall also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
SECTION 3.19. - Codes. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of subsection (b) of Section 3.16 of this Act for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 3.20 of this Act. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
SECTION 3.20. - Codification of ordinances. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and shall contain such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Colquitt, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Act to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Act amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Act and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Act amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code then in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation within the code. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
SECTION 3.21. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
By a majority vote, the city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix his or her compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office. At the time of his or her appointment, the appointee need not be a resident of the city or state, but during the manager's tenure of office, he or she shall reside within either the City of Colquitt or Miller County. No councilmember shall receive such appointment during the term for which the manager shall have been appointed, nor within one year after the expiration of the councilmember's term. 
(H.B. 419, approved by Governor, 6-3-03) 
SECTION 3.22. - Removal of city manager. 
(a)  The city council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedures. 
(1)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the manager. 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, he may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the city council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing. 
(3)  If the city manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the city manager has requested a public hearing, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after the public hearing. 
(b)  The city manager shall continue to receive his salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
SECTION 3.23. - Acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate, subject to approval of the city council a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the city manager during his temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or his disability shall cease. 
SECTION 3.24. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under this Act. He shall have the following powers and duties. 
(1)  He shall appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers he appoints, except as otherwise provided by law, or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this Act, and except authorizing the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in such department or office. 
(2)  He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Act or by law. 
(3)  He shall attend all city council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but he may not vote. The city manager shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the city council. 
(4)  He shall see that all laws, provisions of this Act, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed. 
(5)  He shall prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council, together with a message describing the important features, and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(6)  He shall submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(7)  He shall make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction and supervision. 
(8)  He shall recommend to the governing body a standard schedule of pay for each appointive office and position in the city service, including minimum, intermediate and maximum rates. 
(9)  He shall recommend to the governing body, from time to time, adoption of such measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services. 
(10)  He shall consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his jurisdiction, with the approval of the city council. The city manager may be the head of one or more departments. 
(11)  He shall see that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced. 
(12)  He shall investigate the affairs of the city or any department or divisions thereof. He shall investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city, and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the city, and see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed. 
(13)  He shall devote his entire time to the discharge of all official duties. 
(14)  He shall keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable. 
(15)  He shall perform other such duties as are specified in this Act or as may be required by the city council. 
SECTION 3.25. - Council interference with administration. 
Neither the city council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to or removal from office by the city manager or any of the manager's subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative services of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 3.12, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
SECTION 3.26. - Emergencies. 
In case of an accident, disaster or other circumstances creating a public emergency, the city manager may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting such emergency, but the manager shall file promptly with the council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
SECTION 3.27. - Bond. 
The city manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the council. Such bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of all the manager's duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city. 
SECTION 3.28. - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution. 
SECTION 3.29. - Vacancy. 
Any vacancy in the office of the city manager shall be filled within 180 days after the effective date of such vacancy. 
SECTION 3.30. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified. He shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city immediately preceding his election. He shall continue to reside in this city during the period of his service. He shall forfeit his office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for the city council. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for the city council. 
SECTION 3.31. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes, and be the official spokesman for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  Be counted toward a quorum as any other councilmember; and 
(6)  Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish. 
ARTICLE IV - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

SECTION 4.10. - Department heads. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Act or by law, the directors of departments and other officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency. 
(e)  All directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be appointed by the city manager with confirmation of appointment by the city council. The city manager may suspend or remove directors under his supervision but such suspension or removal shall not be effective for ten calendar days following the city manager's giving written notice of such action and the reason therefor to the director involved and to the city council. The director involved may appeal to the city council which, after a hearing, may override the city manager's action by a vote of three councilmembers. 
SECTION 4.11. - Boards. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Act or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Act or by law. 
(e)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(f)  All board members shall serve at will and any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this Act or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice-chairman, and may elect as its secretary one of its members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Act, an ordinance of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
SECTION 4.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney who shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall have actively practiced law for at least five years. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court, shall attend the meetings of the council as directed, shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city attorney. 
SECTION 4.13. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this Act, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city clerk. 
SECTION 4.14. - Treasurer. 
The city council shall appoint a city treasurer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Act and the ordinances of the city and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes to the city. The city treasurer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the treasurer. 
SECTION 4.15. - Rules and regulations. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Act concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and applications of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of Personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE V - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

SECTION 5.10. - Municipal court. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Colquitt, Georgia. 
SECTION 5.11. - Judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 3.14 of this Act. 
SECTION 5.12. - Convening of court. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
SECTION 5.13. - Powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Act, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months, or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that state law has been violated. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Act or by law. 
(i)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorized the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
SECTION 5.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Miller County, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
SECTION 5.15. - Rules. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE VI - FINANCE 

SECTION 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
SECTION 6.11. - Millage. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
SECTION 6.12. - Occupation taxes and regulatory fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation taxes and regulatory fees as are not denied by law. Such taxes and fees may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes and fees as provided in Section 6.18 of this Act. 
SECTION 6.13. - Licenses. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individual or corporation who transacts business in this city or who practices or offers to practice any profession or calling within the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Act. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
SECTION 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by him. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
SECTION 6.15. - Sewer fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Act. 
SECTION 6.16. - Roads. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess, charge, and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Act. 
SECTION 6.17. - Other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
SECTION 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Act by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
SECTION 6.19. - Borrowing. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Act or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
SECTION 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
SECTION 6.21. - Loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
SECTION 6.22. - Accounting and budgeting. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
SECTION 6.23. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. The city council shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
SECTION 6.24. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
SECTION 6.25. - Adoption. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Act and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  After the conducting of a budget hearing, the city council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than July 1 of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.23 of this Act. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. 
SECTION 6.26. - Levy of taxes. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
SECTION 6.27. - Changes in budget. 
The city council by majority vote may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes. 
SECTION 6.28. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  At the time of submitting the budget for each year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 3.17 of this Act. 
(b)  No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations were made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by majority vote of the city council. 
SECTION 6.29. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Act. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
SECTION 6.30. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by him to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 3.14 of this Act. 
SECTION 6.31. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
SECTION 6.32. - Sale of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon request by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

SECTION 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
SECTION 7.11. - Rules and regulations. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Act are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
SECTION 7.12. - Act language on other general matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Act, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
SECTION 7.13. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this Act are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
SECTION 7.14. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Colquitt, Georgia, approved April 17, 1975 (Ga. L. 1975, p. 3521), together with all amendatory Acts thereto, are repealed in their entirety. 
SECTION 7.15. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
SECTION 7.16. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table provides a listing of ordinances/resolutions amending the 1999 Charter and their disposition. 

 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Colquitt, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1976, § 1-101) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
Charter. The word "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Colquitt, Georgia. 
City. The words "the city" shall mean the City of Colquitt in the County of Miller and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
City council. The words "city council" or "the council" shall mean the mayor and councilmen of the City of Colquitt, Georgia. 
Code. The word "Code" shall mean this Code of Ordinances, City of Colquitt, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The word "county" or "the county" shall mean the County of Miller, State of Georgia. 
Day. The word "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the city council." 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Colquitt, Georgia" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. O.C.G.A. means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and," and the word "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are hereby adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The word "person" means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasipublic. 
Personal property. The words "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The word "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council. 
Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the city seal. 
Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The word "sheriff" shall mean the sheriff of Miller County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city. 
Tenant. The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days. 
Writing. The words "writing" and "written" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1976, §§ 1-102, 1-103) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1976, § 1-104) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1976, § 1-105) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1976, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  Any administrative ordinance or resolution of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Colquitt, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1976, § 1-107) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1976, § 1-108) 
State Law reference— Exemplification of municipal minutes and other records, O.C.G.A. § 24-7-21; altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1; records management plan required, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e). 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations; additional penalties; jail fund; depositing of money in funds. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city prison or in the county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city; whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding six months, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor. All sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond; the procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizances set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(d)  In every case in which the municipal court shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state or any offense against a municipal ordinance, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(e)  At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this state or a violation of a municipal ordinance, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In every case in which the municipal court shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be collected. 
(f)  The additional penalties set forth in this section shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the Peace Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund, or by any other provision of law. 
(g)  The additional penalties as prescribed in this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds. Such additional penalties shall be paid over to the city council by the tenth day of each month following the month in which these sums are collected. 
(h)  All such sums collected and paid over to the city council shall be deposited into a special account which shall be known as the county jail fund. 
(i)  All moneys collected pursuant to this section and placed in the county jail fund shall be expended solely and exclusively for constructing, operating, and staffing the county correctional facilities, or for such other purposes as specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95. 
(j)  The additional penalties provided for by this section shall not be imposed or collected in the municipal court unless the city and the county enter into an intergovernmental contract providing for use of the county jail, correctional institution or detention facility by municipal prisoners. 
(Code 1976, § 1-109) 
Editor's note— By agreement dated April 9, 1991, the county agreed to house city prisoners at the county jail on the terms and conditions set forth in the agreement. An official copy of the agreement is on file and available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; display of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); confinement of violators of municipal ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; authorization of municipal courts to impose any punishment up to the maximum specified by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(c); limitations on home rule powers of municipalities with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); payments to Peace Officers Annuity and Benefit Fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; preemption of ordinances to general law, Ga. Const. art. III, § III, ¶ IV. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any administrative ordinance or resolution of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(13); civil emergencies, ch. 26; courts, ch. 30; administration of flood damage prevention regulations, § 38-66 et seq.; administration and enforcement of waste management and litter control, § 50-56 et seq.; taxation, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; authority to adopt municipal ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Polling places. 
The polling place within the city shall be the Miller County election building. 
(Code 1976, § 2-403; Ord. of 7-13-99) 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-2—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-31. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the city council, its authorities, boards, commissions and committees shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than closed meetings as provided in section 2-35. 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-32. - Regular meetings. 
The regular meetings of the city council shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the second Tuesday of each month. All regular meetings shall be held in the city hall annex. A notice containing the information described in this section shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at city hall. No official action may be taken on any issue at a work session which may be called by the mayor or three councilmembers. 
State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-33. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location by the mayor for any reason. Other special meetings may be scheduled by the mayor or at the request of three councilmembers. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. This written notice shall include the purpose of the meeting. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to the legal organ of the county and to each member of the council. 
State Law reference— Due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-34. - Emergency meetings. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the city council may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the county and to each councilmember as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
Sec. 2-35. - Closed meetings. 
Closed meetings of the city council may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the council is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. No closed meeting shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the council taken in a public meeting. The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the councilmembers present, those voting for the closed meeting and the specific reasons for the closed meeting. Minutes of the closed meeting may be maintained by the city clerk at the direction of the mayor. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the council may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated or abandoned, or court proceedings have been initiated. Voting on any issue shall not take place during a closed meeting but shall be done, if appropriate, in open session following the closed meeting. 
State Law reference— Exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-36. - Agenda; citizen appearances. 
The agenda for regular meetings of the city council shall be prepared on the Friday before the scheduled meeting. Citizens desiring to bring business before the council shall notify the city clerk by noon Thursday, the day before, in order to include the business on the agenda for consideration by the city council. The presiding officer at such meeting shall have the discretion to recognize any person attending a city council meeting. 
(Mo. of 5-11-04) 
Sec. 2-37. - Rules of procedure. 
Rules of procedure shall be as prescribed by the city council, and in the absence of such rules, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern. 
Sec. 2-38. - Adoption of ordinances. 
An ordinance may be introduced by the mayor or any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. After introduction, the ordinance must be submitted to the city attorney for approval as to form prior to adoption. Notice of the introduction of the ordinance must be advertised one time in the legal section of the county's legal organ at least one week prior to its adoption. The city clerk shall distribute a copy of the ordinance to the mayor and each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the city clerk. The council will consider adoption or rejection of an ordinance only at a regular meeting after it has been approved in form by the city attorney and properly advertised. This procedure does not apply to emergency ordinances as provided in the city Charter. 
Sec. 2-39. - Standing committees. 
The following may be the standing committees of the city council: 
Finance 
Public safety 
Public works 
Recreation 
The city council may appoint other committees as deemed necessary. 
(Code 1976, § 3-205) 
Secs. 2-40—2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The city compiles and publishes separate, additional administrative regulations and related matters in its manual of personnel policies and procedures. The manual incorporates the retirement plan for city employees and includes regulations pertaining to operation of the police and fire departments. Official copies of all documentation are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-7(4). 
State Law reference— Employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11; expenditure of county funds for insurance and employment benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11.1; civil service system for county employees authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21; county manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22; personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2); municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Public Employee Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-71. - Mayor's recommendations. 
The mayor shall recommend the appointment of the city officers, boards and committee members. 
Sec. 2-72. - Departmental organization. 
The administrative service of the city may be divided into the following departments and department heads: 
Department of public works, director of public works 
Police department, police chief 
Fire department, fire chief 
(Code 1976, § 3-601) 
Sec. 2-73. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The ordinance adopted January 8, 1997, which created the office of city manager is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect. 
Secs. 2-74—2-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Tree board, § 74-66 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-106. - Creation; purpose. 
The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasijudicial, or quasilegislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. 
Sec. 2-107. - Appointment of members. 
All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
Sec. 2-108. - Compensation; expenses. 
The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission or authority. 
Sec. 2-109. - Holding of elective office. 
Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
Sec. 2-110. - Filling of vacancies. 
Any vacancy on a board, commission or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in the Charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by the Charter or by law. 
Sec. 2-111. - Oath. 
No member of a board, commission or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, and such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
Sec. 2-112. - Removal for cause. 
Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of the councilmembers. 
Sec. 2-113. - Election of officers. 
Except as otherwise provided by the Charter or by law, each board, commission or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice-chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the Charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Secs. 2-114—2-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 13, 1998, did not specifically amend the Code and has been included herein as superseding the provisions of former Div. 2, §§ 2-136—2-148, relative to the downtown development authority, which derived from an ordinance adopted Oct. 12, 1982. 
State Law reference— Downtown development authority created, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-4; Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; Georgia Development Authority Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-136. - Management powers, number, qualification and term. 
The property, affairs and business of the downtown development authority of the city shall be managed by its directors consisting of seven persons, appointed from time to time as provided by law (O.C.G.A. § 36-41-1). The qualifications of the directors shall be as provided by law. Each director shall serve for the length of time provided by law. 
(Res. of 10-13-98) 
Sec. 2-137. - Powers. 
The directors shall have such power and authority as is conferred upon them by the Downtown Development Authority Law of 1981, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, and such other power and authority as may be contained under the Constitution and the laws of the state as the same may now or hereafter exist. 
(Res. of 10-13-98) 
Sec. 2-138. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the authority shall be held on the second Wednesday at 2:00 p.m. on the first month of each quarter of the year. Notice of the time and place of such meeting may from time to time be fixed by resolution of the authority, or if not fixed by the chairman in the same manner as hereinafter specified for giving notice of special meetings. All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Georgia Open Code Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). 
(Res. of 10-13-98) 
Sec. 2-139. - Special meetings. 
Special meetings may be held upon the call of the chairman, secretary, treasurer, or any two directors at such time during regular business hours and at such place within the city as shall be specified in the notice of such meeting. Notice of special meetings may be either oral or written. Oral notice may be delivered personally or by telephone and shall be given at least 24 hours prior to the time of the meeting. Written notice may be sent by mail or telegram or delivered personally. If delivered personally or by telegram, such notice shall be delivered 24 hours prior to the time of the meeting. If written notice is sent by mail, such notice shall be mailed two days prior to the time of the meeting. Unless specified otherwise, any notice hereinafter called for in this division shall be given as specified in this section. No notice of any meeting need be given any director who attends such meeting unless such director attending at the beginning of such meeting states any objection or objections to the place and time of the meeting, to the manner in which it has been called or convened or to the transaction of business. No notice shall be required to be given any director who at any time before or after the meeting waives notice of the meeting in writing. 
(Res. of 10-13-98) 
Sec. 2-140. - Quorum. 
A majority of the directors, at a meeting duly assembled shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Unless otherwise specifically required by statute or this division, the act of a majority of such directors present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the authority, and if at any meeting of the authority there shall be less than a quorum, a majority of those present may adjourn the meeting without further notice, until a quorum shall have been obtained. 
(Res. of 10-13-98) 
Sec. 2-141. - Parliamentary procedures. 
In case of dispute concerning parliamentary procedures governing the conduct of meetings of the authority, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern. 
(Res. of 10-13-98) 
Sec. 2-142. - Nominations of members. 
Prior to the expiration of the term of any director of the authority, the chairman shall appoint an owner of real property in the downtown district and an owner of a business establishment whose principal place of business is located in the downtown district, who are not directors of the authority, to act as a nominating committee and to submit nominations for directors to the governing body of the city. 
(Res. of 10-13-98) 
Sec. 2-143. - Officers. 
(a)  Number. The directors shall elect from one of their number a chairman, a secretary, and a treasurer, and the directors shall elect a recording secretary, who may be, but need not be, a director. 
(b)  Election. A meeting shall be held on April 14, 1999, and thereafter at the first regular meeting of every other year for the purpose of electing new officers. Notice of the time and place of such meeting shall be given by the retiring chairman. 
(c)  Term and removal. All officers shall be elected by and serve at the discretion of the directors and any officer may be removed from office, either with or without cause, at any time, by the affirmative vote of the majority of the directors of the authority then in office. A vacancy in any office because of death, resignation, removal, disqualification or otherwise, shall be filled by the directors of the unexpected portion of the term. Resignation shall be submitted in writing to the chairman. 
(d)  Powers. The powers and duties of the officers shall be as provided from time to time by resolution or other directive of the directors. In the absence of such provisions, respective officers shall have the powers and shall discharge the duties customarily and usually held and performed by like officers of authorities similar in organization and purposes to this authority. The recording secretary, if a nonmember, shall attend meetings for the purpose of recording the minutes of such meetings, but shall not have any of the powers, rights, or duties of directors. 
(Res. of 10-13-98) 
Sec. 2-144. - Fiscal year. 
(a)  Time. The fiscal year of the authority shall begin on the first day of July of each year and end on the last day of June of each year. 
(b)  Annual meetings. An annual meeting of the authority shall be held during the first regular meeting of the fiscal year. Notice of the time and place of such meeting shall be given to by the chairman. 
(c)  Annual audit. The treasurer shall cause an annual audit of the books of the authority to be made by the firm which audits the books of the city and present such audit to the directors of the authority. A copy of the audit shall be filed with the state auditor; if necessary, to comply with the Local Government Financial Management Standards Act (Georgia Laws, 1980, p. 1738). 
(Res. of 10-13-98) 
Sec. 2-145. - Corporate seal. 
The seal of the authority shall consist of an impression bearing the name "Downtown Development Authority of the City of Colquitt" around the perimeter and the word "seal" and the year of activation in the center thereof. In lieu thereof, the Authority may use an impression or writing bearing the word "seal" enclosed in parentheses or scroll, which shall also be deemed the seal of the authority. 
(Res. of 10-13-98) 
Sec. 2-146. - Depositories. 
(a)  Establishment. The authority shall from time to time provide by resolution or resolutions for the establishment of depositories for funds of the authority. 
(b)  Execution of notes, drafts, and checks. All drafts, checks, etc. drawn against accounts of the Authority shall be signed by the chairman together with the treasurer or secretary. 
(Res. of 10-13-98) 
Sec. 2-147. - Amendments. 
The by-laws of the authority shall be subject to alteration, amendment or repeal, and new by-laws not inconsistent with any laws of the state creating this authority may be made by affirmative vote of a majority of the directors then holding office at any regular or special meeting of the directors. Proposed amendments shall be submitted in writing to all directors of the authority ten days prior to the meeting at which such amendment will be considered. If such written proposed amendment is submitted by mail, it shall be deemed to be delivered when deposited in the United States mail properly addressed and with sufficient postage thereon. 
(Res. of 10-13-98) 
Sec. 2-148. - Training requirement. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-42-7(d) Except for a director who is a member of the governing body of the city, each authority member shall attend and complete at least eight hours of training on downtown development and redevelopment programs within the first 12 months of an authority member's appointment. Authority members appointed prior to January 1, 1992, shall be exempt unless reappointed for an additional term. 
(Res. of 10-13-98) 
Secs. 2-149—2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 13, 1998, did not specifically amend the Code and has been included herein as superseding the provisions of former Div. 3, §§ 2-171—2-181, relative to the historical commission, which derived from §§ 1.101, 2.101, 3.101, 3.201, 3.301, 3.401, 3.501, 3.601, 4.101, 5.101, and 6.101 an ordinance adopted Jan. 26, 1981. 
State Law reference— Georgia Register of Historic Places, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-50.2; fire safety requirements for historic buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13; grants to municipal corporations for repairs on facilities of historical value, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1; Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.; historic preservation commissions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24; historic landmark or district designation procedure, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26; certificates of appropriateness, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28; certification as rehabilitated historic property for purposes of preferential assessment, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.2; landmark historic property for purposes of ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.3; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq. 

Sec. 2-171. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
In order to provide for the designation, protection preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
The city council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this division to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest of value, in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(1), § I) 
Sec. 2-172. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, door, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the city council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 2-174(b) of this division. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 2-174(c) of this division. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure means a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-173. - Creation; membership; powers; meetings. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Colquitt Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter referred to as "commission"). 
(b)  Commission position within the city. The preservation commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
(c)  Number, appointment, terms and compensation of members. 
(1)  The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
(2)  To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines or architecture, history, planning, archaeology or related professions and at least one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of building construction or real appraisal. 
(3)  Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(d)  Statement of powers. 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the city council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applicants for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this division; 
(4)  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1 through 44-10-5); 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, the city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program; 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Power to adopt rules and standards. The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applicants for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this division. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statutes and in the City Charter. 
(g)  Authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(1), § III) 
Sec. 2-174. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by commission. 
(1)  Mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(2)  Power to recommend districts and buildings to the city council for designation. The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, noncontributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.  Noncontributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in subsection (1) above). 
(c)  Designation of a historic property. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, city, or the state, for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state, or the region; or 
d.  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation. 
b.  For historic properties a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Require public hearings. The commission and the city council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this division. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, required in subsection (a)(3), to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
(6)  City council action on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States Mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this division. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applicants for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(1), § IV) 
Sec. 2-175. - Application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts of involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or noncontributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effort on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness. The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
(1)  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building material, setback and site features, and to the secretary of interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings. 
(2)  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
a.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object. 
b.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
c.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
d.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
e.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
f.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse. 
g.  Whether the building, structure, site, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this division would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to very or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this division. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by united states mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reason for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The city council or the commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this division or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(l)  Recording of applications for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(m)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with city council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection (h)(1) of this section or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action, subsection (h)(2) of this section. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the county superior court in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for city ordinance violations. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(1), § V) 
Sec. 2-176. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental features in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 2-177 of this division and, at the direction of the city council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this division shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(1), § VI) 
Sec. 2-177. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this division shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(1), § VII) 
Secs. 2-178—2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RECREATION BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— State parks, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; Georgia state games commission, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq.; power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 

Sec. 2-201. - Joint system established; vestment of power in board. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 36-64, the board of commissioners of the county and the city council hereby establish a joint recreation system for Miller County, Georgia, and for the City of Colquitt, Georgia. 
(b)  The power to provide, establish, conduct and maintain the joint recreation system is vested in a recreation board, which shall be known as the Colquitt-Miller County Recreation Board, referred to in this division as the "recreation board." 
(Res. of 2-5-85) 
Sec. 2-202. - Membership; terms; vacancies. 
The recreation board shall consist of nine members to be selected as follows: The chairman of the board of commissioners shall appoint five members, and the mayor shall appoint four members. The initial board members shall serve for terms of two years and four years. After the initial terms, all terms shall be for five years. Vacancies in the recreation board and successors for expired terms shall be appointed by the same presiding authority (chairperson or mayor) who made the initial appointment for the unexpired or expired term, as the case may be. 
(Res. of 2-5-85) 
Sec. 2-203. - Powers and responsibilities. 
The recreation board shall possess all the powers and be subject to all the responsibilities of local authorities as provided under O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 
(Res. of 2-5-85) 
Sec. 2-204. - Funding. 
Funding for the recreation board shall be shared equally by the county and by the city, and shall be appropriated from the general treasury of each governing authority. 
(Res. of 2-5-85) 
Secs. 2-205—2-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-216. - Purpose, duties and responsibilities. 
The purpose, duties and responsibilities of the planning commission shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To research, review and make recommendations to the city council on amendments to the land development ordinance and the official land development maps, the comprehensive plan and the elements thereof, and other policies and procedures of the city and related matters. 
(2)  To advise the city council on environmental, public health, safety and general welfare matters which may include infrastructure, historic, business, residential and recreational matters, policies and procedures. 
(3)  To work with various public and private organizations and agencies engaged in or interested in planning and development activities so as to provide leadership in identifying and implementing city objectives for planning and development. 
(4)  To assist the city clerk's office, other city departments, boards and authorities when appropriate to the purpose of the planning commission, and the city council in carrying out their various functions by making recommendations to achieve the desired benefits on behalf of present and future city residents and businesses as a whole. 
(5)  To report to the city council after research and review on any matter of class of matter referred to the planning commission by the city council before action is taken thereon by them. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-217. - Members, terms of appointment and officers. 
(a)  Generally. The city council shall appoint five citizens of the city to serve as members of the city planning commission. The members of the city planning commission shall be appointed for terms of three years. The city planning commission shall elect as officers, one member to serve as chairman and one member to serve as vice-chairman. The officers of the planning commission shall be elected annually at the first public hearing scheduled in January of each year. Election shall be by a majority vote of the planning commission. The term of office for each officer shall begin immediately upon election. An officer shall serve until relieved of his or her duties by the city council or until he or she voluntarily steps down. In the event of an extended absence of either officer, the planning commission may appoint either a temporary chairman or vice-chairman to fill the office until the return of the absent officer or until the expiration of his or her term of office, whichever comes first. 
(b)  Chairman. The chairman shall be elected for a term of one year beginning in January, 1999, and each year thereafter. The chairman shall preside at all meetings and have all duties conferred by parliamentary usage on such officer. The chairman shall decide all points of order and procedures subject to the rules of this division unless otherwise directed by a vote of the planning commission. 
The planning commission, by adoption of this division, grants to the chairman, the privilege of initiating motions and the privilege of voting on all matters before the planning commission. These same privileges shall be extended to the vice-chairman, temporary chairman or vice-chairman when acting in the absence of the chairman. 
(c)  Vice-chairman. The vice-chairman shall be elected for a term of one year beginning in January, 1999, and each year thereafter. The vice-chairman shall act as the chairman in his or her absence. When acting as chairman, the vice-chairman shall have the same powers, duties and privileges as the chairman. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-218. - City clerk or appointee as executive secretary. 
The city clerk shall serve as the executive secretary of the planning commission and may delegate the performance of the tasks required by the executive secretary to his or her subordinates. The executive secretary shall provide such technical, secretarial and other support services as the planning commission may reasonably require in the conduct of its business, including the maintenance of minutes and records, the preparation of an agenda for all meetings, the providing of notice of all meetings, the placement of appropriate legal notices as required by ordinance, attendance to the correspondence of the planning commission, providing the planning commission with the final action by the city council on the recommendations of the planning commission, and other services which may be required, to the extent such services can be provided within the budgetary limitations of the code official. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-219. - Agenda and minutes. 
(a)  The chairman and executive secretary shall determine the meeting agenda. All matters to be considered and/or acted upon by the planning commission, non-agenda matters, which in the judgment of the chairman do not involve action directly affecting the public, may be discussed and voted thereon. 
(b)  Meeting minutes shall include and indicate all important facts, a report of all actions taken, and shall include a listing of those members present and those absent, a record of the vote of each member on each action taken on each matter, and a record of any explanation or commentary which is relative to the decisions made on matters before the planning commission. 
(c)  The executive secretary shall prepare sufficient copies of the agenda and the applicable rules of procedure for use by the audience attending a meeting of the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-220. - Meetings. 
(a)  Schedule. Meetings shall be held in accordance with the schedule adopted by the city council annually, as amended. One meeting shall normally be held each month which shall be the third Monday of each month at 6:30 p.m. All meetings shall be voting sessions and open to the public. 
(b)  Public hearings. Public hearings shall be used when required by resolution, ordinance or city policy or when desired by the planning commission to formally present matters before the planning commission, and provide a public forum for the proponents and opponents of matters, discussion of matters by the planning commission and the voting thereon. Any other business of the planning commission may be discussed and/or voted upon the planning commission at a public hearing in accordance with the rules and procedures of this division. 
(c)  Special called meetings. The chairman, executive secretary, or a majority of the planning commission may call a special meeting at any time. The executive secretary shall prepare and cause to be delivered a written notice stating the specific purpose of the special called meeting to each planning commission member. No business other than the specific stated purpose shall occur at the special called meeting. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-221. - Order of business at meetings. 
The normal order of business at meetings shall be: 
(1)  Determination of a quorum. 
(2)  Approval of minutes of previous meetings. 
(3)  Voting on matters heard and tabled from previous public hearings. 
(4)  Public comment, discussion by the planning commission and voting on matters which have had their public hearings continued from a previous meeting. 
(5)  New business for: 
a.  Amendments to the land development ordinance and official land development maps of the city. 
b.  Subdivision plat approval. 
c.  Other new business matters requiring a public hearing. 
d.  Reports by staff and committee and other new business. 
e.  Comments by staff and planning commission members. 
f.  Adjournment. 
The chairman may change the order of the agenda on matters appearing on the agenda during the meeting, if, in his or her judgment, time and purpose may be served. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-222. - Rules of procedure for meetings. 
The rules of procedure for meetings are as follows: 
(1)  The chairman shall call the matter before the planning commission. 
(2)  The chairman shall then call parties in interest who shall have privilege on the floor by appearing before the planning commission and identifying themselves by name, address and affiliation with any business or organization which would be relative to the matter being considered. 
Proponents shall speak first, opponents shall speak second. All comments and questions from the parties in interest shall be directed to the planning commission. Neither proponents or opponents shall generally have more than ten minutes total to present their interest and the chairman shall have the power to restrict or expand the period of time for presentations if, in his or her judgment, circumstances surrounding the matter may warrant such action. 
(3)  The chairman shall call for questions from the planning commission to the proponents or opponents immediately after their individual presentation or at the conclusion of all presentations. 
(4)  The chairman shall then call for discussion of the matter by the planning commission and the voting thereon. Once discussion by the planning commission has been called for, no further comment or presentation shall be made by parties in interest unless a planning commission member has a specific question for a party in interest, or, the chairman deems further comment to be appropriate and germane to the issues surrounding the matter before the planning commission. 
(5)  All items on an advertised agenda for a public hearing shall be heard on the scheduled date except, if in the judgment of a majority of the planning commission, specific circumstances surrounding the matter warrant the continuance of the hearing on the matter to a specific future date and time. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-223. - Cancellation of meetings. 
In the event that there is a lack of business to be discussed and/or voted upon at a future meeting, the chairman or a majority of the planning commission may cancel the meeting in question. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-224. - Quorum. 
A quorum shall consist of a majority of the planning commission members and a majority vote of those present constituting a quorum shall be sufficient to decide all matters which come before the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-225. - Voting. 
(a)  A planning commission member who is part of a quorum of the planning commission during the consideration of any matter, but not participating in the discussion or vote on a specific matter because of a conflict of interest, shall be considered present for quorum purposes but abstaining from the voting on that specific matter. 
(b)  A majority vote of a quorum of the planning commission is required for approval of all motions. A tie vote shall be deemed as a denial of the motion. A motion which fails by a majority vote shall not be deemed as approval of the opposite positions and a new motion must be made to approve the opposite position, with any amendments and conditions, in order that the opposite position be submitted to the city council as the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(c)  The planning commission may add conditions to the approval of any application or matter it deems necessary so that the purposes of the city's resolutions, ordinances, regulations, policies and procedures are served, and so that the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city as a whole shall be protected and/or enhanced. 
(d)  The vote of each planning commission member, along with any explanation or commentary related to the decision of the planning commission on all actions as a particular matter, shall accompany the planning commission's recommendation to the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-226. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  In the event that any planning commission member has any interest in any matter, proponent or opponent which may result in a gain or loss to that planning commission member, his or her immediate family by blood or marriage, or to any individual, partnership or corporation with whom that planning commission member has had any regular business or contractual relationships within the past twelve months, said planning commission member shall not participate in the consideration, discussion, questioning and voting on that particular matter before the planning commission, nor shall said planning commission member take any action which may influence the vote of any other planning commission member. In the event that the chairman has a conflict of interest, the vice-chairman shall preside over the meeting during consideration of that particular matter. 
(b)  Any planning commission member may challenge another planning commission member and raise the question of conflict of interest regarding a particular matter. A majority of those without such challenge shall determine if such conflict of interest shall be left to the individual judgment of each planning commission member to determine if he or she is voting on the facts of a matter, for the general good of the city and for the public health, safety and welfare of its residents as a whole. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-227. - Committees. 
(a)  The chairman may appoint, with the concurrence of the planning commission, various standing and temporary committees to further the purposes of the planning commission. Such committees may include members of the staff of various city departments, residents and business owners of the city and other individuals whose background and knowledge may be of benefit to the planning commission in accomplishing its goals. 
(b)  The purpose of committees shall be to make detailed investigations, studies and recommendations to the planning commission as instructed pertaining to matters or classes of matters falling within its purview. 
(c)  The chairman shall be an ex-officio member of all committees. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-228. - Assistance of other departments. 
The planning commission shall have the power to draw upon the resources and knowledge of all city departments, boards and authorities as deemed necessary for the fulfillment of its purposes, duties and responsibilities. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission all such information requested that it may reasonable require, to the extent available and within a reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-229. - Maximum time for action. 
The planning commission shall have 30 days from the date of its first scheduled public hearing on a matter in which to submit a recommendation to the city council except where the city council has established another specific time period for a specific matter. The planning commission may also request an extension of time from the city council on any matter. If the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation within the allowed period of time or is denied its request for an extension of time, that particular matter before the planning commission shall be forwarded to the city council with a "no comment" recommendation. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-230. - Robert's Rules of Order. 
In the event that a conflict occurs between the rules and procedures of this division and Robert's Rules of Order, the rules and procedures of this division shall prevail. In all other procedural questions, Robert's Rules of Order shall apply. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-231. - Enabling ordinance. 
In the event that a conflict occurs between this division and any ordinance as approved and amended by the city council, the provisions of the ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Sec. 2-232. - Amendments to bylaws. 
The provisions contained herein may be amended by a majority vote of the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 10-13-98(2)) 
Secs. 2-233—2-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Sections [I]—IV of an ordinance adopted April 8, 2003, did not specifically amend the Code and has been included herein as superseding the provisions of the former art. V, relative to finance, which derived from § 4 of an ordinance adopted Jan. 8, 1997. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-7(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(3); any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-7(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-7(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(14); taxation, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease by municipality of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq.; disposition of municipal property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; authority to dispose of public utility plants or properties, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-7; grants of state funds to municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-236. - Purpose and objective. 
(a)  The city has a responsibility to carefully account for public funds, to manage municipal finances wisely, and to plan for the provision of public services. Sound financial policies are necessary to carry out these objectives responsibly and efficiently. 
(b)  The city's financial policies set forth below are the basic framework for its overall financial management. These policies incorporate long-standing principles and traditions that have served the city well in maintaining a sound and stable financial condition. 
(c)  The broad purpose of the following financial policies is to enable the city to achieve and maintain a long-term positive financial condition. The key values of the city's financial management include fiscal integrity, prudence, planning, accountability, honesty, and openness. Specifically, the purpose is to provide guidelines for planning, directing, and maintaining day-to-day financial affairs. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § [I]) 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET 

Sec. 2-237. - Intent. 
The budget process provides the primary mechanism by which key decisions are made regarding the levels and type of services to be provided given the anticipated level of available resources. Budget policy states how this is achieved and addresses the need for financial health and stability. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-238. - Balanced budget. 
The budget shall be balanced for each and every budgeted fund. Total anticipated revenues plus that portion of the fund balance in excess of authorized reserves that are designated as a budget-funding source shall equal total estimated expenditures for each fund. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-239. - Financing current expenditures. 
Current expenditures shall be financed with current revenues, which shall include that portion of fund balance in excess of authorized reserves. The city shall avoid budgetary procedures that balance current expenditures through the obligation of future resources, or which financial on-going expenditures with one time revenues. The city shall strive to avoid short-term borrowing to meet operating budget requirements. Nevertheless, this policy shall not prohibit short-term borrowing should a critical need arise. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-240. - Level of adoption. 
All budgets shall be adopted at the legal level of budgetary control, which is the fund-department level (i.e., expenditures may not exceed the total appropriation for any department within a fund without the city council's approval). All budgets shall be adopted on a basis consistent with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles as promulgated by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-241. - Categories. 
The following categories exist for budgetary preparation and presentation: 
(1)  Personal services. 
(2)  Professional and other services. 
(3)  Supplies and operating charges. 
(4)  Repairs and maintenance. 
(5)  Capital outlay. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-242. - Objective by type of fund. 
The following budget objectives are established for the different types of funds utilized by the city: 
(1)  General fund. The budget for the general fund shall provide for the general government operations of the city and maintain working capital necessary for financial health and stability. 
(2)  Special revenues fund. Budgets are prepared for special revenue funds that display the legally restricted revenue sources and how these sources are utilized. 
(3)  Debt services fund. Revenues shall be established and fund balance maintained sufficient for debt expenditures and to provide for any debt service cash flow deficiencies, which would occur prior to the receipt of property tax. 
(4)  Capital projects fund. Budgets for capital projects shall not lapse at the end of a fiscal year, but shall remain in effect until project completion or re-appropriation by city council resolution. 
(5)  Enterprise fund. A business approach is used in budgeting for enterprise funds. Enterprise shall be self-supporting when possible and minimize losses when break-even is not possible. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-243. - Performance budget. 
In addition to the line item budget, the budget document shall include "performance" budget information. The performance budget provides information on the goals and objectives, which each department has determined that it seeks to accomplish during the budget year. The performance budget also utilizes "performance indicators" which measure services rendered and departmental efficiency/effectiveness on a historical basis and projects targets of the indicators for the upcoming budget year. The city shall strive to minimize, and reduce, if possible, staffing levels required to accomplish its service delivery. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-244. - Preparation. 
For each department, budgets shall be prepared for current services levels. Expanded services or extraordinary items shall be summarized in one page or less for discussions with the city manager before further detail is prepared regarding the expanded service or extraordinary items. A current services budget is defined as that level of funding which is necessary to provide the same level of service for the upcoming year that is currently being provided. An expanded services budget includes funding request associated with new service and/or additional personnel. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-245. - Control/reports. 
A system of budgetary controls shall be maintained to assure adherence to the budget. Timely monthly financial reports shall be prepared comparing actual revenues, expenditures and encumbrances with budgeted amounts. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-246. - Authorization of adjustments. 
The budget is a dynamic rather than static revenue and spending plan, which requires adjustment from time to time as circumstances change. Approval of the city council is required for increases in total department or fund budgets, increases or decreases in the personal services budget total of a department or fund, increases in the level of authorized positions, or changes to capital outlay items in amounts greater than $5,000.00. Approval of the city manager is required for changes to capital outlay budgets in amounts less than $5,000.00. Approval of the city manager is required for budget transfers within the departments, excluding changes, which alter personal services. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-247. - Amendment process. 
City council shall authorize new projects by approving a project resolution, which shall include the estimated cost and funding source. At the end of each fiscal year quarter any necessary budget adjustments, including budgets for any projects authorized during the quarter, shall be enacted through a budget resolution. These supplemental budget resolutions shall be balanced for each and every fund. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-248. - Lapses at year end. 
All operating budget appropriations, except for capital project funds, shall expire at the end of a fiscal year. In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, purchase encumbered in the current year but not received until the following year are paid from the budget of the following year. However, when necessary, city council may make a re-appropriation to resolve unusual situations or hardships caused by this policy. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-249. - Unreserved fund balance. 
The city shall attempt to establish an unreserved fund balance in the general fund. The purpose is to pay expenditures caused by unforeseen emergencies, handle shortfalls caused by revenue declines, and to eliminate any short-term borrowing for cash flow purposes. This reserve shall accumulate and attempt to be retained at an amount which represents one month or one-half of operating expenditures. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-250. - Utilization of prior year's fund balance in budget. 
Unreserved fund balance may be used as funding (revenue) source for that fund's budget. The amount of unreserved fund balance shall be estimated very conservatively. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-251. - Contingency budget. 
The city shall include a contingency amount in the general fund and enterprise funds budge for emergency type expenditures which cannot be foreseen when the budget is adopted. The goals of the contingency shall be two percent of the total general fund and enterprise fund budgets, and this shall be subject to annual appropriation. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-252. - Maintenance and replacement of capital equipment. 
Priority shall be given in budget preparation and enactment for adequate maintenance of capital equipment and facilities, and for their orderly replacement. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-253. - Federal and state grants. 
City council shall approve all grants and grant applications through project resolutions. All federal and state grants shall be subject to the city's accounting and budgetary policies. All key financial provisions, including required local match, shall be included in the project resolutions. Accounting and budgeting information shall be inclusive of the federal/sate participation as well as local participation. Provisions shall be made in the city's annual budge for anticipated grants. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-254. - Contributions. 
Unless authorized by city council, contributions to programs operating by city departments shall be subject to the city's accounting and budgetary policies. The city welcomes both unrestricted contributions, as well as restricted contributions compatible with the city's programs and objectives. Any material contributions shall e appropriated by city council prior to expenditures. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
Sec. 2-255. - Net budget. 
A net budget total shall be calculated as well as a gross budget total in order to prevent the "double counting" of revenues and expenditures. The net budget total is calculated by subtracting interfund transfer amounts from the gross budget total. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § II) 
DIVISION 3. - DEBT 

Sec. 2-256. - Purpose of debt issuance. 
The city will utilize long-term debt only for capital improvement projects that are too extensive to be financed from current revenue sources. The city will not use long-term debt to finance current or on-going operations of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § III) 
Sec. 2-257. - Legal debt limitations. 
General government: The city is authorized by the Constitution and laws of the state to issue general obligation bonds not in excess of the ten percent of the assessed values of all taxable property within the city. However, the city will remain cognizant of the millage assessed for repayment of general government debt and will strive to maintain a stable millage in the debt service area for the benefit of its taxpayers. Where feasible, special assessment, revenue and other self-supporting bonds will be utilized instead of general obligation bonds. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § III) 
Sec. 2-258. - Types. 
The city is permitted to issue any form of debt that does not contradict the existing Constitution and laws of the state. These include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  General obligation bonds. 
(2)  Revenue bonds. 
(3)  Intergovernmental contracts. 
(4)  Lease purchases. 
(5)  Certificates of participation. 
(6)  Temporary loans. 
Tax anticipation notes or any other revenue anticipation borrowing will be avoided. In the event such borrowing occurs on an emergency basis, the debt will be retired in fully by the end of the calendar year in which it is incurred. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § III) 
Sec. 2-259. - Features. 
(a)  Maturity of debt. When the city utilizes long-term financing, the city will pay back the debt within a period of time that does not exceed the life of the project financed. The city will seek level or declining debt repayment schedules and will avoid the use of balloon principal payments at the end of the term of the borrowing. 
(b)  Redemption provisions. When cost effective, the city will incorporate early call or prepayment features into the structured debt. 
(c)  Rates. Due to the higher volatility of variable rate debt, the city will examine each variable rate borrowing closely on a case-by-case basis before issuance. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § III) 
Sec. 2-260. - Interfund loans. 
Where cost effective, the city may choose to issue loans between funds within its reporting entity. Careful analysis will be performed on the lending fund's working capital to assured adequate cash flows will remain after the money is transferred to the borrowing fund. The lending fund will not incur financial hardship or an increase in rate structure as a result of the transaction. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § III) 
Sec. 2-261. - Rating agencies. 
The city will strive to maintain sound communications with bond rating agencies regarding the financial conditions of the city. The city is committed to continuous full disclosure and reporting to the rating agencies and the investment community through its comprehensive annual financial reports as well as any bond official statements. The city is committed to maintaining and enhancing existing underlying credit ratings with the established rating agencies. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § III) 
Sec. 2-262. - Review of policies. 
Review of debt policies will occur simultaneously on an annual basis with the review of the capital improvements plan for the city as a whole. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § III) 
DIVISION 4. - INVESTMENTS AND CASH MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-263. - Generally. 
Investment earnings are important sources of revenue. However, the overriding concern at all times is the safety and preservation of the city's cash and investments. The ability to respond efficiently to cash flow requirements is another important consideration. Therefore, the objective of investment and cash management is to maximize interest earnings, within an environment that strongly emphasizes legal compliance and safety while providing cash flow liquidity to meet the city's financial obligations. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § IV) 
Sec. 2-264. - Scope. 
This policy applies to all cash and investments, which are the responsibility of and under the management of the city and its financial services department. Exclusions to this policy include, but are not necessarily limited to the city's pension trust fund and deferred compensation fund. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § IV) 
Sec. 2-265. - Safety. 
Investments shall be made with prudence, judgment and care, not for speculation, but for investment considering the primary objective of safety as well as the secondary objective of obtaining competitive market rates of return. Specifically, the city shall seek to maximize safety through the following categories: 
(1)  All city investments shall be federally insured or fully collateralized to protect investment principal and accrued interest. Emphasis shall be given to category 1 collateralization (collateral securities held by the city or its agent in the city's name), which is preferable, or category 2 (collateral securities held by the counter party's trust department or agent in the city's name). Category 3 (collateral not in the city's name) shall be avoided due to the higher degree of risk. 
(2)  Market risk shall be avoided by limiting investments to a maximum one-year of maturity, except for special circumstances where an interest rate differential and certainty of ability to hold the investment to maturity would justify a longer maturity. The city manager shall approve any exceptions to the one-year maturity limit, and such exceptions will be disclosed to city council. 
(3)  Undue credit risk shall be avoided by monitoring the financial condition of financial institutions participating in the city's investment program. Financial institutions shall provide a consolidated report of condition semi annually and the city shall review creditworthiness at least annually. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § IV) 
Sec. 2-266. - Legal investment instruments. 
The city shall invest in only such investment instruments permitted by state law for local governments which include certificates of deposit, repurchase agreements, direct and agency obligations of the United States, obligations of the state, pooled investment programs of the state, and no-load mutual funds of direct obligations of the United States. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § IV) 
Sec. 2-267. - Competitive investment rates. 
The city shall seek competitive investment rates within its safety criteria. Maximum opportunity shall be provided to all local financial institutions to bid and compete for city investments due to the importance of the financial institutions to the local economy. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § IV) 
Sec. 2-268. - Liquidity. 
Provision shall be made for adequate liquidity of investments so that the city can efficiently meet, with financial penalty, disbursement and cash flow needs, including emergency needs. It is recognized that the state local government investment pool is structured to provide one-day liquidity on deposits and pay competitive market rates. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § IV) 
Sec. 2-269. - Pooled cash management. 
The city shall maintain a zero cash balance; pooled cash management program for the purpose of eliminating idle cash and maximizing invested funds. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § IV) 
Sec. 2-270. - Interest allocation. 
Investment earnings derived from any pooled cash investments shall be distributed to individual funds based upon each fund's amount of participation. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § IV) 
Sec. 2-271. - Investment reporting. 
The financial services department shall continue to prepare monthly reports of investments. Investment reporting has been upgraded in order to calculate monthly interest accruals and composite yields on the city's investment portfolio. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(1), § IV) 
DIVISION 5. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-272. - Intent. 
The purpose of this policy is to provide guidance for the procurement of goods and services in compliance with procurement provisions of the city and the state. The goal of this policy is to establish, foster, and maintain the following principles: 
(1)  To consider the best interests of the city in all transactions; 
(2)  To purchase without prejudice, seeking to obtain the maximum value for each dollar expenditure with maximum quality standards; 
(3)  To subscribe to and work for honesty and truth in buying. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-273. - Vendors. 
(a)  Generally. The city will make every effort to obtain high quality goods and services at the best possible price. All procurement procedures will be conducted in a fair and impartial manner with avoidance of any impropriety. All qualified vendors have access to city business. No bidder will be arbitrarily or capriciously excluded. It is the intent of the city that competition be sought to the greatest practical degree. The conditions of the contract shall be made clear in advance of the competition. Specifications shall reflect the needs of the city. 
(b)  Solicitation of vendors and submission of bids. When a purchase for a single good is expected to exceed $1,500.00 competition is required to the extent that it exists. Each department must attempt to obtain a minimum of three quotes from different sources. If three sources are not possible, the seeker of the bid must attempt to obtain as many vendors as possible. Each department head shall document the competitive bidding process with records of the vendor and bids received. 
(c)  Interest of city officials in expenditure of public funds. No official of the City of Colquitt will be interested directly or indirectly in any transaction with, sale to, work for, or contract of the city or any department of government or service involving the expenditure of public funds in violation of the city's "ethics ordinance." The city shall not use a vendor who is a member of the immediate family of a city commissioner, city attorney, city manager, assistant city manager, a department head, personnel officer, or payroll clerk. The city shall not use a vendor for services in an operating department who is a member of the immediate family of an employee of that operating department. 
(d)  Request for proposal. It is suggested that on individual purchases exceeding $25,000.00 a request for proposal (RFP) process be used for procuring products and services. The RFP should specify the service, evaluation criteria, and terms and conditions required by the city. Purchases that will be bid using an RFP should be advertised in the legal organ and other venues as time and advertising funds allow. 
(e)  Award of bids. Bids are awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. A responsive bid is one that conforms in all material respects to the need of the city. Responsible means a bidder who has the capability to perform the requirements. 
(f)  Local bidder preference. If all other relevant factors are met, each department is authorized to negotiate with and select a local vendor if the local vendor's bid is within ten percent of the lowest offer. A current city occupation tax/regulatory fee license is required to be considered a local bidder. 
(g)  Equal opportunity. The city will provide an equal opportunity for all businesses to participate in city contracts regardless of sex, race, color, religion, national origin, political affiliation, age, handicapped status, sexual orientation, sexual preference, or transgender status. The city will actively seek to ensure that minority-owned and operated firms have the opportunity to participate in the purchasing process, including bidding, negotiations and contract awards. The city will not knowingly conduct business with contractors that discriminate or permit discrimination against persons because of sex, race, color, religion, national origin, political affiliation, age, handicapped status, sexual orientation, sexual preference, or transgender status 
(h)  Ineligible vendors. Any person, firm, or corporation who is in arrears to the city for taxes, or otherwise, will not be qualified to bid on any purchase until their lien to the city has been cleared. No requisition will be approved for such vendors. 
(i)  State contracts. The city is authorized to use state contracts in lieu of issuing bids to vendors or buying locally when it is to the economic advantage of the city or deemed appropriate by the city manager. The state contract price may be used to establish the maximum price for a good or service. 
(j)  Back-up policy and emergency purchases. 
(1)  The city should strive to decrease dependency on single-source vendors in order to achieve maximum efficiency in its purchases. In order to achieve the city's fiscal independence, it is strongly suggested that each department have back-up vendors for each recurring and/or large purchase. 
(2)  In cases of emergency, a contract may be awarded without competitive bidding, but the procurement shall be made with as much competition as the circumstances allow (i.e., informal quotes). An emergency is defined as a threat to life or property, or an unforeseen situation that curtails or greatly diminishes an essential service as determined by the city manager. In the event of an emergency, the city manager shall be contacted. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-274. - Centralization of purchasing authority. 
(a)  Purchasing of goods. Each department head shall have the authority to purchase individual goods costing less than $500.00 each as long as costs remain within the approved budget. Each department head is responsible to ensure that internal control procedures, including those issued by the city manager are followed. This includes obtaining verbal quotations and/or bids. For individual goods costing over $1,000.00, the department shall be required to provide (3) written quotes to the city manager. The city manager will have authorization to make purchases up to $1,500.00 as long as the costs remain within the approved budget. Purchases over $1,500.00 must have council approval and subject to the following guidelines: 
(1)  Individual purchases in excess of $1,500.00 will be recommended by the city manager after the review of at least three written quotations. 
(2)  Purchases over $25,000.00 will require sealed bids and follow normal procurement procedures. 
To the extent that an emergency condition exists or an item is supplied by only one source, the department head shall inform the city manager and make the appropriate notation on the purchase order. 
(b)  Monitoring of purchases. Although authority may be delegated, the ultimate responsibility rests with the city manager. Purchases must be monitored to assure compliance with city policy. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-275. - Purchase order (PO). 
A "purchase order" (PO) cannot be issued unless sufficient funds are available in the budget. The following is the established city procedure for use of purchase orders: 
(1)  An item or service is required and sufficient funds exist in the approved budget to cover the cost of the item or service. 
(2)  A PO is prepared and the item or service is ordered by a department. 
(3)  The department is invoiced by a vendor for the required item or service. 
(4)  The invoice is attached to the purchase order and the department head must certify that purchase order was approved and sufficient funds are available to cover the cost of the purchase. 
(5)  The invoice and PO are reviewed by the bookkeeper or designee. 
(6)  On invoices over $500.00 the PO is reviewed and authorized by the city manager and or his/her designee. 
(7)  Payment to the vendor is generated. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-275.1. - City credit cards. 
(a)  The credit card issued to city employees, council members, etc. is to be used for city business only to purchase goods, services, or for specific expenditures incurred under approved conditions. The cardholder is the only person authorized use the credit card. 
(b)  The credit card holder is responsible for documentation and safekeeping of the credit card during the employee's issuance. A receipt for each transaction must be obtained by the employee when a purchase is made using the city credit card. This receipt shall be dated and a description of the service or item purchased and account codes shall be written on the back of every receipt. Each month, the credit card holder must submit on a timely basis documentation of credit card purchases with the credit card bill. Late submittal of credit card documentation may result in credit card privileges being cancelled. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
DIVISION 6. - GRANTS 

Sec. 2-275.2. - Scope. 
The purpose of this policy is to provide direction in the application, acceptance and administration of funds awarded through grants to the city from other local governments, the state or federal government, non-profit agencies, philanthropic organizations and the private sector. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-275.3. - Application and acceptance. 
(a)  The city manager is given authority to make application for and accept grants that: 
(1)  Are expected to be $200,000.00 or less on an annual basis with no required city match; or 
(2)  Are expected to be $100,000.00 or less on an annual basis with a required match of 20 percent or less; or 
(3)  Are expected to be $50,000.00 or less on an annual basis with a required match of over 40 percent. 
The city commission must approve the application of and acceptance of any grants in excess of the limits established in subsection (a). 
(b)  The city will assess the merits of a particular program as if it were funded with local tax dollars. Local tax dollars will not be used to make up for losses of intergovernmental aid without first reviewing the program and its merits as a budgetary increment. Therefore, no grant will be accepted that will incur management and reporting costs greater than the grant amount. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-275.4. - Administration. 
Each department must notify the city clerk upon acceptance of any grant. Prior to the receipt or expenditure of grant revenues, the city clerk must be provided with the following information prior to receiving grant revenues or making purchases against the grant: 
(1)  Copy of grant application. 
a.  Notification of grant award. 
b.  Financial reporting and accounting requirements including separate account codes and/or bank accounts. 
c.  Schedule of grant payments. 
(2)  Each department is responsible for the management of its grant funds and periodic reporting. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
DIVISION 7. - FIXED ASSETS 

Sec. 2-275.5. - Fixed asset criteria. 
(a)  A fixed asset is defined as a financial resource meeting all of the following criteria: 
(1)  It is tangible in nature. 
(2)  It has a useful life of greater than one year. 
(3)  It is not a repair part or supply item. 
(4)  It has a value equal to, or greater than, the capitalization threshold of $5,000.00. 
(b)  Keeping an accurate record of the city's fixed assets is important for a myriad of reasons. Some of the most important reasons that the city needs to keep a good record of fixed assets are: for financial statement information, for insurable values, for control and accountability, for maintenance scheduling and cost analysis, for estimating and accounting for depreciation, for preparation of capital and operating budgets, and for debt management. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-275.6. - General policy. 
(a)  Each department head is ultimately responsible for the proper recording, acquisition, transfer, and disposal of all assets within their department. City property may not be acquired, transferred, or disposed of without first providing proper documentation. A fixed asset information form must accompany each step. 
(b)  Recording of fixed assets. Unless otherwise approved by the city clerk, all recordable fixed assets must be recorded within 30 calendar days after receipt and acceptance of the asset. 
(c)  A fixed asset form must be attached to the purchase order before submitting request for payment. 
(d)  Assets will be capitalized at acquisition cost, including expenses incurred in preparing the asset for use. 
(e)  Donated assets shall be recorded at fair market value as determined by the department head. Fair market value may be defined as, but is not limited to, an average of documented prices for equivalent items from three separate vendors. 
(f)  The city will recognize acquisition costs based on individual unit prices. Assets should not be grouped. For example, in acquiring equipment, if three personal computers (PC) were acquired simultaneously at $2,000.00 each, this would not be an asset of $6,000.00 consisting of three PCs. Instead, it would be three separate acquisitions of $2,000.00. Each PC would be recorded as a separate controllable item. 
(g)  For equipment purchases, title is considered to pass at the date the equipment is received. Similarly, for donated assets, title is considered to pass when the asset is available for the agency's use and when the agency assumes responsibility for maintaining the asset. 
(h)  Constructed assets are transferred from the construction in progress account to the related building, improvements other than buildings, or equipment accounts when they become operational. Constructed buildings, for example, are assumed to be operational when an authorization to occupy the building is issued, regardless of whether or not final payments have been made on all the construction contracts. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-275.7. - Acquisition. 
There are various methods by which assets can be acquired. The asset acquisition method determines the basis for valuing the asset. Fixed assets may be acquired in the following ways: 
(1)  New purchases. 
(2)  Donations. 
(3)  Transfers from other city departments. 
(4)  City surplus. 
(5)  Internal/external construction. 
(6)  Lease purchases. 
(7)  Trade-in. 
(8)  Forfeiture or condemnation. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-275.8. - Lease purchases. 
(a)  Assets may be lease-purchased through installment purchases (an agreement in which title passes to the department) or through lease financing arrangements (an agreement in which title may or may not pass). 
(b)  Departments considering a lease purchase for greater than $10,000.00 and other than from an established, city approved contract, must consult with the city manager. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-275.9. - Transfer. 
(a)  An asset transfer between departments usually represents the sale of an item by one department to another and may be treated as a new purchase. A transfer between related departments under the same control (police and fire, for example) may, if desired, be treated as a transfer rather than sale. That is, the asset is recorded under the new department with original acquired date and funding amount. 
(b)  A fixed asset form must be sent to the accounting department for all transfers. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-275.10. - Sale. 
Sale of fixed assets by a department must be to the highest, responsible bidder and must be conducted by sealed bid or by auction. The sale must be publicized in accordance with state laws. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-275.11. - Disposal. 
(a)  When an asset is disposed of, its value is removed from the financial balances reported and from inventory reports; however, the asset record, including disposal information, remains on the master file for three years, in the city clerk's office, after which time it is purged from the system according to general accepted accounting principles. This preserves an audit trail for disposed items, and facilitates departmental comparisons between actual or historical useful life information with useful life guidelines. Such comparisons permit a more precise definition of an asset's useful life than those provided by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) or other guidelines initially used. 
(b)  A disposal action is appropriate only when certain conditions occur resulting in an asset no longer being in the possession of the agency. Assets no longer in use, which remain in the possession of the department, are considered surplus property and not a disposal. 
(c)  Fixed assets may be disposed of in any one of six ways: 
(1)  Sale or trade-in. 
(2)  Abandonment/retirement. 
(3)  Lost or stolen. 
(4)  Transfer. 
(5)  Cannibalization (taking parts and employing them for like uses within the department, such as is often the practice in computer or vehicle maintenance). 
(6)  Casualty loss. 
(d)  Only when the asset is no longer in possession of the department, due to one of the six reasons listed above, is disposal action appropriate. 
(e)  Assets are "abandoned" or "retired" when there is no longer any use for them in the department, they are of no use to any other city department, they cannot be repaired, transferred, cannibalized, sold, or traded-in. Thus meaning that, there is no safe and appropriate use for the abandoned goods to the city or for others. 
(f)  Stolen items must be reported to the police department and a police report filed. A copy of this report must accompany the disposal record. 
(g)  Casualty losses must be documented within 24 hours of loss and reported to the city's administrative services director immediately for follow-up with the city's insurance carrier. 
(h)  Cannibalized items are considered surplus and are disposed of by noting cannibalization on the disposal record. Ideally, this method will allow departments to look at cannibalized items on the disposal report and assess what surplus parts may be available. Departments will send documentation of items cannibalized to the city clerk's office, and all remaining costs and accumulated depreciation will be removed from appropriate asset accounts in the general fixed asset fund. 
(i)  All assets no longer in the possession of the department, due to one of these six qualifying conditions and after submission of all appropriate documentation to the city clerk's office, will be removed from the master departmental asset file and considered disposed. 
(j)  Department management is responsible for reviewing disposal reports, evaluating causes and trends leading to disposals, and implementing procedures to more effectively manage and control disposals when the dispositions represent problems, inefficiencies, and/or the incurrence of unnecessary cost. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
Sec. 2-275.12. - Physical inventory. 
An annual physical inventory of all fixed assets will be performed by each department head. The inventory will be conducted with the least amount of interruption possible to the department's daily operation. A full report of the results of the inventory will be sent, within 30 days of completion, to all departments for verification and acceptance. 
(Mo. of 3-9-04(1)) 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-276. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
City council member shall be any person who is an elected city official, including the mayor, of the City of Colquitt. 
Employee shall be any person who is a fulltime or part-time employee of the City of Colquitt. 
Government or city shall be construed to mean the City of Colquitt, Georgia government. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-277. - Acceptance of gifts. 
City council members shall not solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation, or group which: 
(1)  Has, or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city; 
(2)  In exchange for the thing of value seeks to have a council member exercise a matter of discretion in his or her favor; 
(3)  In exchange for the thing of value seeks to have interests which may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duty of the council member. 
This section shall not apply to campaign contributions which shall be reported in accordance with state laws. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-278. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this section that city council members avoid any action whether or not specifically prohibited by section 2-277 which might result in, or create the appearance of the following: 
(1)  Using public office for private gain; 
(2)  Impeding government efficiency or economy; or 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-279. - Financial interests of members. 
City council members may not: 
(1)  Have direct or indirect financial interests that conflict substantially with their responsibilities and duties as government servants; or 
(2)  Engage in, directly or indirectly, financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained from their office. Aside from these restrictions, city council members are free to engage in lawful financial transactions to the same extent as private citizens. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-280. - Use of public property. 
A city council member shall not use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he or she direct employees to use such property for these purposes. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-281. - Use of confidential information. 
A city council member shall not directly or indirectly, make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, official information not made available to the general public. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-282. - Coercion by council members. 
A city council member shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him or persons within his immediate family, or those with whom a council member has business or financial ties. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-283. - Voting in matters of personal interest. 
A city council member shall not vote on an ordinance or amendment in a city council meeting that would directly affect his or her private business. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-284. - Unauthorized purchases. 
A city council member shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-285. - Meetings of the council. 
Meetings of the council shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 14, as amended, and § 36-80-1. as amended, as it applies to municipalities. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-286. - City attorneys used for private business. 
A city council member shall not use the attorney or attorneys who are under retainer by the city and/or any of its authorities for personal or private business without paying just compensation. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-287. - Unauthorized use of public employees. 
A city council member shall not use his superior position to request or require an employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of his family, business, social, church or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
(3)  Work for him personally without offering just compensation. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-288. - Travel expenses. 
A city council member shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention, or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention, or conference without refunding the pro-rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-289. - Penalties. 
The code of ethics to be observed by city council members are set forth above and any violation thereof shall subject the offender to disciplinary action which may include censure and either public or private reprimand. Power to administer a greater punishment shall include power to administer the lesser. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-290. - Ethics committee. 
The ethics committee shall consist of three persons, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the council, and the third appointed by the two above named subject to approval by a majority of the city council. The third member of the ethics committee shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia All members shall be residents of the city and shall serve a two-year term. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-291. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city council members shall be filed with the ethics committee. The ethics committee may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the city council. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics committee shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The ethics committee shall be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(c)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the ethics committee shall be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics committee shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent government servant. 
(d)  The ethics committee shall be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence and hold hearings where provided for in the rules. 
(e)  The ethics committee shall be empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, subpoenas, notices, applications for reinstatement and any other written instruments necessary or desirable under these rules. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-292. - Additional regulations. 
This article shall be cumulative to any other ordinance, resolution or act now existing. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-293. - Right to appeal. 
Any final decision by the city council pursuant to this code of ethics for city council members shall be reviewable by the Superior Court of Miller County. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the city council which supported the decision of the council. Provided, however, no action of the city council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-294. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this article applies shall knowingly engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(b)  If an employee of the city is an officer, director, agent or member of, or owns interest any entity which is subject to the regulation of, or which has financial commitments with the city, they shall file a sworn statement to this effect with the city clerk. 
(c)  Employees shall not transact any business in their official capacity with any business entity of which he or she is an officer, director, agent, member, or in which he or she owns a controlling interest, excluding civic, charitable or religious organizations. 
(d)  Employees shall not have personal investment in any enterprise which will create a conflict or a perceived conflict between their private interest and the public interest. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-295. - Acceptance of gifts, gratuities, special privileges. 
(a)  Employees shall not accept any gifts, loans, rewards, favors, or services that may reasonably tend to improperly influence them in the discharge of their official duties. This limitation is not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value which are distributed generally nor to prohibit employees from accepting loans from regular lending institutions. It is particularly important that employees guard against relationships which might be construed as or give the appearance of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. 
(b)  Employees shall not use or attempt to use their position to secure an economic benefit or advantages, special privileges or exemptions for themselves or others including the use of knowledge obtained by through their employment or by virtue of their position. 
(c)  Employees shall not accept employment or engage in any business or professional activity which they may reasonably expect would require or induce them to disclose confidential information acquired by them by reason of their official position. 
(d)  Employees shall not accept payment from outside sources for professional services (i.e., teaching, instructing, speaking engagements, consulting, honorariums) when such activities are done on city time or when such services pertain to the purchase or sale of city property. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-296. - Proprietorship of creations. 
All plans, designs, reports, specifications, drawings, devices, inventions, and other items produced or created by employees during working hours or through the use of city facilities or equipment or at the request of the city shall be and become the sole property of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-297. - Confidential information. 
Employees shall not disclose confidential information gained by reason of their official position, nor shall they otherwise use such information for their personal gain or benefit. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-298. - Political activity. 
(a)  No person employed by the city shall either publicly or otherwise hold himself out as a candidate in any city election while holding employment with the city. 
(b)  City employees shall not take part in any political management or political campaigns in election of mayor or any member of the city council during any period of time for which he is expected to perform work or receive compensation from the city. 
(c)  No employee, official or other person shall solicit, orally or by letter, or be in any other manner concerned in obtaining any assessments, contributions, or services for any political party from any employee during his hours of duty, service, or work with the city. 
(d)  Employees shall not represent the city by wearing any uniform or portion thereof that is issued by the city while he is participating in any campaign at any time. 
(e)  The city in no way seeks to influence employees in their choice of party affiliations or candidates, recognizing that this is a matter for each person to decide. Therefore, nothing contained herein shall be construed to restrict the right of the employee to hold membership in and support a political party, to vote as he chooses, to express opinions on political subjects or candidates, to maintain political neutrality, to attend political parties after work hours, or to campaign actively during off duty hours in all areas of political activity. 
(f)  Employees shall not utilize any city equipment or vehicles in support of any political campaign. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Sec. 2-299. - Limitations and approval requirement. 
(a)  City employment shall be considered to be the primary employment of all full-time employees. No employee may engage in outside employment which will interfere with the interests of city service. Standards by which some employment is not acceptable include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Illegal activity; 
(2)  Employment that by virtue of association will reflect upon the reputation of the city; 
(3)  High hazard or fatiguing work which might detract from or reduce city performance. 
(b)  Prior to beginning any regularly scheduled outside employment, employees will obtain specific written approval from their department head or his designee on request forms which indicate the name of the outside employer, the nature of the work, hours of work, address and telephone number where the employee can be reached. Such information will become a part of the employee's official personnel record. Employees are required to obtain approval from their department head or his designee for any change in a previously approved outside employment request. 
(c)  Any employee accepting or engaging in out aide employment under the terms of this rule shall make arrangements with the outside employer to be available to respond immediately to any emergency call of duty whenever the department head or his designed shall determine that the employee's services are necessary. 
(d)  Employees sustaining injuries while engaged in outside employment are normally ineligible to receive benefits under the city's worker's compensation program. If an employee sustains an injury while engaged in outside employment, but is performing duties, within the scope of his city responsibilities (i.e. a police arrest), he may be eligible for partial city worker's compensation benefits. 
(e)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section will result in disciplinary action. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03(2)) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Consumption and sale of alcoholic beverages on pool and billiard premises, § 10-34; businesses, ch. 22; open containers of alcoholic beverages, § 46-96 et seq.; public intoxication, § 46-241 et seq. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Case of malt beverages means 24 bottles, cans or containers where such bottles, cans or containers hold 16 or less ounces. It shall also mean 12 bottles, cans or containers which hold more than 16 ounces. 
Conviction means an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of bond by a person charged with a crime. 
Corporation means a corporation duly authorized to transact business in the state with a place of business in the city. 
Distance means measurement in a straight line in linear feet from the nearest wall enclosing the proposed premises of a licensee to the nearest property line of any school, college or church. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
License means the authorization by the city council to engage in the sale of malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Premises means the definite closed or petitioned locality whether a room, shop or building, wherein malt beverages and/or wine and/or distilled spirits are sold, and any and all surrounding and adjacent areas, whether enclosed or not, which are owned by or under the control of the person to whom the license is issued. 
Retail sale or sale means selling or offering for sale any alcoholic beverage to any member of the public. 
School or college means only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state to include licensed preschool and/or kindergarten facilities and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Sales and licensing generally. 
(a)  The sale of malt beverages and/or wine and/or distilled spirits shall be legal in the city, subject to full compliance by all persons engaged in business under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The license granted under this chapter shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on a business during the terms of the license, subject to all the terms and conditions imposed in this chapter and by related laws located in the applicable provisions of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and other city ordinances relating to occupation taxes and regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § II) 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person who shall submit a false or fraudulent return required by this chapter; or who shall assist any person to evade the payment of any license tax provided in this chapter; or who shall conduct in the city the business of selling, shipping or distributing by wholesale or selling by retail malt beverages or wines or distilled spirits after his license so to do has been revoked; or who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXXI) 
Sec. 6-4. - Additional penalties for violation of chapter. 
In addition to any other penalty provided in this chapter, after notice and a hearing on any violation of this chapter, the city council may suspend, revoke or void any license which has been issued to a wholesale dealer or retail dealer in malt beverages and/or wine and/or distilled spirits. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXXV) 
Secs. 6-5—6-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-36. - License categories. 
(a)  Licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be of four classes, as follows: 
(1)  Class I licenses shall be for the retail package sale only of malt beverages and wine. 
(2)  Class II licenses shall be for the retail sales of malt beverages and wine for on-premises consumption only. 
(3)  Class III licenses shall be for retail package sales of distilled spirits. 
(4)  Class IV licenses shall be for wholesalers of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  A separate application is required for each license category enumerated in subsection (a) of this section. The city council will act upon each application separately. 
(c)  No manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer licensed to sell packaged distilled spirits shall hold any consumption on the premises license for the same location. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § II(C)(1)) 
Sec. 6-37. - License restrictions. 
(a)  Class II licenses. Class II licenses may be granted for the following types of premises only, and for no others: 
(1)  A restaurant, defined as a public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually served. Such place shall be provided with an adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining area, having a minimum seating capacity for 25 persons, sanitary restroom facilities, and having regularly employed a sufficient number of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food and nonalcoholic beverages for the public, and which derives at least 50 percent of its gross income from the sale of such meals prepared, served, and consumed on the premises. 
(2)  The premises of any restaurant establishment shall not be a mobile home or any other such prefabricated structure. 
(b)  Class III licenses. Licenses for the sale of distilled spirits in the city shall be for off-premises consumption only. 
(c)  Inventory requirement. Only those places of business which carry in stock or inventory an amount of goods in excess of $2,500.00, exclusive of beer and wine and distilled spirits, shall be eligible for a license to sell beer and/or wine and/or distilled spirits for off-premises consumption unless such business sells only beer, wine or distilled spirits, or its products. 
(d)  Persons or corporations. Licenses may be issued to persons or corporations in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § II(C)(2), (D), (E); Ord. of 9-8-98(2); Ord. of 11-9-10) 
Sec. 6-38. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Contents of application. The application for a license as required in this chapter shall be in writing and addressed to the city council and shall set forth therein the following information: the type of license applied for; the location of the place of business wherein beer and/or wine and/or distilled spirits is to be sold; whether the premises are owned or leased by the applicant (attaching thereto a copy of the deed or lease); names and addresses of all persons, firms or corporations having a financial interest in profits or losses; and such other information as the city council may from time to time require. The application shall be signed by the applicant and must be certified by oath of such applicant, and if the applicant is to be a corporation, by the oath of one of its executive officers or managers. Such application and oath must be on a form provided by the City of Colquitt. 
(b)  Furnishing of data, information and records. All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records pertinent to the application requested of them in writing by the city council, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. The applicant, by filing an application, agrees to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the police department or the city council who are considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such application and/or license issued under the terms of this chapter. The failure to produce such person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of any application pending under this chapter. 
(c)  Processing time. The city may require 60 days from the date of completing and filing the application for processing any application for license under the terms of this chapter. 
(d)  Public hearing; approval or denial. After advertisement for two weeks in the official organ of the city, a public hearing upon all applications for a license hereunder shall be held before the city council at a regular or special meeting. Licenses may be issued under this chapter after the public hearing and investigation by the city police department and the city council. All applicants for a license shall be either approved or denied not more than 60 days after the filing of the application, or the application shall be deemed approved. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § III) 
Sec. 6-39. - Wholesale dealer license. 
(a)  Conditions for issuance. Any wholesale dealer in malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits licensed by the state or the agent of such wholesale dealer shall be granted a license to distribute such beverages in the city upon the presentation of evidence that he understands the conditions under which retail licenses are issued and that he understands all of the laws and regulations pertaining to such activities in this city. 
(b)  Fee. An applicant for a wholesale license shall pay to the clerk of the city at the time of the license being issued the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges as an annual license fee. 
(c)  Duration. All wholesale licenses issued under this chapter shall be issued for the calendar year only and shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(d)  Transfer. No wholesale license shall be transferrable by the wholesale dealer. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § IV) 
Sec. 6-40. - Investigation of applicants. 
All applicants shall be investigated by the city police department or by such other person as may be designated by the city council, and the report of such investigation shall be presented to the city council for consideration with the application. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § V) 
Sec. 6-41. - Inquiry into tax records. 
The mayor of the city council shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records to determine if any applicant or other parties interested in an application have any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent or any other monies owing to the city. No license shall be issued, nor shall a license be renewed, until all such debts are paid in full. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § VI) 
Sec. 6-42. - Issuance prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to issue a license to: 
(1)  A person or corporation applying for a beer and/or wine license who is not a resident of the state and who does not have a permanent place of business within the city limits, or a distilled spirits license to a person who has not been a resident of the city for a period of 12 months prior to making his application for a license and to a corporation who does not have a principal or permanent place of business in the city. 
(2)  A person who has been convicted of a felony under state statutes or the statutes of any other state within five years of the date of application. 
(3)  A person whose place of business is conducted by an employee, manager or agent unless the manager, agent or employee possesses the same qualification as the licensee, except as to the requirements of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(4)  A person who is not of good moral character. 
(5)  A person who is deemed to have insufficient mental capacity. 
(6)  A person who has been dishonorably discharged from the armed services of the United States. 
(7)  Any person or corporation with either officers, directors or shareholders, who, as a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a five-year period preceding the date of the application under this chapter. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation shall be granted a beer, wine or distilled spirits license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the city council that such persons, partners in the firm, officers and directors of the corporation shall be of good moral character, and in no event shall any license be granted to any person or persons or officers or directors of any such corporation who have been convicted or have pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, lottery or illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for a retail or wholesale beer, wine or distilled spirits license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither he, nor any of the other owners of the retail or wholesale establishment, nor the manager of such establishment has been convicted or has pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, lottery or illegal possession or sale of narcotics or distilled spirits within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. Should any applicant, partner or officer, after a license has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude or the violation of any laws regulating the sales of narcotics, wine, beer or distilled spirits, or the lottery laws of this state, such license shall be immediately revoked and cancelled. Should any employee used in the sale or dispensing of beer, wine or distilled spirits after a license has been granted be convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude or the violation of any laws regulating the sale of narcotics, wine, beer or distilled spirits, or the lottery laws of this state, and the crime was committed in the course of the employee's employment, on or off the premises of the licensee, and the licensee knew or should have known that the crime had been committed, and did not immediately report the crime to the proper police authorities, such license shall be subject to be revoked and cancelled. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § VII) 
Sec. 6-43. - Revocation or denial—New license waiting period. 
If the city council revokes or denies any license for the sale of malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits at any location within the city, no new license shall be granted by the city for the sale of any malt beverages for the period of 12 months after the date of revocation or denial, at the same location. After notice to the city council that a person holding a license, or his employee or agent, has been accused of prohibited acts, no new license shall be issued for such location until after the disposition of the complaint. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XIII) 
Sec. 6-44. - Same—Specific procedures enumerated. 
(a)  Any license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any licensee may be suspended or revoked for due cause as defined in subsection (b) of this section, and after a hearing held for the purpose of considering any such suspension or revocation. At least five days' prior written notice of a time, place and purpose of such hearing, a statement of the charges upon which such hearing shall be given to the holder of such license which is sought to be suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of any license shall consist of a violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to the authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business or for the violation of any state, federal or city ordinance that would prevent one from obtaining a license. 
(c)  The mayor is hereby authorized to suspend any license issued under this chapter in any emergency situation such as civil disorders or natural disasters or in any situation that he deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city, and such suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the mayor determines the emergency is over or until the next regular meeting of the city council. 
(d)  When a license is suspended or revoked, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee to the holder of such suspended or revoked license. When a license is revoked, the licensee may not reapply for a license under this chapter for a period of three years from such revocation. 
(e)  No person whose license has been suspended or revoked pursuant to any provisions of this section shall sell any beverages covered by such suspended or revoked license during the period of such suspension or after such revocation. No license shall be suspended or revoked without the city council first giving to the licensee a written notice of the reason therefor, and, within five days thereafter, the licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the city council and present any evidence or give any reason why the license should not be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XIV) 
Sec. 6-45. - General requirements. 
Application for such license to deal in malt beverages, wines or distilled spirits shall be made to the city clerk and be accompanied by the amount of license fee. Licenses shall be issued by the city council. The license certificate shall be posted conspicuously in licensee's place of business. Before operating under such city license, the licensee must secure the state license and comply with all provisions of the Act of the General Assembly of Georgia approved March 23, 1935, as amended. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to furnish to the licensee such certificate, copy of the city license, or other evidence as may be required by the state revenue commission in order to show payment of the city license fee. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXVIII) 
Sec. 6-46. - Duration; renewal. 
(a)  All licenses granted pursuant to this chapter shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the license shall be issued. 
(b)  Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the requisite fee provided in the schedule of fees and charges with the city clerk's office, on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before December 1 of each year, otherwise no renewal license shall be granted. An application for renewal shall be treated as an initial application, and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. All licenses granted under this chapter shall be for the calendar year, and the full license fee must be paid for a license issued at any time during a license year. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXXIII) 
Sec. 6-47. - Motions for rehearing of council actions. 
Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by act or omission of the city council with respect to its proceedings under this article, including the suspension or revocation of a license, shall have the right to move for a rehearing. Such motion for omission complained of shall be in writing and shall outline the manner in which such protestant believes that the city council erred. If the motion relates to a matter as to which evidence has already been heard, no additional evidence or argument shall be permitted on the motion for rehearing except after a grant by the city council. If the matter of which complaint is made was not the subject of a prior hearing at which the protestant was permitted to be present and be heard, the city council shall afford a hearing within ten days after the filing of the motion, of which reasonable notice shall be given to all parties known to the city council to be interested, at which persons interested in protesting or supporting the action or omission of the city council shall be allowed to appear, be represented, introduce oral and documentary evidence, and examine and cross examine witnesses. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXXIV) 
Sec. 6-48. - Liability of licenseholders. 
Officers, directors and shareholders of corporations issued licenses under this chapter shall be personally liable for and criminally responsible for all fines levied by the city against the corporation of which they are an officer, director or shareholder for violations of this chapter by the corporation, its agents or employees. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXXVI) 
Sec. 6-49. - Issuance; location restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to issue any license for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine in the city within 300 feet of the grounds of any church, school or school ground. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to issue any alcoholic beverage license for the sale of distilled spirits in the city within 300 feet of the grounds of any church and within 600 feet of any school as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, as amended. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, §§ XI, XII) 
Sec. 6-50. - Transfer. 
Licenses issued under authority of this chapter shall not be transferable from one person or corporation to another, nor from one location to another. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XVII) 
Sec. 6-51. - Fingerprinting of applicants. 
(a)  Each applicant for a license to sell beer, wine or distilled spirits in the city who has not heretofore been licensed by the city to sell beer, wine or distilled spirits, at retail, shall be required to submit to a complete fingerprinting record and test, pursuant to rules and regulations established by the city council from time to time, the records being used by the council to supplement the information contained on the application and to make available to the council any records of criminal offenses, either federal or state from other jurisdictions. 
(b)  The city council, within their own discretion from time to time, may require employees, male or female, working in any establishment dispensing beer, wine or distilled spirits, to submit to the same complete fingerprinting record and test and for the same purposes of supplementing any information available to the city with respect to employees. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XVIII) 
Sec. 6-52. - Period fee applicable; due date; fee required; proration. 
Each such license fee shall be for the calendar year. The fee shall be due and payable in advance by January 1 of each year. Any person desiring to have an alcoholic beverage business in the city shall pay the prescribed fee and obtain a license before commencing business. No license fee shall be prorated for the sale of distilled spirits, nor shall any other license fee be prorated for the sale of any other type of alcoholic beverage in the city. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXVI) 
Secs. 6-53—6-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation generally, ch. 62. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-86. - Payment of license tax not to preclude additional taxation. 
The payment of any tax for the privilege of engaging in the business of vending alcoholic beverages shall not prevent the city from increasing at any time, before or after the grant of a license, the amount of such tax, nor prevent the city from providing for and collecting any other form of taxation of such business. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXVII) 
Secs. 6-87—6-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL TAXES 

Sec. 6-111. - Malt beverages. 
(a)  Levied. There is hereby levied a special tax in addition to the license fee required in article II of this chapter on the sale of all malt beverages which are sold in the city, in the following amount: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  Collection and payment. The tax levied in this section shall be collected and paid as follows: 
(1)  The tax shall be collected by wholesale distributors and paid to the city council by the wholesale distributors on all malt beverages sold to retailers in the incorporated area of the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping or in any way delivering malt beverages to any retailer, shall collect the special tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the tax, together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer, on or before the tenth day of the following month. The $0.05 per 12 ounce container shall be prorated so that each bottle or each individual size container shall be taxed on the basis of $0.05 per 12 ounces. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any malt beverage on which such tax has not been paid. 
(3)  Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the city council a summary of all purchase invoices for malt beverages sold to each retailer in the incorporated area of the city on or before the 15th day of each month following such purchases. Such invoices shall show the amount of special tax paid. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § VIII) 
Sec. 6-112. - Wine. 
(a)  Levy. In addition to the annual retail wine license fee, there is hereby levied a special tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  Collection and payment. The tax shall be collected by wholesale distributors and paid to the city council by the wholesale distributors on all wine sold to retailers in the incorporated area of the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping or in any way delivering wine to any retailer, shall collect the special tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the tax, together with a summary of all deliveries, to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the following month. 
(c)  Violation to store, sell or display without payment of tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any wine on which the tax has not been paid. 
(d)  Furnishing of purchase invoices. Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the city council a summary of all purchase invoices for wine sold to each retailer in the incorporated area of the city on or before the 15th day of each month following such purchases. Such invoices shall show the amount of special tax paid. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § IX) 
Sec. 6-113. - Distilled spirits. 
(a)  Levy. In addition to the annual retail license fee for the sale of distilled spirits, there is hereby levied a special tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter of distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter sold in the city, which shall be paid to the city council on all distilled spirits excluding fortified wine sold, displayed or stored in the incorporated area of the city. 
(b)  Collection and payment. Such tax shall be collected by wholesale distributors and paid to the city council by the wholesale distributors on all distilled spirits excluding fortified wine sold to retailers in the incorporated area of the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping or in any way delivering distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine, to any retailer, shall collect the special tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the tax, together with a summary of all deliveries, to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the following month. The $0.22 per liter shall be prorated down to one-half pints, pints, fifths, quarts and half-gallons, so that each bottle or each individual size container shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. 
(c)  Violation to store, sell or display without payment of tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any distilled spirits excluding fortified wine on which the tax has not been paid. 
(d)  Furnishing of purchase invoices. Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the city council a summary of all purchase invoices for distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine, sold to each retailer in the incorporated area of the city on or before the 15th day of each month following such purchases. Such invoices shall show the amount of special tax paid. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § X) 
Secs. 6-114—6-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SALES AND PURCHASES 

Sec. 6-146. - Sales on Sundays and election days. 
It shall be unlawful to sell any malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits within the confines of the city on Sunday as defined by the law of the state, or between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Mondays. Sales of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits are hereby authorized on election days so long as the premises are not located within 250 feet of the polls. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XV) 
Sec. 6-147. - Sales without license or to minors a violation; penalties. 
(a)  Sales without license. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, any person who engages in the business of selling malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits, whether by a single act or more often, in the city, without first obtaining the city license required in article II of this chapter for that line of business, for the calendar year in which such business is conducted; any person engaging in such business in the city after such license has expired or has been revoked; and any person violating any other provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction for each offense, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  Sales to minors. Any person who engages in the business of selling malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits, who shall be convicted for selling malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits to a minor, as defined by this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine and license suspension as follows: 
(1)  First offense: A fine of $500.00; 
(2)  Second offense, if occurring within 12 months of the first offense: A fine of $500.00 and suspension of the licensee's license for a period of 30 days from the date of conviction; 
(3)  Third offense, if occurring within 24 months of the first offense: A fine of $500.00 and suspension of the licensee's license for a period of 12 months from the date of conviction; and 
(4)  Fourth offense, if occurring within 36 months of the first offense: A fine of $500.00 and permanent suspension of the licensee's license. 
(c)  Petition for hearing on license suspension. Any person whose license is suspended, pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, shall be entitled to petition the city council for a hearing due to the suspension of their license pursuant to section 6-44. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XVI) 
Sec. 6-148. - Employer's responsibilities for employees. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits to file with the clerk of the city the names of all employees, with their home address and home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees, with the names of the new employees must be filed with the clerk before the date of any such change. No new employee shall be allowed to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits under this chapter until the provisions of this subsection are complied with. 
(b)  The licensee is responsible for the conduct or actions of his employees while in his employment. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XIX) 
Sec. 6-149. - Service, sales or order-taking by underage persons prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Persons under 18 years of age are not to be allowed or required to serve, sell or take orders for alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, drugstores or restaurants from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises or on the premises pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XX) 
Sec. 6-150. - Sales to underage persons, intoxicated persons or habitual drunks. 
No licensee shall by himself or another sell, furnish or cause to be sold or furnished to permit any person in his employment to furnish beer, wine or distilled spirits to any person under the legal age, to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or to any habitual drunk and whose intemperate habits are known to such person. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXI) 
Sec. 6-151. - Purchasing, drinking or possessing alcoholic beverages by underage persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to purchase, drink or possess any beer, wine or distilled spirits. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a place wherein persons under the legal age are permitted to come and purchase any beer, wine or distilled spirits. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy beer, wine or distilled spirits and furnish the same to anyone under the legal age for consumption. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to examine the identification of patrons to be certain that such patrons are of legal age. A state driver's license, which is apparently valid upon its face, may be accepted by the licensee or his employee as evidence of age. 
(e)  The legal age shall mean the age at which a person may consume or purchase malt beverages, wines or distilled spirits under state law. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXII) 
State Law reference— Posting of laws regarding sale of alcoholic beverages to underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24.2. 
Sec. 6-152. - False representation of age by minor. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to falsely misrepresent his age in any manner whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXIII) 
Sec. 6-153. - Loitering by minors; responsibilities of licensee. 
No person who holds a license to sell beer, wine or distilled spirits may allow any minor to loiter about the premises of the licensee, unless he is present for purposes of purchasing goods or food other than beer, wine or distilled spirits. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXIV) 
Sec. 6-154. - Drive-in or service window sales; curb service; advertising signs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell or dispense malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits from drive-in or service windows, unless it is approved in the application by the city. If drive-in or service windows are approved, such areas must be well-lighted as required by the city. 
(b)  Curb service or other sales of beer, wine or distilled spirits outside the building licensed to sell is hereby expressly prohibited. 
(c)  No sign shall be erected anywhere within the city advertising or promoting the sale of beer, wine or distilled spirits except as may be authorized by state law and regulations of the state department of revenue, or other agency having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXV) 
Sec. 6-155. - Recordkeeping by retail dealers. 
All retail dealers in malt beverages, wines and distilled spirits and all persons selling malt beverages in retail, shall keep a complete and correct record of all persons from whom they purchase malt beverages, wines and distilled spirits to furnish and deliver to them, at the time of delivery of such beverages, a correct invoice of purchase, which invoice shall be kept and preserved by the retailer at his place of business for a period of six months from the date of purchase. Such invoices and all records of retailers of malt beverages, wines and distilled spirits shall be subject to inspection by any authorized representative of the city. All records of purchases shall be kept for a period of at least three years from the date of such purchase or sale before being destroyed. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § XXIX) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; circuses, carnivals and public exhibitions, § 22-101 et seq. 
State Law reference— Exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c); Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq.; state licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POOL AND BILLIARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of May 8, 2012, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 10-31—10-38, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of November 13, 1990, §§ 1 and 3—9. 
State Law reference— Authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 

Sec. 10-31. - License required. 
Each person, business, entity or proprietorship located within the incorporated area of the city maintaining or operating a pool table, billiard table or table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue, and amusement and recreation centers for adults shall be required to comply with the provisions of this Code requiring the payment of occupation taxes and compliance with the business tax registration provisions as set forth in section 22-31 et seq. 
(Ord. of 5-8-12) 
Sec. 10-32. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the definitions as contained in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 are incorporated in this section by reference. Further, amusement and recreation centers for adults shall include any type of recreation facilities for adults, whether requiring admission fees or not, and shall include recreation facilities that provide music by way of either bands or disc jockeys for listening or dancing for persons 18 years of age or older. An amusement and recreation center for adults shall not include any type of adult entertainment as defined in article III, section 10-73. 
(Ord. of 5-8-12) 
Sec. 10-33. - Hours of operation. 
The hours of operation for facilities provided in article II shall be as follows: 
(1)  Pool, billiards and similar games: No operator, owner or manager of a billiard room or pool room in the city shall allow or permit the playing of billiards, carom billiards, pocket billiards, English billiards or any similar game between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. where a charge is made for the use of the equipment or permit the playing of billiards on Sundays except in game or recreational rooms. 
(2)  Amusement and recreation centers for adults: No operator, owner or manager of an amusement or recreation center for adults shall be open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and 12:00 a.m. (Midnight) on Sunday until 6:00 a.m. on Monday, whether for a private party or open to the general public for admission. 
(Ord. of 5-8-12) 
Sec. 10-34. - Consumption and sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or consumed on the premises designated as a billiard room or amusement and recreation center for adults except as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2(b)(3) and the City of Colquitt's ordinances. The operator, owner or manager of the facility shall be responsible for compliance with this provision of the ordinances and that the customers or patrons comply with the provisions of this article. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall subject the business, entity or proprietorship with suspension of its license to operate or maintain a billiard room or amusement and recreation center for adults. Premises shall include the grounds or lands surrounding the building in which the billiard room, or amusement or recreation center for adults is located. 
(Ord. of 5-8-12) 
Sec. 10-35. - Gambling on premises. 
The owner, operator or manager of a billiard room or amusement and recreation center for adults open for the public shall be responsible for prohibiting and stopping all gambling of any kind to occur upon such premises. A violation of this section of this article shall cause such person's license to operate the billiard room or amusement and recreation center for adults to be revoked by the city. Premises shall include the grounds or lands surrounding the building in which the billiard room, or amusement or recreation center for adults is located. 
(Ord. of 5-8-12) 
Sec. 10-36. - Minors. 
No minors shall be allowed on the premises where a billiard room or amusement and recreation center for adults is located, if alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on premises. Minors may be allowed on the premises of a facility used as an amusement and recreation center for adults if for a private party to which the public is not allowed and no admission fee is charged, provided no alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed on the premises, and a permit is obtained for the private party from the City of Colquitt Police Department. 
(Ord. of 5-8-12) 
Sec. 10-37. - Recreation or game rooms. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the city form issuing a license to a game or recreation room, or to an amusement and recreation center for adults, upon payment of the occupation tax, provided that no alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises and no persons are allowed to be on the premises under the influence of alcoholic beverages or other intoxicants, and all customers or patrons of the amusement and recreation center for adults are 18 years of age or older. Premises shall include the grounds or lands surrounding the building in which the billiard room, or amusement or recreation center for adults is located. 
(Ord. of 5-8-12) 
Sec. 10-38. - Clear view of the premises required. 
The owner, operator or manager of a facility obtaining a license pursuant to article II shall not use any device which obstructs the view through windows or doors, and said facility while in operation shall be open such that the city police may enter as any time. A violation of this section may result in the license of the owner, operator or manager of the facility being revoked. 
(Ord. of 5-8-12) 
Sec. 10-39. - Insurance requirements. 
No business, entity or proprietorship shall be issued a license for an amusement or recreation center for adults until proof of liability insurance is furnished to City of Colquitt in the amount of $100,000.00. 
(Ord. of 5-8-12) 
Sec. 10-40. - Building code requirements. 
All businesses, entities, or proprietorships shall comply with the requirements of the buildings codes for the City of Colquitt, as well as all fire code regulations governing the type of buildings being used for the facility. No license may be issued until the facilities are in compliance with the building and fire code requirements for the City of Colquitt. 
(Ord. of 5-8-12) 
Sec. 10-41. - Occupants. 
It shall be the responsibility of the operator, owner or manager of the facility issued a license pursuant to this article to maintain or prohibit more occupants of a building than are permitted by the building code or fire codes for the City of Colquitt. Failure to comply with the requirement may result in suspension of the license of the business, entity or proprietorship. 
(Ord. of 5-8-12) 
Secs. 10-42—10-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Nudity and related acts on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41; employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42; restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-71. - Findings. 
The city council makes the following findings with respect to the regulation of adult entertainment establishments and adult bookstores within the city: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses require special supervision in order to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such business as well as the citizens of the communities where they locate. 
(2)  Sexually oriented businesses are frequently used for unlawful sexual activities, including prostitution and sexual liaisons of a casual nature. 
(3)  The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern of the city that demands reasonable regulation of sexually oriented businesses in order to protect the health and well-being of the citizens. 
(4)  Permitting and/or licensing is a legitimate means of accountability to ensure that operators of sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations and to ensure that operators do not knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation. 
(5)  There is convincing documented evidence that sexually oriented businesses, because of their very nature, have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, causing increased crime and the downgrading of property values. 
(6)  It is recognized that sexually oriented businesses, due to their nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when they are located in proximity to each other, thereby contributing to urban blight and downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area. 
(7)  The city council wants to prevent these adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizenry; protect the citizens from increased crime and preserve the quality of life; and preserve the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods, and deter the spread of urban blight. 
(8)  It is not the intent of this article to suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a content neutral ordinance that addresses the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses as well as the health problems associated with such businesses. 
(9)  It is not the intent of the city council to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials, and the council recognizes that state and federal law prohibits the distribution of obscene materials and expects and encourages state enforcement officials to enforce state and federal obscenity statutes against any such illegal activities in the city. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96) 
Sec. 10-72. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot defacto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: Reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-1) 
Sec. 10-73. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent of its net sales, consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means either: 
(1)  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(2)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Church means a body of communicants gathered into church order; united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same ritual and ceremonies; place where persons regularly assemble for worship; congregation; or organization for religious purposes. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit furnishes or offers to furnish names or persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character means, according to this article, that a person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony, sex-related crime or a crime of moral turpitude in the past ten years. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-74. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued under this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-27) 
Sec. 10-75. - Regulations. 
Regulations governing the operation of an adult entertainment establishment are as follows: 
(1)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(2)  No later than March 1 of each year an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(3)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(4)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(5)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(6)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be closed as follows: 
a.  On Christmas Day. 
b.  Between 12:45 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Tuesday through Saturday. 
c.  From 12:00 a.m. Sunday to 8:00 a.m. Monday morning. 
(7)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(8)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(9)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor and a minimum of four feet from the customer. 
(10)  No adult entertainment licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any other person on the premises to engage in any of the following sexual activities. 
(11)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty. 
(12)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. 
(13)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation. 
(14)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast. 
(15)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain. 
(16)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
(17)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-3) 
Sec. 10-76. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this article, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted under this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-28) 
Sec. 10-77. - Premises to be open for inspection. 
The adult entertainment premises shall be open at reasonable times for inspection by the city to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-32) 
Sec. 10-78. - Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point outside the establishment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This subsection shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The establishment is a part of a commercial multiunit center; and 
(2)  The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multiunit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multiunit center. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-33) 
Sec. 10-79. - Signage. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other city ordinance, code or regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than the one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided in this section. 
(b)  Primary signs shall have no more than two display surfaces. Each such display surface shall: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing lights; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed 75 square feet in area; and 
(4)  Not exceed ten feet in height or ten feet in length. 
(c)  Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of the enterprise. 
(d)  Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color. 
(e)  Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. Such display surface shall: 
(1)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(2)  Not exceed 20 square feet in area; 
(3)  Not exceed five feet in height and four feet in width; and 
(4)  Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise. 
(f)  The provisions of this article shall also apply to secondary signs. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-34) 
Sec. 10-80. - Admission of minors. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-7) 
Sec. 10-81. - Sales to minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment, or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-8) 
Sec. 10-82. - Location of business or use. 
No adult business or use restricted under this article shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,500 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single-family uses or purposes. 
(2)  Within 1,500 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, public park or neighborhood playground is located. 
(3)  Within 1,500 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined under this article is located. 
(4)  Within any zoning category other than the following four categories: Highway commercial district, C-2; central business district, CBD; and light industrial district, M-1. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-9) 
Sec. 10-83. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult use establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult use establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any premises requiring licenses under this article for a period of ten years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty. The terms "employed as an adult use establishment employee" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the licensing officer of his intended employment on forms that require the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section. The city shall have 45 days to investigate the information required by the employee. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the licensing officer shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of such denial, apply to the licensing officer for a hearing. The decision of the licensing officer after hearing may be appealed to the city council who shall issue such order as is required. An investigation fee in an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges shall accompany the notice of intended employment, or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation of license. Conviction of violating the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of his license. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner of a license of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-10) 
Sec. 10-84. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business, or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required for such business under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-6) 
Secs. 10-85—10-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-106. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments without a license so to do. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity under this article if the activity is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-5) 
Sec. 10-107. - Application. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee in an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges shall be paid to the clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and the report required by this article. The clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the city at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-11) 
Sec. 10-108. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full true name, social security number and date of birth. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(4)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the ten years immediately preceding the date of application and business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation. 
(5)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(7)  If the applicant, any partners or any corporate officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, have been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past ten years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(8)  If applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any. 
(9)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral character. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(10)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(11)  Whether the premises are owned or rented. 
(12)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions of this article which provide that no adult business or use restricted shall be located within 1,500 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single-family use or purposes; within 1,500 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; within 1,500 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined under this article is located; or within any zoning category other than allowed by this article. 
(13)  Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; or 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(14)  In addition to the information required herein, the application shall disclose the name, address, social security number and date of birth of any and all persons who have a financial interest of any type in the entity which is applying for the license. 
(15)  Any other matter reasonably required by the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-12) 
Sec. 10-109. - Applicant to appear before city officers. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee has been paid, and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-13) 
Sec. 10-110. - Investigation of applicant. 
The city shall have 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city council may grant the permit at its next regular meeting if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses. 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause involving moral character in this city or any other local government jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable zoning and distance laws and would qualify to receive a certificate of occupancy. 
(8)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(9)  The applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities openly occur. 
(10)  On the date the business for which a permit is required commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)  The proposed premises is not to be located within 1,500 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single-family uses or purposes; within 1,500 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; within 1,500 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; or within any zoning category other than that allowed by this article. 
(12)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state or the United States. 
(13)  The licensee shall maintain at all times a written notification of the name, address and phone number of the manager or assistant manager in charge of the licensed premises, and there shall at all times be a manager in charge and on the premises during operating hours. 
(14)  There is hereby created a continuing obligation on the licensee to comply with all provisions of this article. 
(15)  The applicant shall appear before the city council at any hearing on this issue of the grant or denial of the requested license. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-14) 
Sec. 10-111. - Persons prohibited to be licensees. 
No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)  Any corporation whose directors are not of good moral character. 
(4)  Any partnership or association whose partners or members are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-15) 
Sec. 10-112. - Renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a calendar year basis, provided that the licensee continues to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishments license shall be established by this article. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15 of each year prior to January 1 of the year for which such license is requested. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-16) 
Sec. 10-113. - Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such license. In such case, the license upon notification to the city shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-17) 
Sec. 10-114. - Change of licensee name. 
(a)  No licensee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(b)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-18) 
Sec. 10-115. - Refusal; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within 45 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a license may appeal such denial to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of the receipt of notice from the city clerk. A hearing before the city council shall be scheduled within 45 days of such notice. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-19) 
Sec. 10-116. - Fees. 
There is hereby established a nonrefundable fee in an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges to be submitted with any and every application to operate an adult entertainment establishment pursuant to the ordinance providing for the insurance of such license. The annual renewal fee for any such license shall be an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-30) 
Sec. 10-117. - Advertising and posting. 
The premises for which a license is sought shall be posted with a notice in a form prescribed by the mayor for at least 21 days prior to the hearing before the city council. In addition, a newspaper advertisement shall be published in a form prescribed by the mayor at least once in the newspaper a minimum of ten days prior to the hearing before the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-31) 
Sec. 10-118. - Revocation and appeal. 
(a)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license previously granted. If the chief of police seeks to suspend or to revoke a license, the chief of police shall give written notification to the licensee of such action, and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation and shall be served upon the licensee at least five days prior to the notice of hearing. The licensee shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license in the event of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee has violated any provision of this adult entertainment article; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by or crime of moral turpitude the state or the city regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article; and 
(6)  A licensee fails to pay any fee, license fee, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this article or any other licensing ordinance of the city. 
(c)  If the chief of police shall suspend or revoke any license under this article, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the chief of police; provided, however, that the licensee shall be authorized to continue its business operations until that date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (d) of this section hereafter. No licensee or other applicant may apply for a license during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing conducted by the chief of police, the chief shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension, revocation and the duration of either. 
(d)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the chief of police, the licensee may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date of the decision of the chief of police. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled before the city council within 45 days after the date of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After a hearing by the city council, the city council may take such action as it deems appropriate, including the upholding of the action of the chief of police or the imposition of such action as the city council may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of the city council shall be final. Appeals from the decision of the city council shall be to the superior court, filed within 30 days of the final action of the city council. If the licensee does not file an appeal from any decision of the chief of police, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-29) 
Secs. 10-119—10-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS; HEARINGS 

Sec. 10-141. - Appeal procedure generally. 
(a)  The licensee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council, and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-20) 
Sec. 10-142. - Actions by council upon appeal being placed on agenda. 
When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this division. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-21) 
Sec. 10-143. - City council hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the city council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-22) 
Sec. 10-144. - Power of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-23) 
Sec. 10-145. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-24) 
Sec. 10-146. - Hearing officer; report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendation. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall be considered public records. 
(b)  A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished the city manager and chief of police. 
(c)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting, unless the licensee/appellant stipulates a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-25) 
Sec. 10-147. - Action by council upon receiving report. 
The council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points, in either of such cases the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 7-9-96, § 32-215-26) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer means an employee of the police department of the city whose duties specifically include enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
Dangerous dog means any dog which, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Dog control officer means the chief of police of the city and such employees of the animal control division of the police department acting under his supervision and control. 
Owner means any person owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody or control of a dog or cat within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog which has, without provocation, bitten a human being on public or private property. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, while on the owner's property, securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Rabies control officer means an employee of the county board of health whose specific duties include enforcement of the rabies control rules and regulations of the city. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state or local court; or records maintained by the dog control officer pursuant to this chapter. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery, or a physical injury that results in death. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit hogs, fowl, cattle and other domestic animals to run at large within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. I) 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 
Sec. 14-3. - Keeping of hogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep hogs within the corporate limits of the city, other than hogs which have been killed or slaughtered and prepared for market. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. I) 
Sec. 14-4. - Keeping of cows. 
It shall be unlawful to keep any bovine animal within the corporate limits of the city confined in any area that does not provide for each animal so kept an area equal to that of a tract of land of one acre. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. I) 
Sec. 14-5. - Fees and charges. 
The fees and charges authorized and imposed under this chapter shall be as established by the city council from time to time and set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. I) 
Sec. 14-6. - Restraint of dogs and cats. 
(a)  The owner or keeper of each dog or cat within the city shall keep it from becoming a nuisance and from endangering or injuring any person or property. Although dogs and cats do not have to be enclosed, owners must comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever a dog is allowed to roam free, in violation of this section, impoundment of the animal is authorized. Upon identification of the owner, a citation shall be issued for violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 1) 
Sec. 14-7. - Animals as nuisances; abatement. 
Whenever a dog or cat is kept in such manner as to constitute a nuisance, a proceeding to abate the nuisance may be brought by the party aggrieved. An animal found by the court to constitute a nuisance may be impounded by the city if the owner, after reasonable opportunity to do so, fails to abate the nuisance as ordered by the court. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 1) 
Sec. 14-8. - Tags to be worn by animals. 
The numbered vaccination tag issued by a licensed veterinarian upon inoculation shall be attached to a collar or harness and worn by the animal at all times. Every untagged dog or cat shall be impounded. If a tagged animal is impounded, and the dog or cat is found not to be registered, or its current registration has expired, the owner may be cited for violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 1) 
Sec. 14-9. - Inoculation required; regulations adopted. 
All dogs and cats shall be inoculated against rabies in accordance with the procedures set forth in the rabies control rules and regulations of the county, as promulgated and from time to time amended by the county board of health, which by reference are expressly incorporated as a part of this section as if fully set out in this chapter. Violation of such rules and regulations may be enforced by the rabies control officer in the municipal court, upon citation, as an offense against the city. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 1) 
Sec. 14-10. - Presentation of certificate of vaccination; registration form; duration; transfer. 
(a)  Between January 1 and March 1 of each year, the owner of each dog and cat shall present to the city a current certificate of vaccination, and complete the registration form provided by the city, giving therein the full name, address and telephone number of the owner; breed and sex of the animal; type of animal; and the number of the current vaccination tag. Upon payment of a fee, and completion of the foregoing requirements, the city shall issue to the owner a certificate of registration. 
(b)  All certificates shall be valid until March 1 of the following calendar year; provided, however, that no certification of registration shall be transferable. It shall be the duty of the owner to notify the city, within 24 hours, if the dog dies, is sold or transferred. If sold or transferred to a new owner within the city, the name, address and telephone number of the new owner shall be provided. 
(c)  Owners acquiring or bringing animals into the city after March 1 and before January 1 of the following year shall immediately cause the animal to be registered with the city in the manner provided for by this section. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 1) 
Sec. 14-11. - Impoundment procedures. 
(a)  Notice to owner. All dogs and cats impounded by the city shall be held in a humane manner. The animal control division shall make a diligent effort to ascertain the owner of such animal, and shall give the owner prompt notice of the fact of impoundment. Notice shall be given by the best means possible to ensure actual receipt by the owner. For purposes of this section, written notice to the owner by certified mail, at the address shown in the current registration form, shall be deemed complete upon its mailing. If the owner is personally served, such notice may be left with a person of responsible age residing at the address, or conspicuously tacked on the main entrance thereof. The notice shall advise the owner that the animal will be held for a period of ten days, exclusive of the date of service. Thereafter, the animal may be disposed of in accordance with this section. The notice shall state the location and hours of the facility where the animal may be reclaimed, and shall specify the cost for reclaiming the animal. 
(b)  Fees. The animal control officer shall charge and assess such fees for pickup and impoundment as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges approved by the city council, as may be from time to time amended. If the owner cannot show proof of current rabies vaccination, the animal shall be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian before such release, and the costs collected from the owner. 
(c)  Disposal. Any impounded animal, except a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, may be disposed of on or after the fifth day after date of service of notice of the owner. Disposal of animals shall be made by adoption or by destruction in an expedient and humane manner. Animals may be held beyond the period stated, if circumstances warrant. 
(d)  Release; payment of fees. Before being released, the owner of any impounded animal/fowl shall pay the following: 
(1)  A vaccination fee on any unvaccinated animal when a vaccination is required by this chapter; 
(2)  A license fee for any unlicensed dog in an area covered by this chapter; 
(3)  An impoundment fee; and 
(4)  A daily boarding fee. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 1) 
Sec. 14-12. - Disposition of dead animals. 
If any dead dog or cat is found upon the public right-of-way, the city shall remove and dispose of the animal and charge the owner, if known, a fee for such service. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 1) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-13. - Right of entry. 
Any animal control officer empowered to perform any duty under the rabies and animal control regulations in this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for impounding a dog or other animal/fowl, which the officer is in immediate pursuit of, with the exception of any occupied building into which the dog or other animal/fowl may enter. In the latter case, if the occupant or owner of the premises gives permission to the animal control officer to enter the premises, the officer may remove such dog or other animal/fowl. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 1) 
Sec. 14-14. - Obstruction of officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to molest the animal control officer in the performance of his duties, or for any person to remove any animal/fowl from the animal control vehicle without the permission of the animal control officer. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 1) 
Sec. 14-15. - Nuisance birds. 
(a)  Designation. If starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the health officer, or others designated by the city council, the health officer or person designated by the city council shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, bird club, garden club or Humane Society, or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given such clubs at least three days' actual notice of the time and place of such meeting to the representative of such clubs. 
(b)  Destruction. If, as a result of a meeting under subsection (a) of this section, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate the nuisance, then the birds causing such nuisance may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health authorities, or individuals designated by the city council, under the supervision and at the direction of the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. III) 
Secs. 14-16—14-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

Sec. 14-46. - Liability of owner. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury or the death of a person caused by such dog. Under no circumstances shall the city or any employee or official of the city which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this chapter, be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, or by a dog which has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in this section, or by a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in this article. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2) 
Sec. 14-47. - Registration required. 
It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this state and city a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog, and vicious dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2; Ord. of 4-10-12) 
Sec. 14-48. - Investigation; classification. 
Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the dog control officers' jurisdiction from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer or county board of health, the dog control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Whenever the dog control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, notice shall be given the dog's owner in writing by certified mail to the owner's last known address of such classification or reclassification. Such notice shall be deemed complete upon its mailing. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2) 
Sec. 14-49. - Requirements of notice to owner. 
The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the day shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog before the city council. 
(4)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this section on the date after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing. 
(5)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the city council and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such form to the city. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2; Ord. of 4-10-12) 
Sec. 14-50. - Hearing generally. 
When the city council receives a request for a hearing under this article, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The city shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and, in addition thereto, the council shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the council may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify or overrule the dog control officer's classification of the dog. Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the city council shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify it is effective on the third day following the date of receipt by the owner. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2) 
Sec. 14-51. - Prerequisites for issuance of registration. 
Subject to the requirements of this article, the dog control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, if the owner presents to the dog control officer or if the dog control officer finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous, potentially dangerous, and vicious dogs. 
(2)  The animal found to be a potentially dangerous dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog shall be spayed or neutered within 15 days of the animal control officer's determination that said dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog. 
(3)  The owner shall be required to post the premises where the animal is located with a clearly visible sign, issued by the animal control officer, containing a symbol designed to warn all citizens, including children, that there is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on the property; the number of signs will be determined by the animal control officer. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to display the above dangerous dog sign at locations or on premises where no such dangerous or potentially dangerous dog exists or is located. 
(5)  The registration fee shall be $150.00, or as set forth in the City of Colquitt Fee Schedule, which will be collected by the city for a regulatory service for a potentially dangerous dog annually and for a dangerous and vicious dog annually. One warning sign shall be issued and is included in this fee. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2; Ord. of 4-10-12) 
Sec. 14-52. - Insurance and bond. 
In addition to the requirements above, the owner of a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall present to the dog control officer evidence that the dog has been spayed or neutered, and evidence of: 
(1)  Policy of insurance in the amount of $75,000.00 or more in special circumstances issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog or vicious dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
(2)  A surety bond in the amount of $75,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous or vicious dog. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2; Ord. of 4-10-12) 
Sec. 14-53. - Renewal of registration. 
Each certificate of registration issued under this article shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of an annual renewal of a certificate of registration, a dog control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2) 
Sec. 14-54. - Issuance not guarantee of status of dog. 
Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of certificate of registration by the City Of Colquitt does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of an annual renewal of such certificate. 
An animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2; Ord. of 4-10-12) 
Sec. 14-55. - Notice of change of status of dog. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer as soon as the dog owner realizes the dog is loose, unconfined, has attacked a human or other animals, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the animal control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2; Ord. of 4-10-12) 
Sec. 14-56. - Notice of removal from jurisdiction. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer if the owner is moving from the dog control officer's jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2) 
Sec. 14-57. - Application to new residents. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer if the owner and dog are moving from animal control officer's jurisdiction. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the State of Georgia shall register the dog as required in this Code section within 30 days after becoming a resident. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the State of Georgia shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2; Ord. of 4-10-12) 
Sec. 14-58. - Restraint. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2) 
Sec. 14-59. - Warning sign. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dangerous dog to fail to post a warning sign on the premises where a dangerous dog is located in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2) 
Sec. 14-60. - Impoundment authorized. 
It shall be the duty of the dog control officer, and any person under his employ, to impound the dog if: 
(1)  The owner does not secure a certificate of registration in accordance with this article; 
(2)  The owner does not secure liability insurance or meet the bond requirements of this article; or 
(3)  The owner does not keep the dog within a proper enclosure or permits the dog to roam or run free. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2) 
Sec. 14-61. - Impoundment procedures. 
Any dog impounded under the provisions of this article shall be returned to the owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this chapter and upon payment of reasonable impoundment cost, as fixed by the schedule of fees and charges approved by the city council, as from time to time amended. Notice of impoundment under this section shall be given the owner, in writing, by certified mail, at his last known address. The notice shall state that if the owner has not complied with the provisions of this chapter within 20 days from receipt of such notice, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner; provided, however, that no dog shall be destroyed under this section unless it has been held a full 20 days, exclusive of the date of giving notice. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 2) 
Sec. 14-62. - Definitions. 
At large means an animal in any public street, right-of-way, park or other public grounds or when off of the premises of the owner or person who has custody of the animal, and not under restraint or under the immediate control of the owner, or the person who has custody of the animal. 
Bite means to be seized with the teeth or jaw so that a person or animal has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced and a saliva of the biting animal has or may have contacted the result of break or abrasion of the skin. 
Dangerous animal or vicious animal means any animal that, according to the records of the City of Colquitt, the chief of police or any county department: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being or another animal without provocation on public or private property at any time. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, firm or trust, owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of an animal within this county. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise threaten persons without provocation; or any dog that, when unprovoked dogs: 
(1)  Chases or approaches a human being or another domestic animal on any public or private property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack; or 
(2)  Attempts to attack a human or another domestic animal. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely enclosed indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top; and, if the dog is enclosed with a fence, all sides of the fence shall be eight feet in height and the bottom of the fence constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
(Ord. of 1-12-12) 
Sec. 14-63. - Vicious and potentially dangerous dogs. 
(a)  No person owning or having custody or control of any dog or other animal known by such person to be vicious or potentially dangerous dog shall permit it to run at large, or permit it to run loose on or within the premises of such person in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person lawfully entering such premises. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any vicious animal, or anyone having anyone having such animal in their possession or custody, to ensure that the vicious animal is kept under restraint, as prescribed in this ordinance [Ordinance of 1-12-12] and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the vicious animal from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, custodian, or harborer, and it is securely and humanely enclosed within house, building, fence, locked pen, or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition. Such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended so children are prevented from entry and to prevent the vicious animal from escaping. 
(c)  For owners of a vicious animal whose animal lives out-of-doors, a portion of their property should be fenced with a perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter fence, the vicious animal, which fence must be a minimum of eight feet in height. Within this perimeter fence the vicious animal must be humanely confined inside a locked pen or kennel of adequate size. The kennel or pen must have secure sides that set securely into the ground or onto a concrete pad, such that the vicious animal is unable to dig out of the kennel or pen. The gate to the kennel must be locked when the animal is unattended. This enclosure shall provide protection from the elements. 
(d)  A vicious animal shall not be upon any street or public place except when restrained by a leash not more than four feet in length and humanely muzzled, when appropriate, as determined by the chief of police or such other animal control officer as designated by the mayor and council for the City of Colquitt. 
(e)  Whenever outside of its enclosure, as provided for in this ordinance [Ord. of 1-12-12], but the owner's property, a vicious animal must be attended by the owner or custodian and restrained by a secure collar and/or muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the health control, officer, and on a leash of sufficient length to prevent an escape. 
(f)  No vicious animal shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied while unattended by the owner or custodian to a inanimate object such as a tree, post, or building outside of its primary enclosure. 
(g)  A warning sign (i.e. beware of dog) shall be conspicuously posted denoting a vicious animal on the premises. 
(h)  Failure to keep any vicious animal confined or under restraint as provided in this ordinance [Ordinance of 1-12-12] shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in this ordinance. 
(i)  The word vicious shall include potentially dangerous dogs. 
(Ord. of 1-12-12) 
Sec. 14-64. - Rights of officials and interference with officials prohibited. 
(a)  If the chief of police or officer appointed by the City of Colquitt has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of any animal is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to protect the public health or safety, he shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property, and may use reasonable means required to effect such entry and make inspection whether such property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining his reasons and the purpose of the inspection. Failure or refusal to permit inspection shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b)  No person shall resist or interfere with the chief of police or officer designated by the City of Colquitt in the performance of his official duty in enforcing this ordinance [Ordinance of 1-12-12]; nor shall any person fail or refuse to exhibit the vaccination certificate of any animal required to be vaccinated when required to do so by officer. 
(Ord. of 1-12-12) 
Sec. 14-65. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designated officer or any officer designated by the mayor and council for the City of Colquitt to enforce this ordinance [Ordinance of 1-12-12]. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this ordinance [Ordinance of 1-12-12] shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Upon conviction for the first offense, the court shall be authorized to impose a fine of up to $1,000.00 per day for each day that such condition or violation shall exist. Upon conviction for a second or subsequent offenses within a 12-month period, the court shall be authorized to impose a fine of up to $1,000.00 per day for each day that such condition or violation shall exist. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violations of this ordinance [Ordinance of 1-12-12], to recover damages, and to restrain, correct or abate a violation; and these remedies shall be in addition to the other penalties described in this [Ordinance of 1-12-12] ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-12-12) 
Secs. 14-66—14-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6. 

Sec. 14-91. - Vaccination required. 
(a)  The owner, custodian or harborer of each dog or cat over four months of age kept, maintained or harbored within the city is required to maintain a current rabies vaccination on such dog or cat. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having custody of any dog or cat over four months of age brought into the city from outside the county to have such dog or cat vaccinated within 14 days from date of entry; provided, however, that when the owner or person having custody of the dog or cat, produces evidence satisfactory to the health department through its designee that such dog or cat has a current vaccination as prescribed by this article, such dog or cat will not be required to be vaccinated again until the expiration of the current vaccination. 
(c)  Only a licensed veterinarian shall be entitled in connection with his practice, on request of any owner of a dog, cat or other animal, to vaccinate such dog, cat or other animal against rabies; provided, however, that at the time of vaccination he furnished two copies of the vaccination certificate to the owner, forwarded one copy to the city police department and maintained one copy for his files. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 3) 
Sec. 14-92. - Rabies cases to be reported. 
It shall be the duty of any person who knows of a rabid animal or of any animal showing symptoms of rabies to immediately report such animal to the health department or its designee and give as much pertinent information as possible. Any bite by an animal shall be reported to the health department or its designee. The animal control office, in order to maintain an effective epidemiological surveillance and control program, shall maintain records of its rabies related activity, including investigation and confirmation of rabies in animals in the manner and frequency stipulated by the health department. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 3) 
Sec. 14-93. - Quarantine. 
(a)  If a dog or cat has bitten a human, such animal shall be immediately confined at the animal control shelter, veterinary hospital or other such premises deemed acceptable by the health department or its designee for a period of ten days from the date of the bite to be observed for symptoms of rabies. 
(b)  If an animal, other than dog or cat, has bitten a human, another dog, cat or other animal, the recommendations contained in the rabies control manual compiled by the state department of human resources, shall be followed. 
(c)  All expenses incurred for boarding an animal for the quarantine period, as well as other applicable fees, shall be paid by the owner or custodian of the biting animal. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, custodian or harborer to fail to surrender a dog, cat or other animal which has bitten a human, for quarantine or laboratory examination, upon the sworn statement of the person bitten. The provisions of this article shall apply, regardless of whether or not such animal has a current rabies vaccination and tag. 
(e)  Where rabies has been found to exist in any warm-blooded animal, or where its existence is suspected, the health department or its designee may designate an area within which quarantine of all owned warm-blooded animals shall be maintained. Such animals shall be immediately confined to the premises designated and in a manner approved by the health department or its designee whether or not such animals have been vaccinated against rabies. 
(f)  No animal shall be brought into or removed from a quarantined area or premises without written approval of the health department or its designee. 
(g)  Quarantine ordered by the health department or its designee shall be maintained for such period as deemed necessary to protect the public health. 
(h)  Quarantined areas or premises where rabid animals or animals suspected of having rabies remain at large, may be posted by the health department with signs which read as follows: "Rabies Suspected" or "Rabies—Keep Away From Animals." Such signs shall be conspicuously displayed in a place designated by the health department and shall not be removed except by the health department. Such signs shall not be defaced. 
(i)  The owner, custodian or harborer of each animal, subject to a quarantine invoked by the health department under the terms of this article, shall be notified of the quarantine, the particular animals subject thereto and shall be given such other information as the health department deems necessary. 
(j)  Every animal showing clinical signs of rabies, as determined by the health department, shall be immediately destroyed; and/or the heads of all animals suspected of having had rabies at the time of death, shall be submitted to the epidemiology office, state department of human resources, for examination by the state department of human resources laboratory. 
(Ord. of 10-14-97, art. II, div. 3) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 74; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-31. - Adoption of technical codes. 
It is the intent of the city to enforce the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standards Codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: 
(1)  International Building Code; 
(2)  International Mechanical Code; 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code; 
(4)  International Plumbing Code; 
(5)  National Electrical Code; 
(6)  International Fire Code; 
(7)  International Residential Code (CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code); and 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code. 
(Ord. of 9-10-85; Ord. of 4-11-06) 
Sec. 18-32. - Self-inspection exemption. 
The city council, pursuant to 1996 Ga. Laws, page 1632 does hereby exempt the city from the alternative inspection procedure as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). 
Secs. 18-33—18-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Water conservation, § 34-181 et seq. 
State Law reference— Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 18-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling unit, but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-67. - Construction standards. 
Construction initiated within the county for any residential or commercial building of any type must comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Water closet. Water closets shall be either flush tank or flushometer operated, and shall be designed, manufactured and installed to be operated and adequately flushed with no more than 1.6 gallons of water per flushing cycle when tested in accordance with applicable standards. 
(2)  Urinals. Urinals shall be designed, manufactured and installed to be operable and adequately flushed with no more than 1.5 gallons per flush. 
(3)  Lavatory facilities, public. Faucets for public lavatories shall be equipped with outlet devices which limit the flow of water to a minimum of 0.5 gallon per minute or to be equipped with self-closing valves that limit the delivery to a maximum of 0.25 gallon of hot water for recirculating systems and to a maximum of 0.5 gallon for a nonrecirculating system. 
Exception: Separate lavatories for physically handicapped persons shall not be equipped with self-closing valves. 
(4)  Lavatory facilities, private. Faucets for private lavatories shall be designed, manufactured and installed to deliver water at a flow rate not to exceed 3.0 gallons per minute when tested in accordance with applicable standards. 
(5)  Showerheads; sink faucets. Showerheads and sink faucets shall be designed, manufactured and installed to deliver water at a rate not to exceed 3.0 gallons per minute when tested in accordance with applicable standards. 
Sec. 18-68. - Exemptions from article requirements. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of this article when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewer system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing building. 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewer system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed. 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence. 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(5)  Commercial construction for which the contract was entered into prior to July 1, 1992. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified by this section shall obtain the exemption by applying to the code enforcement officer or the building inspector. 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; collection and disposal of solid waste at commercial establishments, § 50-84; taxation, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 70. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors, and utility contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; registration of nonresident contractors with state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-31. 

Sec. 22-31. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the city. 
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the City of Colquitt, Georgia, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a fixed business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no fixed business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-32. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "Colquitt" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean City of Colquitt, Georgia; wherever the term "city" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean City of Colquitt, Georgia". 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, which is the major and principal source of income of such business. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual s compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2, but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Gross receipts: 
(1)  Means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)  Shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization s receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied by a local government on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue-raising purposes. 
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes all nonprofit organizations. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation as designated by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-33. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $5.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, annual renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. The regulatory fee levied in this appendix is an exercise of the police power of the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is as follows: 
(1)  $250.00 per year: 
Auto and motorcycle racing. 
Boxing and wrestling promoters. 
Brown bagging. 
Carnivals. 
Circuses. 
Escort services. 
Flea markets. 
Fortunetellers. 
Handwriting analysts. 
House movers. 
Hypnotists. 
Massage parlors. 
Tatoo artists. 
(2)  $150.00 per year: 
Arcade. 
Cable TV. 
Finance or loan company. 
Firearms dealer. 
Pawn shop. 
Pool hall. 
(3)  $100.00 per year: 
Auctions. 
Bondsman. 
Broker. 
General contractors. 
Hotel/motel. 
Junk dealers. 
Private garbage collectors. 
Salvage companies. 
Taxi/limo service. 
Trailer park. 
Tree surgeon. 
(4)  $75.00 per year: 
Burglar/fire alarm installers/companies. 
Electricians and electrical contractors. 
Gas fitters. 
HVAC technicians and contractors. 
Other subcontractors. 
Plumbers and plumbing contractors. 
Private investigators. 
(5)  $50.00 per year: 
Carpet cleaning. 
Insurance companies. 
Peddlers (or $15.00 per day). 
Pressure washing 
Sign installers. 
(6)  $25.00 per year: 
Vending services. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-34. - Occupation tax levied; occupation tax structure; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  Number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of full-time equivalent employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city council. 
0—2 employees ..... $80.00 
3—10 employees ..... 105.00 
11—25 employees ..... 155.00 
26—50 employees ..... 205.00 
51—75 employees ..... 255.00 
76—100 employees ..... 305.00 
101—999 employees ..... 355.00 
(Includes the $5.00 administrative fee.) 
(b)  Restrictions on imposition of occupation tax. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(3)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in the state shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the number of employees engaged in substantial efforts in the state; nationwide profitability ratios shall apply only to types of business transacted within the state. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-35. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state; exemption for tax paid in other state. 
(a)  Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Any business or practitioner of a profession with no location or office in the state shall be exempt from assessment of an occupation tax under this article if such business or practitioner submits proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state on the business s or practitioner s sales or services in the state. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-36. - Lines of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city and that line of business being noted by the city upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-37. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of an occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-38. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 22-34. 
(2)  A fee of $125.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state s regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by December 1st of each year. 
Professionals: 
Architects. 
Chiropractors. 
Counselors. 
Dealers of motor vehicles. 
Dentists. 
Embalmers. 
Engineers. 
Funeral directors. 
Land surveyors. 
Landscape architects. 
Lawyers. 
Optometrists. 
Osteopaths. 
Physicians. 
Podiatrists. 
Psychologists. 
Public accountants. 
Therapists. 
Veterinarians. 
Any other business, profession, or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-39. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-40. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 through 48-13-28. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-41. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year (January 1—December 31) and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by January 31st of each year, be subject to penalties and interest for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a $25.00 penalty and interest imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the city judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, either or both in the discretion of the judge of municipal court for the city. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-42. - Exemption on grounds that business is a non-profit organization. 
Any nonprofit organization shall be exempt from the levy of occupation tax under this article 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-43. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee s place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-44. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory requirement shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-45. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person intending to commence business in the city after January 1st of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation that require registration without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided therefore. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-46. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before January 31st of each year, and on January 31st each year hereafter. Every person intending to commence business in the city after January 31st shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 22-47. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation that require registration without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-47. - Penalty of article violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city or county judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 180 days, either or both, in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-48. - City subpoena and arrest powers. 
The city and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the Business Tax Ordinance for 1995 (this law) and succeeding years. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-49. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-50. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-51. - When occupation tax due and payable; payment options. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the city, at the office of the treasurer, on January 1st each year and delinquent if not paid on or before January 31st each year. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-52. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-53. - Businesses and practitioners required to provide certain information to the city. 
All businesses and practitioners doing business within the city will provide to the city clerk: 
(1)  The address of any location or office maintained by such business or practitioner within the city; 
(2)  A description of the business or types of business conducted or occupation or profession performed at such location; and 
(3)  The payment of any business or occupation tax or regulatory fee to any other [city/county]. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-54. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city clerk, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and charter of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-55. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-56. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. Any and all parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed that provide for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that impose fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or for failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-57. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk and chief of police to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city clerk, chief of police, members of the police department, and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-58. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-59. - Requirement of public hearing before adoption, amendment, or repeal of article and when revenues derived from occupation tax increase. 
The city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting, amending, or repealing any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax. In addition, the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing to determine how to use the additional revenue derived from occupation taxes in any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue derived from such taxes for the preceding year. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-60. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in or credit against occupation tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax or a credit against occupation tax owed to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging, or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the council. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Sec. 22-61. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 9-10-02) 
Secs. 22-62—22-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CHARITABLE SOLICITORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-76. - Registration. 
The registration required by this article shall be in writing, shall be signed by the chief officer of the club or organization, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and object of the charitable, religious, social, patriotic or civic club or organization conducting or sponsoring the solicitation or sale to which the registration relates. 
(2)  The days on which the solicitation or sale will take place. 
(3)  The object for which the funds to be derived from the solicitation or sale will be utilized. 
(4)  The name and address of the chief officer of the club or organization conducting or sponsoring the solicitation or sale. 
(Code 1976, § 32-206(2)) 
Sec. 22-77. - Exemption. 
This article shall not apply to any locally established organization or church operated exclusively for charitable or religious purposes if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies of any such organization or church. 
(Code 1976, § 32-206(3)) 
Sec. 22-78. - Duty to exhibit permit. 
Charitable solicitors shall be required to exhibit their registration certificates at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1976, § 32-206(4)) 
Sec. 22-79. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to execute a registration which contains any false statement, and it shall be unlawful for any person to solicit donations or contributions or sell any insignia or novelty on the streets of the city purportedly in behalf of or under the sponsorship of any charitable, religious, social, patriotic or civic club or organization which does not in fact exist. 
(Code 1976, § 32-206(5)) 
Secs. 22-80—22-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND PUBLIC EXHIBITIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention regulatory license from state for traveling motion picture shows, carnivals and circuses, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-20. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Carnival means amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for the conduct of games of skill, food dispensing facilities and sideshows. 
Public exhibition means circuses, menageries, sideshows and other similar itinerant amusement enterprises which are open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged. 
(Code 1976, § 32-111(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 22-102—22-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATORY FEE CERTIFICATE 

Sec. 22-126. - Required. 
No person shall conduct or operate a circus, carnival or public exhibition without complying with the occupation tax registration requirements as set forth in article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 32-111(1)) 
Sec. 22-127. - Fees established. 
The regulatory fee imposed on each circus, carnival or public exhibition operating within the city limits shall be as determined by article II of this chapter. There shall be no fee imposed on any circus or carnival when such circus or carnival shall be sponsored by a charitable organization. 
(Code 1976, § 32-111(3)) 
Sec. 22-128. - Conditions of issuance. 
No regulatory fee certificate under this article shall be issued until the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The operator and sponsor of the circus, carnival or public exhibition have each assumed full responsibility for maintaining order and for keeping the site clean and free of trash, papers and other debris, and have placed trash containers in adequate number and in convenient locations for the use of the public. 
(2)  The applicant has placed on file with the city clerk a certificate or certificates of insurance indicating that there is in effect public liability insurance covering any damages arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in connection with such carnival or exhibition. Such insurance shall be in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 for each person, and $300,000.00 for each accident. 
(Code 1976, § 32-111(4)) 
Secs. 22-129—22-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GARAGE SALES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— State roadside market incentive program, O.C.G.A. § 2-10-130 et seq.; exception from local peddler or itinerant vendor licensing requirements for persons selling agricultural products, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6. 

Sec. 22-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garage sales means all sales known and referred to as garage sales, yard sales, rummage sales or any other sale of this type by people other than a duly licensed merchant of the city and shall be conducted only in areas that are zoned and used for residential purposes. All sales known as garage sales, yard sales, rummage sales or similar type sales are prohibited in the historical district and central business district. All goods sold at garage sales, yard sales, rummage sales or similar type sales shall be clothing or other types of household personal effects, but shall not include any property whether clothing, furniture or furnishings or jewelry purchased outside of the county or within the county for the purposes of resale. 
(Ord. of 6-16-86, § 1; Ord. of 9-30-86; Ord. of 1-12-93) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-162. - Permit fee and number of sales permitted. 
(a)  No person shall conduct more than three sales per year in the city. 
(b)  No person shall conduct garage sales in the city without first obtaining a permit from the office of the clerk of the city and paying to the clerk of the city a fee in an amount listed in the schedule of fees and charges for the permit. The clerk of the city shall not issue more than three permits per year to any individual or groups of individuals. Permit fees may be waived by the city council for nonprofit organizations or groups. 
(Ord. of 6-16-86, § 2; Ord. of 9-30-86) 
Sec. 22-163. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Any person who conducts a sale in violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by paying of a fine for the first offense in the amount of $10.00, and for each and every subsequent offense a fine of not less than $50.00, nor more than $500.00. 
(Ord. of 6-16-86, § 3) 
Secs. 22-164—22-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INSURERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 22-196. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any one of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-197. - License fees—Generally. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 22-198, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
Sec. 22-198. - Same—Those insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional annual license fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, per location. 
Sec. 22-199. - Same—Due date. 
License fees imposed in sections 22-197 and 22-198 shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. 
Sec. 22-200. - Insurers, independent insurance agencies and brokers not otherwise licensed; fee imposed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 22-197 in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each such location within the city. 
Sec. 22-201. - Gross direct premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-197 of this article. 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 62. 
Sec. 22-202. - Gross direct premiums tax on all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-197. 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 62. 
Secs. 22-203—22-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Junk or metal dealers records, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-350 et seq.; control of junkyards, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-240 et seq.; purchase and resale of used motor vehicles and used parts, O.C.G.A. § 40-4-40 et seq.; junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1 et seq.; Used Car Dealers' Registration Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-1 et seq.; Used Motor Vehicle Dismantlers, Rebuilders and Salvage Dealers Registration Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-48-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-236. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business premises or premises means the area of a junkyard as described in a junk dealer's license or application for license, as provided for in this article. 
Junk means old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be prepared to be used again in some form; and motor vehicles, no longer used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but the term "junk" shall not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as byproducts, waste or scraps from the operation of his own business or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing processes. 
Junk dealer means a person who operates a junkyard within the city. 
Junkyard means a yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing junk, upon which occurs one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling or offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such acts are to be used for charity. 
(Code 1976, § 32-209(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-237. - General operating requirements. 
The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk dealers doing business in the city: 
(1)  The junkyard, together with things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(2)  No space not covered by the regulatory fee certificate shall be used in the business. 
(3)  No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(4)  Weeds and vegetation on the premises, other than trees, shall be kept at a height of not more than four inches. 
(5)  No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises, nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is junk and is in use in the business. 
(6)  No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street, walkway or curb, or become scattered or blown off the business premises. 
(7)  Junk shall be stored in piles not exceeding ten feet in height and shall be arranged so as to permit easy access to all such junk for firefighting purposes. 
(8)  No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the business shall be kept on the premises, nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard. 
(9)  Gasoline and oil shall be removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles on the premises. 
(10)  No junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in any incinerator not meeting the requirements of the building code. No junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in the open except in accordance with the provisions of the building regulations in chapter 18. 
(11)  No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on in connection with the business on any Sunday, Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day or at any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(12)  The area on the premises where junk is kept (other than indoors) shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a solid, vertical wall or fence. The fence or wall shall not contain any poster or advertising of any kind excepting one sign of the licensee. Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the licensed business. 
(13)  The business owner shall permit inspection of the business premises by any police officer at any reasonable time. 
(14)  No junkyard shall be allowed to become a nuisance; nor shall any junkyard be operated in such manner as to become injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the community or of any residents close by. 
(Code 1976, § 32-209(6)) 
Sec. 22-238. - Recordkeeping. 
Each acquisition of junk shall be recorded in a permanent type register kept on the business premises, giving the name and residence address of the person from whom the acquisition was made, a description of the junk acquired, and the date of the transaction. Such data shall be held available for inspection by any police officer. 
(Code 1976, § 32-209(7)) 
Sec. 22-239. - Dealings with minors. 
No junk dealer shall have any business dealings as a junk dealer with a minor, nor shall a regulatory fee certificate be issued to a minor, nor shall a junk dealer employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
(Code 1976, § 32-209(8)) 
Sec. 22-240. - Stolen goods. 
Every junk dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or things of value which may have been lost or stolen shall upon demand produce such article or thing to any member of the police department for examination. 
(Code 1976, § 32-209(9)) 
Sec. 22-241. - Vehicles. 
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear thereon, in legible characters, the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 32-209(10)) 
Secs. 22-242—22-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATORY FEE CERTIFICATE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 62. 

Sec. 22-261. - Required. 
Each junk dealer who does business within this municipality shall be required to comply with the regulatory fee certificate requirements as set forth in article II of this chapter and obtain a regulatory fee certificate. 
(Code 1976, § 32-209(1)) 
Sec. 22-262. - Application. 
Application for a regulatory fee certificate under this article shall be made as provided in article II of this chapter, except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  Trade names used during the previous five years by the applicant and each person signing the application, along with the locations of prior establishments. 
(2)  Names and addresses of employers of each person signing the application during the previous five years. 
(3)  The name, residence address and telephone number of each person employed or intended to be employed in the business as of the time the application is filed. 
(4)  A sketch of the actual premises to be used in connection with the business, giving distances in feet and showing adjoining roads, property lines, buildings and uses. 
(5)  A description of the materials with which any buildings to be used in connection with the licensed business are, or are to be made; a sketch giving distances, showing the location of such buildings on the business premises; and a diagram or plan giving distances and heights, showing floors, exits, entrances, windows, ventilators and walls. 
(Code 1976, § 32-209(3)) 
Sec. 22-263. - Review of application. 
No action on any application for a regulatory fee certificate to operate a junkyard shall be taken by the city council until the chief of police has reviewed such application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 32-209(4)) 
Secs. 22-264—22-295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PAWNBROKERS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 22-296. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pawnbroker means any person lending money on any personal property, taking possession of such personal property and holding it as a pledge or pawn, for the security of a loan, or one who purchases property with the right of repurchase or redemption. Any person who purchases jewelry, guns, pistols, radios, televisions, household appliances and effects, or other articles of merchandise or personal property, and at the time of such purchase gives the seller the privilege of redeeming the same thereafter, or who purchases from an individual any of such items or articles with or without the privilege of redemption, shall be held and deemed a pawnbroker within the intent and meaning of this article. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-297. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any violation of any section of this article shall be subject to punishment, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 22-298. - License—Required. 
No person shall conduct or operate the business of pawnbroker (or loan shop) without having first complied with the provisions of article II of this chapter and obtained a regulatory fee certificate. 
Sec. 22-299. - Same—Suspension and revocation. 
Any pawnbroker accused of receiving stolen goods, or of burglary or robbery, shall have his regulatory fee certificate immediately suspended and, upon conviction, shall have such regulatory fee certificate revoked. 
Sec. 22-300. - Criminals not to be licensed. 
No regulatory fee certificate shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of receiving stolen goods or of burglary or robbery. 
Sec. 22-301. - Daily record and report—Required. 
Every business operating as a pawnbroker shall keep a daily record of every article taken in by pledge or purchase. Such report shall specify the thing or article, giving a description thereof (such as any serial number, make, model and any other details to make identification of such thing or article clear and positive); and the name and address from whom such item was received. 
Sec. 22-302. - Same—Police department may collect. 
The pawnbrokers daily record forms may be collected at any time by the police department. 
Sec. 22-303. - Visitation and inspection of shop—Required. 
Each pawnbroker shall hold his shop subject to visitation and inspection by any authorized law enforcement officer or city inspector. 
Sec. 22-304. - Same—Refusal to submit. 
Upon the refusal of a pawnbroker to submit the shop or business to visitation or inspection at any time, the police department shall immediately order such shop or business closed, and it shall remain closed until a hearing is held before the city council to determine if such regulatory fee certificate shall be revoked. 
Sec. 22-305. - Report of suspicious articles. 
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged to or bought by him which he has reason to believe or suspect was stolen. 
Sec. 22-306. - Employing or doing business with minors. 
No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with any person less than 18 years of age. No pawnbroker shall be or employ a person less than 18 years of age. 
Secs. 22-307—22-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Exception from local peddler or itinerant vendor licensing requirements for persons selling agricultural products, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6; Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-341. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Itinerant merchant means any person whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat, public room in hotels, lodginghouses, apartments, shops or any street, alley, or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. 
Peddler means any person whether a resident of this city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale or who, without travelling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance. 
(Code 1976, § 32-205(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-342. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not be applicable to newsboys, nor to bona fide merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of business, nor to bona fide charitable, religious or philanthropic organizations. 
(Code 1976, § 32-205(3)) 
Secs. 22-343—22-365. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATORY FEE CERTIFICATE 

Sec. 22-366. - Required. 
Each peddler and itinerant merchant who does business within this municipality shall be required to comply with the requirements of article II of this chapter and obtain a regulatory fee certificate. 
(Code 1976, § 32-205(1)) 
Sec. 22-367. - Application. 
Application for a regulatory fee certificate under this article shall be made as provided in section 22-32, except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  The fingerprints of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business or in lieu thereof, at least three letters of recommendation from reliable property owners in the county in which the business is to be conducted, certifying as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or other evidence which establishes to the satisfaction of the city council good character and business responsibility of such person. 
(2)  The place in the city where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that the business shall be conducted. 
(3)  The place, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where the applicant within the six months next preceding the date of the application conducted a transient business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which such business was conducted. 
(4)  A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by applicant in the city, the invoice value and quality of such goods, wares and merchandise, where the goods or property proposed to be sold are manufactured or produced and where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed. 
(5)  A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers, and, if required by the city clerk, copies of all the advertising whether by handbills, circular newspaper advertising, or otherwise, shall be attached to the application as exhibits thereto. 
(6)  Whether or not the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business has been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 32-205(4)) 
Sec. 22-368. - Service of process. 
Before any regulatory fee certificate as provided in this division shall be issued for engaging in business as a peddler or itinerant merchant in this municipality, the applicant for such regulatory fee certificate shall file with the city clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the city clerk his true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of the applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business transacted under the regulatory fee certificate and the bond given as required by this article or for the performance of the conditions of the bond or for any breach thereof, which instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that the applicant for a regulatory fee certificate consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon such agent, and when so made shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served upon the person applying for such regulatory fee certificate under this article according to the law of this or any other state, and waiving all claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or manner of service. Immediately upon service of process upon the city clerk, as provided in this section, the city clerk shall send to the licensee at his last known address, by registered mail, a copy of such process. 
(Code 1976, § 32-205(5)) 
Sec. 22-369. - Duty to exhibit. 
All persons obtaining a regulatory fee certificate under the provisions of this article shall be required to exhibit the regulatory fee certificate at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1976, § 32-205(7)) 
Sec. 22-370. - Loud noises and speaking devices. 
No regulatory fee registrant under this article nor anyone in his behalf shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device including any loud speaking radio or amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys or parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such registrant proposes to sell. 
(Code 1976, § 32-205(8)) 
Secs. 22-371—22-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - TELEPHONE OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Power to grant franchises or make contract with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6)(a)(5). 

Sec. 22-401. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Recurring local service revenues means: 
(1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users; 
b.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and 
c.  Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange service. 
(2)  Charges for more transmission, signaling, data transmission remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. 
(3)  All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. 
(4)  Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by CATV companies. 
(Ord. of 6-13-78, § I) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-402. - Payment; computation. 
Telephone companies shall pay, on or before August 31, of each year, an occupational license tax for that calendar year in the amount of three percent of recurring local service revenues received by the company from subscribers located within the city. The annual amount due may be computed by annualizing the taxable revenues billed during the month of June preceding the date of payment. The first payment under this article shall cover the period from its effective date through December 31, of the year in which enacted; shall be three percent of the taxable revenues billed during that part of the year; and shall be paid on or before March 15 of the following year. Any amount of license tax previously paid, and absorbed by the company, which is applicable to any period subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance shall be credited against the amounts imposed in this section, or by subsequent ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-13-78, § I) 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 30; offenses, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - National incident management system—adopted. 
The City of Colquitt hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations in the city train and exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Mo. of 10-11-05(1)) 
Secs. 26-2—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY-COUNTY EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The attachments, glossary of terms and acronyms referred to in the text of this article are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

Sec. 26-31. - Scope; applicability of article. 
This plan sets forth the policies and procedures for coordinated county/city emergency and disaster operations, plus the preparations for executing all such emergency or disaster functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible. This plan is applicable to any natural or manmade emergency situation. 
(Ord. of 4-30-91, § I) 
Sec. 26-32. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from emergencies or disasters of natural or manmade origin. 
(Ord. of 4-30-91, § II) 
Sec. 26-33. - Situation requiring plan. 
A detailed hazard vulnerability analysis for the county revealed several primary hazards which are given priority in emergency management planning. A profile of recognized hazards is contained in Attachment A. 
(Ord. of 4-30-91, § III) 
Sec. 26-34. - Assumptions. 
(a)  The county and municipal governments have primary responsibility for response in emergency situations and will commit all available resources to save lives and minimize injury to persons and minimize damage to property. 
(b)  As appropriate, state and federal governments plus adjacent jurisdictions will assist the county government when disaster response and recovery become necessary. 
(Ord. of 4-30-91, § IV) 
Sec. 26-35. - Legal basis and references. 
The following acts, plans and publications form the legal basis and reference guide for this article: 
(1)  The Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950, as amended (Public Law 81-920). 
(2)  The Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, Pub. L. 93-288, as amended by Pub. L. 100-707, November 1988. 
(3)  Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 
(4)  State of Georgia Natural Disaster Operations Plan (NDOP) revised August 1985, with change. 
(5)  State of Georgia Nuclear Emergency Operations Plan (NEOP), September 1989. 
(6)  Georgia Emergency Management Agency Rescue Manual, GEMA 2-2. 
(7)  U.S. Department of Transportation, 1987 Emergency Response Guidebook, DOT PUB 5800.4. 
(8)  National Response Teams Hazardous Materials Emergency Planning Guide, NRT-1, March 1987. 
(9)  Georgia Emergency Management Agency, SOP 1-2, Natural Disaster Situation Reporting. 
(10)  Current county emergency management resolution. 
(Ord. of 4-30-91, § V) 
Sec. 26-36. - Concept of operations. 
(a)  In the event of an emergency, the county will utilize all available resources before requesting outside assistance. The organization for emergency operations is shown in Attachment B. 
(b)  Each department will perform assigned functions as outlined in Attachment C. 
(c)  In the event of an emergency situation requiring the coordination of two or more departments, the county emergency management director under the direction of the chairman, county commissioners will coordinate emergency operations until the emergency has been terminated. The title "county emergency management director" is used throughout this plan to designate the county's disaster coordinator for emergency or disaster operations, i.e., the county civil defense director or the county emergency management director. The title "chairman, county commissioners" is used throughout this plan to designate the chief elected official of the county, i.e., the sole commissioner of the county or the chairman of the county board of commissioners. 
(d)  Centralized direction, control and coordination of all phases of emergency operations will be conducted through the county emergency operating center (EOC) which is staffed as provided in Attachment D. Either partial or full activation may be required based on the situation. If the emergency warrants, a forward EOC may be established near the affected area. 
(e)  Supplementary agreements may be made as necessary for effective emergency operations response. A copy of each such agreement will be provided to the county emergency management director. 
(f)  Interdepartmental coordination of emergency operations capability will be implemented by a disaster coordinator within the various departments of the county/city government. 
(g)  All emergency preparedness planning and coordination will be compatible with the policies and procedures of this plan. 
(h)  All emergency public information matters will be coordinated and released through the emergency public information officer in coordination with the county emergency management director. 
(i)  All county/city departments and separate agencies are expected to perform their normal duties and services unless requested to provide aid or assistance to another department. If it is necessary for one department to request emergency aid or support of another department, personnel rendering aid or support will be under the operational control of the department receiving the aid or support. 
(Ord. of 4-30-91, § VI) 
Sec. 26-37. - Emergency operations responsibility. 
(a)  Responsibilities of county emergency management director. The county emergency management director, under the direction of the chairman, county commissioners, is responsible for: 
(1)  Advising the chairman, department heads and government officials of the nature, magnitude and effects of the emergency. 
(2)  Coordinating the functions of all elements of the county/city governments and agencies engaged in emergency operations. 
(3)  Assisting and advising all departments and agencies in developing and coordinating supporting plans and procedures. 
(4)  Briefing and training the emergency operating center staff and conducting periodic exercises to test and evaluate this plan. 
(5)  Coordinating with adjacent emergency management organizations, the state emergency management agency (GEMA) and other agencies that have an emergency response capability. 
(6)  Maintaining a list of all county/city department and agency points of contact. An emergency director is located at Attachment H. 
(7)  Maintaining a file of all standing operating procedures (SOPs). 
(8)  Maintaining, updating and distributing all changes to this plan, with annual review. 
(9)  Recommending the increased operational readiness condition, as outlined in Attachment E. 
(10)  Recommending additional actions deemed necessary to effectively implement this plan. 
(11)  Providing operational and administrative support to department or agency personnel assigned to the EOC, disaster site or at the agency's work/control/dispatch center. 
(b)  Duties of heads of departments and agencies. The head of each department and agency assigned primary emergency functions will: 
(1)  Develop and maintain the respective functional annexes in this plan. 
(2)  Develop and maintain the internal standing operating procedures for the execution of primary functions in accordance with this plan. 
(3)  Review this plan annually and update assigned annexes and SOPs to meet current department policy and organization. Revisions must be compatible with the policies set forth in the basic plan. Two copies of the revised annexes and SOPs will be forwarded to the county emergency management director. 
(4)  Assign department personnel to the emergency operating center staff in the EOC, when requested. 
(5)  Maintain current internal notification/recall rosters and communication systems. 
(6)  Assign appropriate persons to succeed the decision making authority. See Attachment F. 
(7)  Provide for procurement and management of resources necessary for emergency operations and provide and maintain in current status a list of resources for entry in "The Resources Data Book," as requested by the resources manager. 
(8)  Participate in tests and exercises to evaluate this plan. 
(c)  Outside support. If it is necessary to bring in outside support, coordination will be made through the county emergency management director, the chairman, county commissioners, and the mayor of the affected municipality. 
(Ord. of 4-30-91, § VII) 
Sec. 26-38. - Continuity of government. 
(a)  Line of succession. The line of succession for county and city governments, plus emergency support service agencies is contained in Attachment F. 
(b)  Preservation of records. In order to provide normal government operations following an emergency or disaster, essential records must be protected, i.e., vital statistics, deeds, corporation papers, operational plans, resources data, authorities, personnel and payroll rosters, succession lists, supplies and equipment lists, laws, charters and financial records. The principal causes of damage to records are fire and water; therefore, essential records should be protected accordingly. Each department currently responsible for essential records should ensure the preservation of such records. Consideration should be given to duplication of records and separate storage sites prior to the emergency or disaster. 
(c)  Alternate emergency operations center. The alternate emergency operations center (EOC) is identified in Attachment D to this basic plan. 
(Ord. of 4-30-91, § VIII) 
Sec. 26-39. - Activation. 
This emergency operations plan will be activated when such action is: 
(1)  Directed by the chairman, county commissioners, or the county emergency management director under the direction of the chairman; or 
(2)  An emergency or disaster that affects this county is declared by the governor of the state. 
(Ord. of 4-30-91, § XI) 
Chapter 30 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 26; offenses, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Contracts to furnish municipal court services authorized, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-80 et seq.; powers of presiding officer in court of a municipal corporation to bind over or commit criminal offenders to jail, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts and magistrate courts to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; agreements between private entities and municipal court judges for probation services, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-102; establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I. 

Sec. 30-31. - Regulations for organization and operation. 
(a)  The chief municipal judge may propose written regulations, or amendments thereto, to organize and operate the municipal court in the most efficient manner reasonably possible consistent with the Charter and this Code. 
(b)  The regulations referred to in this section shall become effective only after approval by the mayor and after being filed with the clerk of council unless disapproved within 15 days of such filing by motion of the city council. 
(c)  The city council may, by resolution, amend the regulations at any time. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 1) 
Sec. 30-32. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The municipal court shall have the authority to try any case of alleged violation of any provision of this Code committed within the city or on any city park, airport or other city property outside the city, unless otherwise provided in this Code and, after conviction, punish any person found to be in violation as alleged. 
(b)  The municipal court may likewise try, convict and punish any person for violation of any state law where jurisdiction has been granted or allowed by general state law or the Charter. 
(c)  Every person charged with a violation in this city of any other state law may be brought before the municipal judge as soon as is reasonably possible for a finding of probable cause, and upon such a finding the person shall be bound over for prosecution by the state. 
(d)  The municipal court shall also have any other powers and duties allowed under state law for such courts. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 2) 
Sec. 30-33. - Summons; notice to appear; subpoena; failure to appear. 
(a)  Any person charged with a violation of this Code or any state law under the jurisdiction of the municipal court and who has been served with a written summons, citation or notice to appear before the municipal judge at a given time, place and date shall be required to so appear and, upon failure to so appear, the municipal judge may order that person's immediate arrest for an appearance before the judge on a day and time certain to show cause why the person should not be held in contempt and on the original charges. 
(b)  Any person who may be able to provide evidence of any kind on a matter before the municipal court and who has been served by a police officer with a written subpoena issued by the court clerk or a municipal judge which orders the person to be present at the municipal court and testify at a given time, place and date shall be required to be present and, upon failure to be present, may be held in contempt of court, and the municipal judge may order that person's immediate arrest for an appearance before the judge on contempt charges. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 3) 
Sec. 30-34. - Court sessions; opening announcement. 
(a)  A regular session of the municipal court shall be held on the second Monday of each month at a fixed hour (9:00 a.m.), provided that any session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court or no cases are ready for trial. 
(b)  The general form of opening announcement may contain the following: 
(1)  A command that attention by all is required; 
(2)  The name of the court; 
(3)  A declaration that court is in session; and 
(4)  The name of the judge presiding. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 4; Ord. of 10-12-99) 
Sec. 30-35. - Special sessions. 
The chief municipal judge may order special sessions when, in his judgment, it is necessary, or there is urgent cause for the trial of accused persons, before the next regular sitting of the court. The necessity or urgency of the cause shall be presumed from the fact of a session being held. All defendants shall have at least six hours' notice of the session. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 5) 
Sec. 30-36. - Police attendance. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his second in command, or some member of the police force designated by the police chief, to attend each session of the court to act as court liaison officer. It shall be the duty of each police officer making the arrest or having knowledge of the case for or against the defendant, to attend the trial of any person brought before the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 6) 
Sec. 30-37. - Appearance bond; procedure for accepting. 
Offenses against the ordinances of the city shall be bailable as follows: 
(1)  The chief of police, municipal judge, police clerk, city employee or any other officer designated by the city manager may accept bond of the accused, payable to the city, conditioned upon the appearance of the accused at the next session or any subsequent session of the municipal court as stated in the bond, to answer the charge. 
(2)  The bond shall be in writing and in an amount established in a schedule adopted by the city council. 
(3)  In lieu of an appearance bond, a person arrested for violation of a city ordinance may be released on his own recognizance or may deposit his driver's license with the arresting officer, the police chief or a municipal judge if, in any of these officials' determinations, the person will appear at the time set for the court appearance in view of the following considerations: 
a.  The seriousness of the offense charged; 
b.  The penalty provided by law; 
c.  The number of charges pending against the defendant; 
d.  The criminal record of the defendant; 
e.  The residence of the defendant and the length of time of residence; 
f.  The defendant's age; 
g.  Marital status and number of children; 
h.  Residence of the relatives of the defendant; 
i.  Employment of defendant (by whom, nature of work and how long employed); 
j.  Former employment; 
k.  Amount of earnings; 
l.  The defendant's character, reputation and previous criminal history; 
m.  The defendant's mental condition; and 
n.  Whether the defendant has membership in any clubs or societies, church affiliation and other things which could show that he is a responsible member of the community with established community ties. 
(4)  Any person released under subsection (3) of this section shall receive a receipt for any driver's license deposited or, if released on the person's own recognizance, shall sign and receive a copy of the citation or ticket describing the violation for which the person was arrested. 
(5)  All persons arrested or notified by citation or ticket of parking violations shall be released on their own recognizance. 
(6)  All sureties who sign bonds for the release of principals for offenses against the city shall at all times be governed and comply with O.C.G.A. § 17-6-1 et seq. 
(7)  Any person engaged in the bonding business that fails to deposit the required bond amount into the court registry after a bond forfeiture has occurred, as required by O.C.G.A. § 17-6-71 shall be summoned to the municipal court, after having been given ten days' notice, to show cause why their privilege of signing bonds for municipal offenses should not be suspended by the court. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 7) 
Sec. 30-38. - Continuance of cases. 
Continuances shall be made only for good cause shown. Prior to the scheduled court appearance the clerk of court or the presiding judge may grant continuations of a case. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 8) 
Sec. 30-39. - Forfeiture of witness and appearance bonds. 
(a)  The presiding municipal judge shall call the case in its regular order, and, if the accused or any subpoenaed witness is not in court and does not answer the call, and if no good and sufficient reason is given for the nonappearance, the judge shall enter on the docket where the case is stated, "bond forfeited," or similar words, if there was any bond or cash posted, and issue an arrest warrant for that person, in the judge's discretion. 
(b)  Upon forfeiture of any bond, the cash deposited as security shall be paid to the city treasury, and it shall become the property of the city. 
(c)  Upon the forfeiture of any bond signed by a person as surety, the city may collect the sum as delinquent revenues are collected. 
(d)  Each bond forfeited under the terms of this section, unless extended by the court for good cause shown, shall be due and payable six months from the date that such bond is forfeited. If any forfeiture is not paid within 30 days of the due date for payment of such forfeiture, the city will no longer accept any bonds signed by the same person acting as the surety on the forfeited bond. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 9) 
Sec. 30-40. - Acceptance of pleas. 
Before accepting a plea to an offense charged, the court shall in all cases, in language which the defendant can understand, inform the defendant of the nature of the charge and the penalty which may be imposed upon conviction. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 10) 
Sec. 30-41. - Pleas. 
(a)  The defendant shall enter one of the following pleas: 
(1)  Guilty; 
(2)  Not guilty; 
(3)  Nolo contendere (with the permission of the court); or 
(4)  A former judgment of conviction or acquittal of the offense charged. 
(b)  If the defendant refuses to enter a plea, the court shall enter a plea of not guilty and set the case down for trial. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 11) 
Sec. 30-42. - Fines; collections; payment in advance of court date. 
(a)  For fines that may be due by any defendant, collection may be made by the city as for delinquent taxes due the city. 
(b)  Persons charged with violations of this Code may, prior to the time for their court appearance, plead guilty in writing and pay to the city as their fine the amount set as the appearance bond for the offense charged, except as may be provided otherwise in the appearance bond schedule. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 12) 
Sec. 30-43. - Appearance of complaining witnesses; bond. 
(a)  A material or complaining witness in any contested prosecution shall appear at the session at which the prosecution is docketed. The prosecution may be dismissed if the material witness fails to appear. 
(b)  Any person who has been subpoenaed as a witness before the municipal court, may, in the discretion of the chief of police or any other designated by the police chief, be required to give bond or be released on their own recognizance with good security or a cash bond or collateral, conditioned to appear and testify before the municipal court in the case in which the witness has been subpoenaed. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 13) 
Sec. 30-44. - Rules of evidence. 
The general rules of evidence applicable to the county superior court shall be applicable in the trial of all cases in the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 14) 
Sec. 30-45. - Judgment and sentences. 
Upon a judgment or plea of guilty the court shall impose sentence. The court may: 
(1)  Impose a fine, with or without a commitment for compulsory work, confinement or both; 
(2)  Commit the defendant to confinement, compulsory work, or both; 
(3)  Suspend the execution of the sentence, in whole or in part; or 
(4)  Defer the execution of the sentence or any portion or portions thereof to one or more fixed dates in the future. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 15) 
Sec. 30-46. - Court costs—Collection. 
(a)  The municipal court may collect costs in cases involving violations of the penal statutes of the state in the same manner as are now provided by law in cases where criminal warrants are issued, and proceeding thereon had before a magistrate. 
(b)  In all cases in the municipal court involving a violation of the penal statutes of the state, where the accused is bound over to the county superior court or the county state court to await trial, the city shall be allowed costs in the same amounts as is provided by general state law for a magistrate. 
(c)  Such costs shall be collected and paid to the city in the same manner and at the same time as costs are now collected and paid by the county state court to the sheriff, clerk and solicitor of the state court for the benefit of the county and the board of education of the county; provided, however, that the insolvent cost bill of the city shall participate in the distribution of fines and forfeitures arising only in cases committed from the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 16) 
Sec. 30-47. - Same—Required; exceptions. 
The judge of the municipal court shall impose a fee in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges as court costs, in addition to any other fine, punishment or other sentence imposed by the court; provided, however, that the court costs shall not be applied to overtime parking violations, to violations for which the fine is paid prior to court appearance and for which no court trial is held, or to cases in which an alternative sentence is imposed in lieu of a fine. The judge of the municipal court shall have the discretion to impose only one fee where the defendant is charged with multiple crimes out of the same transaction. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 17) 
Sec. 30-48. - Disposal of evidence. 
Any illegal firearms, weapons or other illegally possessed items or contraband seized by the city police and before the court for disposition may be destroyed, sold as provided for city property or used in the service of the city at the order of the presiding municipal judge. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97, § 18) 
Sec. 30-49. - Technology surcharge. 
(a)  Any person against whom a fine is imposed by the Municipal Court of the City of Colquitt, Georgia for the violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the City of Colquitt, Georgia or the laws of the State of Georgia shall be subject to and have assessed a technology surcharge in the amount of $10.00 per violation. Said technology surcharge to be in addition to all other fines and fees imposed by the municipal court. All revenue derived from the technology surcharge shall be utilized by the city to provide technology support for the Colquitt Police Department and Colquitt Municipal Court functions. 
(b)  The city administrator is hereby given the authority to adjust the fees set forth in subsection (a). Should anyone object to the fees established by the city administrator, they are hereby given the right to appeal to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 8-13-10(1), §§ 1, 2) 
Chapter 32 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 32-1. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-12-10) 
Sec. 32-2. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the city and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare a local emergency for the City of Colquitt. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the mayor may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the city to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the mayor finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the mayor shall execute and file with the city clerk a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the mayor. The city governing authority may, by resolution and in accordance with the city charter, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of local emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the mayor shall automatically activate the local emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The city manager and/or his/her designees 
[Here the city should designate a public officer to vest with the responsibility of acting under the authority provided by the ordinance. The logical choices would be the Fire Chief, Police Chief, Public Safety Director, City Manager, or City Administrator. Some cities may have their own Emergency Management Director. Some cities may wish to designate the county Emergency Management Director, provided that there are agreements in advance with the county authorizing this and provided that the city is confident the county Emergency Management Director will be available to execute these functions for city in the event of a emergency.] 
shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred by law, including the implementation of the local emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with county, state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
2.  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the city manager (see subsection 32-2(a)(4)a.1.) or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The city manager (see subsection 32-2(a)(4)a.1.) is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the city; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification by the city governing authority. 
3.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the mayor is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the mayor may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: section 32-5 (overcharging prohibited), section 32-6 (registration of building and repair services, and section 32-7 (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If any of these sections is included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the city governing authority is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 32-34 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The city manager (see section 32-2 (a)(4)a.1.) shall have and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and flammable liquids and substances; 
4.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
5.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any city departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
6.  To utilize all available resources of the city and subordinate agencies over which the city has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
7.  To commandeer or utilize public or private property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
8.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of city business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any city agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
9.  To provide welfare benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
10.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
"DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, the City of Colquitt, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [DESCRIPTION OF EVENT] on [DATE]; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Mayor of the City of Colquitt, there exist emergency circumstances located in [DESCRIBE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Colquitt, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event; 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
WHEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1) That the local emergency operations plan is hereby activated; 
(2) That the following sections of the City of Colquitt Code be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Section____________-5, Overcharging; Section____________-6, Registration of Building and Repair Services; Section____________-7, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews]; and 
(3) That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from Section____________-2(a)(4)c, d or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [TIME] on [DATE].  [Signed]  Mayor, City of Colqluit." 
(c)  Contracts with local governments. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. 
(Ord. of 10-12-10) 
Sec. 32-3. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the city police department shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the ____________ (see subsection 32-3(a)(4)a.1.) or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the ____________ (see subsection 32-2(a)(4)a.1.) or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 120 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. The owner of land upon which a violation occurs, and each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the ____________ (see subsection 32-2(a)(4)a.1.) is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this ordinance may be enforced by the city police department. 
(Ord. of 10-12-10) 
Sec. 32-4. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  City business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city governing authority shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. City officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city governing authority may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the city on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the city pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. of 10-12-10) 
Sec. 32-5. - Overcharging prohibited. 
To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or property within a designated area upon the declaration of emergency or disaster, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the emergency or subsequent recovery period, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses sold or rented within the county. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "Overcharging" means charging prices for goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, which exceed the customary charges by at least 25 percent or, in applicable cases, which exceed by at least 25 percent the suppliers' or providers' costs for such goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a 25 percent or greater increase in the price at which the merchandise or rate, fee or cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency or disaster, but shall not include increases in cost to the supplier directly attributable to the higher cost of material, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
(2)  "Subsequent recovery period" means that period during which the emergency or disaster continues to cause disruptions in the area designated in the declaration of emergency, but shall not exceed three months after the declaration has been terminated, unless extended by action of the city governing authority. 
(b)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the governing authority of the city, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Ord. of 10-12-10) 
Sec. 32-6. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the city designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the city clerk and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the city without complying with this ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $50.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security number or federal employer identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the city governing authority, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recover period of three months. 
(Ord. of 10-12-10) 
Sec. 32-7. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the mayor until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the mayor shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The mayor shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the local emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the city; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through an emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by ____________ (see subsection 32-2(a)(4)a.1.). 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. of 10-12-10) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 70; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Attractive nuisances at excavations, § 54-54. 
State Law reference— Ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts or magistrate courts to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq. 

Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated. 
Drug crime means any act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq., commonly referred to as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used or occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outbuildings and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
Nuisance means any condition which tends to the immediate annoyance of the public in general, is manifestly injurious to the public health or safety or tends greatly to corrupt the manners and morals of the public. For purposes of this article, but not limited thereto, the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business occupancy or use and are inimical to the welfare and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of this city, including vacant, dilapidated structures in which drug crimes are being committed, for which a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such structures are declared to be public nuisances. Any private property within the city on which there has been allowed to accumulate weeds, trash, junk, filth and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions is hereby declared a public health hazard or nuisance to those persons living in the vicinity. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of such property and all individuals, associations and corporations who have interest of record in the county where the property is located including executors, administrators, guardians and trustees, including the tax commissioner of the county. 
Public officer means those officers and employees of the city, county or state whose duties include code enforcements and inspections within the city, including, without limitation, the city clerk, the building inspector, the fire inspector, the zoning administrator, the county health inspector and the state fire marshal. 
Repair means closing a dwelling, building or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-32. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal court of the city shall have jurisdiction to try issues concerning the existence and abatement of public nuisances within the geographical limits of the city in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 34-33. - Standards for determination of nuisances. 
(a)  A finding of noncompliance with any building, fire, health, sanitation or life safety code, regulation or ordinance now or hereafter adopted by the city council shall constitute prima facie evidence that a public nuisance exists. Any written citation served upon a property owner by a public officer charged with code enforcement shall specify the code section deemed to be violated and state sufficient details to apprise the property owner of the basis for citation. 
(b)  The public officer charged with code enforcement shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Investigate the conditions existing on any private property within the city to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use; provided, however, that no public officer shall enter into a secured structure without consent of the owner or tenant in possession unless he first obtains a warrant based upon probable cause. 
(2)  Delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to his subordinates as he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this article. 
(c)  In addition to specified code violations noticed and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the following conditions are subject to abatement: 
(1)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, including improper storage of materials on the premises; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation and disrepair, including those structures which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes such that 35 percent or more of the external structure and roof have been destroyed or structural members weakened; 
(4)  Sanitation and general uncleanliness, including improper keeping of pets and animals on the premises, and improper disposal of human and animal wastes; 
(5)  Accumulations of trash, weeds (having a height of 12 inches or more), debris, junk, filth, standing or stagnant water and other unsafe conditions; and 
(6)  Vacant, unsecured dwellings, buildings or structures in which drug crimes are being committed. 
Sec. 34-34. - Procedure for abatement of nuisance; service. 
(a)  A processing to abate a public nuisance may be commenced under this article by the filing of a complaint in the name of the city against the respondent in the municipal court of the city, specifically setting forth therein the facts of the alleged nuisance. Except when brought in the name of the city by a public officer thereof, private citizens may not have a public nuisance abated unless special injury can be shown. Upon the written petition of five or more residents of the city, setting forth special injuries alleged, the city council shall cause a complaint to be filed, identifying therein the petitioners and injuries alleged. Where the alleged public nuisance involves a condition existing upon private property, the respondent shall be the owners of such property, each person in lawful possession if not the owner, and any parties in interest. 
(b)  Complaints or orders issued under this article shall be served upon each named respondent, and a return of service signed by the serving agent shall be filed with the clerk of the municipal court. Service may be either personal or by leaving such copy at the respondent's place of residence with a person of responsible age. Service on city residents may be perfected by any police officer, the city clerk, the fire inspector, the building inspector or the zoning administrator. 
(c)  If the respondent resides outside the city but within the state, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of residences of such party. Nonresidents of this state shall be served by publishing once each week for two successive weeks in the legal organ of the county, and posting a copy of the complaint or orders in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such nonresident is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to him by registered or certified mail. 
(d)  If the respondent is a minor, an estate or incompetent person, the guardian or other personal representative shall be served in the manner provided in this section; however, if such party has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by personally serving the probate judge of the county, who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the petitioner in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the petitioner shall make an affidavit to that effect; and service by publication, as described in subsection (c) of this section, shall be sufficient. 
(f)  Where known, any person holding himself out as an agent for the property involved shall be served in the manner provided in this section. 
(g)  At the time of filing a complaint or orders in the municipal court, a copy thereof shall also be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county on the lis pendens docket, and such filing shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law, provided that any such complaint shall contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 34-35. - Procedure for hearings; findings by court; abatement. 
(a)  Whenever a public officer issues a citation to a property owner as provided in this article, and the property owner fails to respond by taking the necessary action to correct the condition within ten days of the service of citation, the public officer shall notify the city clerk, who shall forthwith cause to be filed a complaint in the name of the city seeking to abate the condition on grounds it constitutes a public nuisance. The complaint shall state all charges giving rise to such action, including a reference to the specific code, regulation, ordinance or statute deemed to be violated, if any, and those facts known in support of the complaint. If the complaint is based upon the petition of five or more residents of the city, it shall identify the petitioners and the specific injury alleged. The complaint shall be served upon the responding parties in the manner set forth in section 34-34, and shall be accompanied by a notice of the time and date of hearing before the municipal court, which date shall not be less than ten days nor more than 45 days after the date service is perfected. Continuances will only be granted for good cause shown. 
(b)  At the hearing, the burden shall be upon the city to prove its complaint by competent evidence. The responding party shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by counsel, to present evidence and to cross examine the city's witnesses. 
(c)  If after the hearing the municipal court judge determines that a public nuisance, as defined by this article and O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq., exists, he shall make his findings and conclusions of law and impose such order as required to ensure its abatement. The responding party shall be afforded a reasonable time in which to comply with the order of abatement. Costs may be imposed upon the respondent, which costs must be paid as a condition for the issuance of any permit or license necessary to abate the nuisance, in addition to regular permit fees. 
(d)  If the court determines that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, he shall state his findings and conclusions in writing, and cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest an order, as follows: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial or business use or to vacate, close and secure the dwelling, building or structure as a human habitation; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building or structure. 
In no event shall the court order the removal or demolition of any dwelling, building or structure except upon a finding, based upon competent evidence, that the cost of repair, alteration or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value such dwelling, building or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of law; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city council from exercising the power of eminent domain for the taking of such dwelling, building or structure for public purposes. 
(e)  If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate, close and secure a dwelling, building or structure within the time specified therein, the city clerk may cause the dwelling, building or structure to be vacated, closed and secured and may post conspicuously thereon a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use; the use or occupancy of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use is strictly prohibited and unlawful." If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to remove and demolish a dwelling, building or structure within the time specified therein, the city clerk may cause the demolition thereof; provided, however, that such power may not be exercised until the city council shall have by resolution directed the city clerk to proceed. 
(f)  The cost of bringing a complaint pursuant to this article, together with any costs reasonably incurred by the city in abatement of a public nuisance after determination thereof by the municipal court, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of the costs by the city clerk in the office of the city clerk on a lien docket maintained for such purposes. If a dwelling, building or structure is removed or demolished by the city, the city clerk shall sell in a commercially reasonable manner all salvageable materials therefrom and deduct the proceeds from the costs of demolition. Any surplus of proceeds over costs shall be paid to the owner and parties in interest. 
(g)  The city may enforce its lien in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties in interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city, within 30 days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual installments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment; 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city; and 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, not be paid as provided in this section or be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, the city may enforce the collection of the full amount due in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable tax statutes; provided, however, this procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon the property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et seq. 
(h)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent or prohibit the municipal court from punishing by its contempt powers any owner or parties in interest that willfully fail or refuse to comply with an order entered in accordance with this article. 
Secs. 34-36—34-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— A motion of March 9, 2004, repealed art. III, §§ 34-66—34-73, which pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from §§ II—VIII and IX(C) of an ordinance adopted Sept. 12, 1995; §§ II—VIII and IX(C) of an ordinance adopted Dec. 4, 2000. The motion of March 9, 2004, further specified that such responsibility was transferred to the Environmental Protection Division. 

Secs. 34-66—34-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Noise at excavations, § 54-63. 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 

Sec. 34-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Noise means any loud or harsh sound including, but not limited to, shouting, a clamor, electrical disturbance, loud music, horns, signaling devices, or loud motors or machinery. The term "noise" shall not refer to reasonable expression of thought such as is protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. This article shall not apply to motors or machinery or other noise-producing agents when lawfully operated upon private property pursuant to proper zoning or permit. Nor shall this article apply to the tire, motor or exhaust sounds produced by properly maintained and legally equipped motor vehicles while being lawfully and reasonably operated upon the public roadways. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-107. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violation of this article or any provision of this article, upon conviction of a first offense shall be fined $25.00 or sentenced to 24 hours in jail, or both. 
(b)  For any second violation of any provision of this article within a period of one year after any prior violation, upon conviction, the punishment shall be a fine of $100.00 or seven days in jail, or both. 
(c)  For the third and any subsequent violation within a period of one year following any previous violation, upon conviction, the punishment shall be a fine of no more than $500.00 or up to 30 days in jail, or both. 
(d)  No person accused of violation of this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for a trial following appropriate citation may be arrested thereafter upon a warrant issued by the municipal court judge and required to post bond for future appearance to answer charges. 
Sec. 34-108. - Prohibited acts—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create or cause to be created a disturbance which interferes with the peace, tranquility and good order of the city. It shall further be unlawful for any person in possession and control of premises within the city to allow other persons located upon those premises to violate this article. 
Sec. 34-109. - Same—Specifically. 
Violations of this article shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The repeated sounding of any horn or signaling device, whether or not attached to a motor vehicle, except that this article shall not prohibit reasonable and necessary sounding of such a device for a warning of danger or in the case of a true emergency. 
(2)  Using or operating any amplified sound producing device including, but not limited to, a radio, a musical instrument, a phonograph, a tape player, a video tape player or drum in an unreasonably loud manner. It shall be presumed that any such device is being used in an unreasonably loud manner if it is clearly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the point of origin. 
(3)  The use of any loudspeaker or amplification system for the purpose of advertising or communicating information. It shall not be a violation of this article to use such communication equipment with a valid permit, nor shall it be a violation if the sound produced is audible only upon the premises of the point of origin, and the sound is produced with the consent of the owner of the premises. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to screech tires, operate a motor vehicle without a silent muffler or race an engine in such a way as to produce a sound clearly audible at a distance of 100 feet. 
Sec. 34-110. - Duty of owners or occupants of premises; right of entry by law enforcement officers. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every landowner and every person in possession and control of premises within the city to prevent violation of this article upon premises in his control. Whenever a violation of this article occurs upon premises within the city by any individual, other than the person in possession or control of the premises, the person in possession or control of the premises may be cited for a violation of this article if he permitted the violation. A person will be presumed to have permitted a violation if the violation is of such a character and continued for a sufficient duration that such violation should have been detected by a reasonable and prudent person in control of the premises reasonably attempting to maintain peace and good order upon the premises within his control. 
(b)  Any duly authorized law enforcement officer may enter upon the premises of any property within the city without a warrant for the purpose of issuing a citation or taking other appropriate action necessary in order to discontinue any ongoing violation of this article. 
(c)  For purposes of interpretation of this article, a "person in possession or control of premises" shall include the property owner, tenant or on-premises manager. 
Sec. 34-111. - Court proceedings. 
(a)  Violation of this article shall be tried upon citation or accusation. The city attorney may act as the prosecuting attorney. 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall be tried in the municipal court. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the city council from bringing any civil action for injunction, mandamus or other proceedings to prevent, correct or abate any violation of this article. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed in this section shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanction, penalty or remedy of law. 
Secs. 34-112—34-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars or trespassing personal property, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 

Sec. 34-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junked motor vehicle means any contrivance, or parts thereof, propelled by power and used for transportation of persons or property on public streets and highways, the condition of which is one or more of the following: 
(1)  Wrecked; 
(2)  Dismantled; 
(3)  Partially dismantled; 
(4)  Inoperative; and 
(5)  Discarded. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-142. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Anyone receiving notice of violating this article shall have the right to a hearing as in article II of this chapter. Anyone found guilty of violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 34-143. - Declaration of public nuisance; prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  The presence of any junked motor vehicle on public property or any private lot, tract or parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the city, shall be a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering inoperable or discarding any motor vehicle on the real property of another or to suffer, permit or allow junked motor vehicles to be parked, let or maintained in his own real property. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A motor vehicle in an enclosed building; 
(2)  A motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or 
(3)  A motor vehicle on property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning and remodeling of motor vehicles in conformance with appendix A, zoning; 
provided, however, that the removal of the junked motor vehicle from the premises prior to the expiration of the ten-day notice shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this article, and no further action shall be taken against the owner of the junked motor vehicle or the owner or the occupants of the premises. 
Sec. 34-144. - Administration and enforcement of article; enforcement officers. 
The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the police or other appropriate officials. Members of their departments designated by them are hereby authorized to enter upon private or public property to examine a junked motor vehicle, or obtain information as to the identity of a junked motor vehicle, or to remove or cause the removal of a junked motor vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. When the city has a contract with any person, such person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a junked motor vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
Sec. 34-145. - Notice to remove; service. 
When the chief of police or any authorized agent shall deem such public nuisance to exist, he shall issue a notice to the parties stated in this article, and such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Specify the public nuisance and its location; and 
(3)  Request the public nuisance to be abated within ten days from the notice. 
If, after a diligent search has been made, the chief of police or any authorized agent shall be unable to determine the owner of the junked motor vehicle, he may serve such notice by attaching it to the junked motor vehicle. This shall constitute service upon the owner of the junked motor vehicle. 
Sec. 34-146. - Civil remedy. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the city from proceeding to the county superior court to obtain a restraining order or any other civil remedy necessary to abate a nuisance. Any civil remedy shall be in addition to any criminal penalty or fine imposed by the municipal court. 
Secs. 34-147—34-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATER CONSERVATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Flow rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, § 18-66 et seq.; utilities, ch. 70. 

Sec. 34-181. - Monitoring by public works department. 
To effectively monitor the city's water system the following shall be required of the public works department: 
(1)  All well water pumped at the wells shall be metered. 
(2)  All service connections shall be metered. 
(3)  A distribution map of the system shall be on file at city hall and updated when replacement, additions or improvements are made. 
(4)  The public works director shall compile on appropriate forms an accountability for 90 percent of the water produced and shall call for a leak survey when water unaccounted for exceeds ten percent. 
(5)  Monthly static and pumping water level measurements shall be recorded. 
(Ord. of 11-11-86, § 1) 
Sec. 34-182. - Monitoring and public education by administrative department. 
The administrative department shall prepare monthly reports of major users, variances in water usage, number of gallons billed per customer and total gallons billed. This department shall also be responsible for public education programs, news releases, leaflets on regular home water conservation as well as during droughts and emergencies when drastic measures are required. 
(Ord. of 11-11-86, § 2) 
Sec. 34-183. - Procedure of council during emergency. 
(a)  When the public works director and/or the state department of natural resources have sufficient evidence that reductions in groundwater levels and/or water pressure necessitate an emergency situation, the city council shall immediately adopt a resolution establishing the priority use of water, the curtailment for nonessential uses, and penalties for noncompliance. Curtailment for nonessential use shall include the following: 
(1)  No outside watering of any kind, including street flushing, public fountains, park irrigation, watering lawns, gardens, shrubbery, etc. 
(2)  No commercial and/or public water use such as swimming pools, water cooled air conditioning systems and motor vehicle washing of any kind. 
(3)  No commercial and home laundry use except during the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. only. 
(b)  Inspection and enforcement shall be in the following manner: 
(1)  Inspection by duly authorized officers bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement and testing. 
(2)  Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and shall be issued a warning ticket. On second violation, water service will be terminated and a reconnect fee in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges will be charged. All such subsequent violations shall be charged a reconnect fee in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each violation. 
(c)  Rationing, duration of resolution and/or other emergency procedures shall be determined by the city council at time of critical water situation. 
(Ord. of 11-11-86, § 3) 
Sec. 34-184. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
(a)  Restrictions. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(2)  The city shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(3)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 1-17-11, §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 34-185—34-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 34-201. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "wellhead protection ordinance." 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. of 9-19-00, § 1) 
Sec. 34-202. - Definitions. 
When used in this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section: 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitation reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. of 9-19-00, § 2) 
Sec. 34-203. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 5,280 feet. 
(Ord. of 9-19-00, § 3) 
Sec. 34-204. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. of 9-19-00, § 4) 
Sec. 34-205. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 34-204: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 34-204; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks; 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Ord. of 9-19-00, § 5) 
Sec. 34-206. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. of 9-19-00, § 6) 
Secs. 34-207—34-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WETLAND PROTECTION 

Sec. 34-231. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings of fact. The wetlands within the city are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife, and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; open space; and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the state. 
Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavation, building, pollution, and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
The state department of natural resources and the state department of community affairs have determined that each local government with classified wetlands located in its jurisdiction must adopt a wetlands protection ordinance under the requirements of House Bill 215, Georgia's 1989 Growth Strategies Legislation and the rules promulgated thereunder. 
(b)  Title and purpose. This article shall be known as the wetland protection ordinance of the City of Colquitt, Georgia. The purposes of this article are to promote wise use of wetlands and protect wetlands, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational, and aesthetic values. The objective of this article is to make the public aware of state and federal laws that protect wetlands from alterations which will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, ground water recharge, aesthetic nature, and wildlife. 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 34-232. - Definitions. 
When used in this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section: 
Functions means the beneficial roles that wetlands serve, including: storage, conveyance, and attenuation of floodwater and storm water; protection of water quality and reduction of erosion; habitat for wildlife, including rare, threatened and endangered species; food chain support for a wide variety of wildlife and fisheries; educational, historical, and archeological value protection; and scenic, aesthetic, and recreational amenities. 
General wetland map means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city, as indicated on the National Wetlands Inventory Map. 
Hydric soils means soils that form as a result of saturated soil conditions. A list of these soils is maintained by the soil conservation service. 
Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plants tolerant of or dependent on saturated soil conditions. 
Jurisdictional wetland means a wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Silviculture means the art of producing, reproducing and growing a forest of distinctive stands of trees. 
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophilic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Wetland delineation means the establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or any authority designated by the Corps. 
Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city which are indicated on the generalized wetland map as "wetlands providing significant wildlife habitat and/or which may be subject to extensive mitigation". 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(1), § 2) 
Sec. 34-233. - Wetland protection district established. 
(a)  Wetland protection district. This article shall apply to all wetlands within the wetland protection district as defined herein and located within the jurisdiction of the city. The generalized wetland map, adopted as part of this article, shows the general location of wetlands and of the wetland protection district and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetlands before engaging in a regulated activity. The generalized wetland map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The generalized wetland map shall be on file in the office of the city. 
(b)  Wetland protection district boundaries. The generalized wetland map is a general reference document and wetland boundaries indicated on the map are approximations. The purpose of the generalized wetland map is to alert developers/landowners if they are within proximity to a wetland, which means that there is a high likelihood of the presence of a jurisdiction wetland and a need for the developer/landowner to seek U.S. Army Corps of Engineers guidance as to whether a Section 404 Permit will be required prior to any activity. The generalized wetland map does not necessarily represent the exact boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city, and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(1), § 3) 
Sec. 34-234. - Local development permitting. 
(a)  Permit requirements, issuance, deferment. 
(1)  Requirements. No regulated activity will be conducted within the wetland protection district without prior review by the city zoning administrator. Proposed activities shall be reviewed to compare proposals for land disturbance or development with the generalized wetlands map to determine whether local permitting should proceed or be deferred pending a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination. All activities that are not exempted in subsection (b) below shall be prohibited without prior issuance of a local permit. 
(2)  Issuance of local permit. A local permit shall be issued without a jurisdictional wetlands determination by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers if either one of the following two conditions exist: i) it is not the type of activity that would cause the alteration of wetlands; or ii) the proposed location of the activity is not near or within a protected wetland boundary as shown on the generalized wetlands map adopted by the city as a part of this article. 
(3)  Deferment of local permit. Issuance of a local permit shall be deferred pending a jurisdictional wetlands determination by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. This determination is required when a proposed activity is of a type that would cause alteration of wetlands and the proposed location of the activity is near or within a wetland boundary. A deferred local permit will be issued after a letter of permission or Section 404 Permit is obtained from U.S. Army Corps of Engineers by the applicant. 
(b)  Permissible uses (use as a right). The following uses shall be allowed as a right within the wetland protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, drainage, or dredging except as provided herein. 
(1)  Operations conducted during normal silvicultural activities, including minor dredge and fill associated with road construction, harvesting, and reforestation practices provided they meet the performance standards and road construction best management practices required under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(2)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, and other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 Permit. 
(3)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(4)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission. 
(5)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(6)  The pasturing of livestock provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved best management practices are followed. 
(7)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(8)  Emergency repair of critical facilities. 
(9)  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads, structures, or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged and that, prior to the commencement of work, written notice has been given to the city or its designee and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns, and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland, are not impaired and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
(10)  Temporary water level stabilization measures associated with silvicultural operations, provide that they are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected. 
(11)  Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating, or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided that the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration, or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the terms and provisions of this subsection (b). 
(12)  Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses, or other similar water-related structures, provided that they are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
(c)  Site plans. Applications for registration within the generalized wetland protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale, vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(3)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(4)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet. 
(5)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(6)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(d)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. The site plan may be amended by prior written notice to the city or its designee. 
(e)  Filing fee. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee of $50.00. 
(f)  Enforcement authority. The city zoning administrator is hereby established as the administrator of this article. 
(g)  Review procedures. Application for registration shall be made to the zoning administrator with a copy to the city planning commission or such parties which may be designated by the city. 
(h)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance the registration shall be renewed before construction may begin. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the registration shall expire twelve months after the date that work ceased. 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(1), § 4) 
Sec. 34-235. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who commits, takes part in, or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by law. Each violation of this article shall be a separate offense, and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  If the city council or its designee discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of provisions of the Clean Water Act as amended, the city council or its designee shall issue written notification of the violation of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
(c)  The city council or its designee may suspend or revoke a registration if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The city council or its designee may cause notice of its denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation, or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(1), § 5) 
Sec. 34-236. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city council or its designee shall be reviewable in the city recorders court. 
(b)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the city council or its designee may, within the time specified by the court, elect to institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(1), § 6) 
Sec. 34-237. - Amendments. 
This article and the generalized wetland map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning wetland locations, soils, hydrology, flooding, or botanical species peculiar to wetlands become available. 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(1), § 7) 
Sec. 34-238. - Assessment relief. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation restriction with the government or a nonprofit organization to permanently control some or all regulated activities in the wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special assessment on the controlled wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water mains. 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(1), § 8) 
Secs. 34-239—34-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - GROUNDWATER PROTECTION 

Sec. 34-261. - Short title, finding of fact and objectives. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known as the "groundwater protection ordinance." 
(b)  Findings of fact. In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the city and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that city and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. Groundwater resources are contained within aquifers, which are permeable, rock strata occupying vast regions of the subsurface. These aquifers are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(c)  Objective. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; 
(2)  Protect groundwater quality by limiting density of development; and 
(3)  Protect groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse affect on groundwater quality. 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(2), § 1) 
Sec. 34-262. - Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district. 
(a)  A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the department of natural resources in Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. 
(b)  Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made part of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(2), § 2) 
Sec. 34-263. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section: 
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Drastic means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600/2-87-035. (Note: The "drastic" methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility). 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharge, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. 
Pollution susceptibility maps means maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the department of natural resources. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas having high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Significant recharge areas means those areas mapped by the department of natural resources in Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contracts, geologic structure, the presence of karst, and potentiometric surfaces. Significant recharge areas for the city are typified by those of the coastal plain. In the coastal plain, the significant recharge areas are the surface outcroppings of the large and extensively used drinking water aquifers (e.g., the Floridan, the Clayton, etc.) and soils having high permeability according to the 1976 1:750,000 Soils Association Map of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(2), § 3) 
Sec. 34-264. - Criteria. 
The following criteria pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 shall apply in significant recharge areas as defined above: 
(1)  The city shall not issue any permits for new sanitary landfills not having synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(2)  The city shall not issue any new permits for the land disposal of hazardous wastes. 
(3)  The city shall require all new facilities permitted or to be permitted to treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste to perform such operations on an impermeable pad having a spill and leak collection systems. 
(4)  New above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. (Note: These figures are consistent with US EPA rules for oil pollution prevention, 40 CFR 112.1). Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(5)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: 
a.  A high pollution susceptibility areas; 
b.  A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet; 
c.  A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. 
As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5×10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the natural resources conservation service. 
(6)  All residential lots not served by a public water system and public sewage system shall be at least 1½ acres in size (consult county health department) or the following size limitations, whichever is larger. New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resources Manual (hereinafter "DHR Table MT-1"). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A—F) of the DHR Manual. 
a.  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
c.  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(7)  New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 the Department of Human Resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter "DHR Table MT-2"). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A—F) of the DHR manual. 
a.  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
c.  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(8)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the DHR Manual and subsections (6), (7), (8) and above. 
(9)  Lots of record approved prior to the adoption of this article are hereby exempted from the requirements of subsections (6) and (7) above. 
(10)  New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(11)  The department of natural resources shall require conservative design in any new permits for the spray irrigation of wastewaters or the land spreading of wastewater sludge in areas having high pollution susceptibility. This shall be accomplished by comparing the department's Criteria for Slow Rate Land Treatment (February, 1986 or latest edition) with amendments and other technical publications to site specific information submitted by a registered professional engineer for each project. 
(12)  Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in area having high pollution susceptibility. 
(13)  Exclusive of mining settling basins, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(2), § 4) 
Sec. 34-265. - Variances. 
A variance may be approved if such approval is not contrary to the public interest and where because of the special characteristics of the property and the activity, a literal enforcement of provisions of this article will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship. However, the spirit of this article must be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done; provided that the variance, if granted, will not result in damage to the groundwater. 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(2), § 5) 
Sec. 34-266. - Appeal procedures. 
Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision by the enforcement officer under this article according to the appeal process established under the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-12-01(2), § 6) 
Chapter 38 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 34-66 et seq.; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.; construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-31. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards; disruption of commerce and governmental services; extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief; and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other properties which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 38-32. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion of flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 38-33. - Objectives of article. 
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 38-34. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition to an existing building means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter loadbearing walls is new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the building inspector's interpretation of any provision of this article, or a request for a variance. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 38-36. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below the ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls or breakaway walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before April of 1993. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before April of 1993. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means the official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency where the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including the basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include longterm storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured homes means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer, and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) (as corrected in 1929) means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of April 1, 1993. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after April 1, 1993. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L-97-348)), includes substantial improvements and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstructions or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above the ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-35. - Land to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 38-36. - Basis for establishing the area of special hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in its Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) No. 130135, dated July 23, 1976, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FHBM and data are hereby adopted by reference. Areas of special flood hazard may also include these areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties, but not yet incorporated on a FHBM. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 38-37. - Development permit required. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 3, § C) 
Sec. 38-38. - Compliance with article. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 3, § D) 
Sec. 38-39. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 3, § E) 
Sec. 38-40. - Interpretation of article provisions. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the city council, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 3, § F) 
Sec. 38-41. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by an officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 3, § G) 
Sec. 38-42. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violations. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 3, § H) 
Secs. 38-43—38-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 38-66. - Development permit requirements; stages. 
(a)  A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article. Application for a development permit shall be made to the city clerk on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. 
(b)  Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. The following information is required at the application stage: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (MSL) (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor (including the basement) of all proposed structures. 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed. 
c.  Design certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria in section 38-92(2). 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. At the construction stage, the following are required: A floor elevation or floodproofing certification after the lowest floor is completed is required. Upon placement of the lowest floor or floodproofing by whatever construction means, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the city clerk a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Such certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, such certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The building inspector shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 38-67. - Designation of building inspector. 
The building inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement this article by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. Duties of the building inspector shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Advise the permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known, require that copies of such permits are provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)  Review all development permits to determine if proposed development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the floodplain. For purposes of this article the term "adversely affects" means damage to adjacent properties because of rises in flood stages attributed to physical changes of the channel and the adjacent overbank areas. 
(4)  If it is determined that there is no adverse effect, and the development is not a building, then the permit shall be granted without further consideration. 
(5)  If it is determined that there is an adverse effect, then technical justification (i.e., a professional engineering analysis) for the proposed development shall be required. 
(6)  If the proposed development is a building, then the provisions of this article shall apply. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 38-68. - Use of other base flood data. 
When base flood elevation data or floodway data has not been provided in accordance with section 38-36 then the city shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer section 38-92. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 38-69. - Information to be obtained and maintained. 
(a)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including the basement) of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 38-66(b)(2). 
(b)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed. Certification of such floodproofing shall be obtained in accordance with section 38-66(b)(2). 
(c)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 38-70. - Alteration of watercourses. 
(a)  Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(b)  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 38-71. - Interpretation of FHBM or FIRM boundaries. 
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual physical conditions), the city building inspector shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 4, § F) 
Secs. 38-72—38-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 38-91. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Anchoring. Anchoring requirements are as follows: 
a.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
b.  Manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this subsection, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for existing wind forces. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. Construction materials and methods are as follows: 
a.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
b.  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
c.  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
1.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
2.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area. 
d.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(3)  Utilities. Utilities requirements are as follows: 
a.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
b.  New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
c.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(4)  Subdivision proposals. Subdivision proposals shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
b.  Subdivision proposals shall have public utilities facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
c.  Subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
d.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(5)  Encroachments. The cumulative effect of any proposed development shall not adversely affect the area of special flood hazard. This determination is to be made in accordance with section 38-67(3). 
(6)  Noncompliant repairs, improvements and reconstruction. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 5, § A) 
Sec. 38-92. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 38-91(2)c. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure (including manufactured homes) shall either have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to one free board foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 38-66(b)(1)c. 
(3)  Floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential; therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If subsection (3)a of this subsection is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(4)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on individual lots or parcels, in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (See section 38-91) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
2.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 5, § B) 
Sec. 38-93. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-36, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided, but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 38-36, then the building inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this division. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including the basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 38-93. The building inspector shall certify that the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 5, § C) 
Sec. 38-94. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision or determination is made by the building inspector in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and creates no additional threats to public safety. 
(e)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(f)  In reviewing such requests, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(g)  Conditions for variances are as follows: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The building inspector shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(h)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in this section and the purposes of this article, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, art. 6) 
Chapter 42 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 74; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS FOR INSTALLATION OF PRE-OWNED MANUFACTURED HOMES 

Sec. 42-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the city limits of the City of Colquitt. 
Building inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the municipal building official or any of his or her assistants. 
Certificate  of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this article, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
Guarantee  of condition bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by section 42-33 of this article reasonably portray or represents the existing condition of the pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the city. 
Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Jurisdiction means the areas within the city limits of the City of Colquitt, Georgia. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
(Ord. of 9-22-10, § 1) 
Sec. 42-32. - Conditions. 
All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. (the HUD Code) and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160, et seq. 
(Ord. of 9-22-10, § 2) 
Sec. 42-33. - Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy and fees. 
A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
(a)  Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the building inspector: 
(1)  An affidavit signed by the applicant that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by this Act; 
(2)  Photographs of the interior and exterior of the pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that home meets the minimum health and safety standards of section 42-34 of this article; 
(3)  A $ ____________ refundable guarantee of condition bond or $ ____________ refundable cash deposit; and 
(4)  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(c)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this article have been met. 
(d)  Fee. A permit and inspection fee of $ ____________ shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the city to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one followup inspection. The applicant shall be charged $ ____________ for each additional followup inspection that may be necessary. 
(e)  Alternative inspection. At the request of the applicant, the building inspector may, at his or her discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the city. 
(Ord. of 9-22-10, § 3) 
Sec. 42-34. - Minimum health and safety standards. 
All preowned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
(a)  HUD Code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
(b)  Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(c)  Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(d)  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(e)  Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Un-vented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(f)  Electrical systems. Electrical systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
(g)  Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(h)  Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(i)  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(j)  Smoke detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(Ord. of 9-22-10, § 4) 
Sec. 42-35. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
(c)  The guarantee of condition bond or cash deposit will be forfeited after 90 days from the date of inspection, unless all conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the 90 days or an extension has been issued in writing by the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 9-22-10, § 5) 
Sec. 42-36. - Penalties. 
Failure to remove a pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be punishable by a fine of $ ____________ . Each day any violation under this article continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 9-22-10, § 6) 
Sec. 42-37. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed, provided that, nothing in this article shall be construed to permit the location of manufactured homes in areas where they are not authorized by applicable zoning and land use regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-22-10, § 7) 
Sec. 42-38. - Severability. 
Should any provision of this article be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining provisions shall continue in force and effect until amended or repealed by action of the municipal governing authority. 
(Ord. of 9-22-10, § 8) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Civil emergencies, ch. 26; courts, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any violent, tumultuous, obstreperous or similar disorderly conduct tending to infringe on the peace and repose of the citizens of the city. Such unlawful disorderly conduct shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Fighting between two or more persons in which physical contact is made, except which occurs in organized boxing, martial arts or wrestling exhibitions or training programs, organized and presented as part of a recognized athletic program or lawfully presented entertainment event. 
(2)  The commission of a reckless or knowing act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering or procession. 
Sec. 46-2. - Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies, municipalities or political subdivisions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to a company, municipality or political subdivision engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone or other public services; intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; in any way to interfere with the proper action of such company, municipality or political subdivision; intentionally to divert any services of such company, municipality or political subdivision; or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the company, municipality or political subdivision, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the company, municipality or political subdivision. 
(b)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts set forth in subsection (a) of this section and the person who with knowledge of such violation receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of the improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of tampering or diversion. 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 46-3. - Outside burning; permit required; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)  No outside burning of any nature shall be allowed in the city limits without first obtaining a permit for such purpose from the city's fire department. No rubber material which includes tires shall be burned at any time. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be punishable, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-11. 
Cross reference— Burning of leaves and rubbish, § 54-12. 
State Law reference— Local fire safety standards authorized, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4. 
Sec. 46-4. - Indecent exposure. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any public place, on the sidewalks, public parking lots, streets or alleys of the City of Colquitt wearing pants or shorts below the waist, which expose the undergarments. 
(Ord. of 8-17-09) 
Sec. 46-5. - Visible 911 address. 
All residents must have their 911 address visible from the street. 
(Ord. of 4-8-08) 
Secs. 46-6—46-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOITERING OR PROWLING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances proscribing loitering or related activities not preempted, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24; loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-36. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to establish jurisdiction in the municipal court of the city, pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-36 and 16-6-24, to try and dispose of cases of loitering, prowling or loitering or related activities in public for the purpose of procuring others to engage in any sexual acts for hire. 
Sec. 46-37. - Defined; acts constituting cause for alarm. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this article, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this article if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-38. - Loitering for purpose of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in any public place for the purpose of procuring others to engage in any sexual acts for hire. For purposes of this article, sexual acts shall include intercourse, sodomy, masturbation, bestiality or any other sexual offense described in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 et seq. The definitions of those terms are hereby specifically incorporated in this article by reference to such definitions. 
Sec. 46-39. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person charged with any offense under this article shall be cited for appearance before the municipal court and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Secs. 46-40—46-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOITERING UPON SCHOOL PREMISES OR WITHIN A SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE 

Sec. 46-61. - Persons present without legitimate cause or need; principals of schools to prohibit with police assistance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain upon the premises or within the school safety zone, as defined by state law, of any public or private school in this city, or to remain upon such premises or within such school safety zone when that person does not have a legitimate cause or need to be present thereon. Each principal or designee of each public or private school in this city shall have the authority to exercise such control over the buildings and grounds upon which a school is located so as to prohibit any person who does not have a legitimate need or cause to be present thereon from loitering upon such premises. Each principal or designee of each public or private school in this city shall notify the city police department to prohibit any person who does not have a legitimate need or cause to be present therein from loitering within the school safety zone. 
Sec. 46-62. - Failure of loiterer to depart; violation of division. 
Any person who shall not have any legitimate cause or need to be present upon the premises or within the school safety zone of any public or private school in the city who shall willfully fail to remove himself from such premises after the principal or designee of such school shall request him to do so shall be guilty of a violation of this division. 
Secs. 46-63—46-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN CONTAINERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; public intoxication, § 46-241 et seq. 
State Law reference— Parking, standing or driving vehicle in private parking areas after request not to do so, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-252. 

Sec. 46-96. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to establish jurisdiction of offenses of possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages while operating a vehicle in the municipal court of the city pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-243. 
Sec. 46-97. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Open container means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from or the seal of which has been broken. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-98. - Possession prohibited while operating motor vehicle. 
No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while operating a vehicle in this city. For the purposes of this article, an open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger and is not located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk or other locked nonpassenger area of the vehicle. 
Sec. 46-99. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who violates this article shall be cited for appearance before the municipal court and required to post bond. Upon the conviction, punishment shall be as set forth in section 1-11. 
Secs. 46-100—46-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SHOPLIFTING 

Sec. 46-131. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to establish jurisdiction in the municipal court of the city, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-9, to try and dispose of cases in which a person is charged with theft by shoplifting when the property which was the subject of the theft was valued at $100.00 or less, if the offense occurred within the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 46-132. - Prohibited acts. 
A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when he alone or in concert with another person, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following: 
(1)  Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(3)  Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; 
(4)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or 
(5)  Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. 
Sec. 46-133. - Penalty for violation of article. 
The municipal court of the city will have jurisdiction to try and dispose of such offenses of theft by shoplifting where the subject of the theft is $100.00 or less in value. Upon conviction, the penalty shall be as set forth in section 1-11. 
Secs. 46-134—46-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MARIJUANA 

Sec. 46-166. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to establish the offense of possession of marijuana to be tried in the municipal court of the city. 
Sec. 46-167. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Marijuana means as stated in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-21(16), as now codified or hereafter amended. 
All other words and phrases contained in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the definitions listed in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-21, which are hereby specifically incorporated in this section by reference to such definitions. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-168. - Possession. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, possess or have under his control any marijuana in the city. 
Sec. 46-169. - Penalty for violation of article. 
The municipal court of the city shall have authority to try those cited with possession of marijuana. Those convicted shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Secs. 46-170—46-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CRIMINAL TRESPASS AND DAMAGE TO PROPERTY 

Sec. 46-201. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to establish jurisdiction in the municipal court of the city to try criminal trespass and damage to property offenses, to define such offenses and to provide for penalties. 
Sec. 46-202. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person committing any offense under this article of criminal trespass, criminal damage to property, interference with city property or injuring, tearing down or destroying mailboxes or injuring, defacing or destroying mail, shall be issued a citation and required to post bond. Upon conviction in the municipal court, the punishment shall be as set forth in section 1-11. Each separate act representing any violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense for the purpose of punishment. 
Sec. 46-203. - Criminal trespass. 
A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he does either of the following: 
(1)  Intentionally damages any property of another without his consent; 
(2)  Knowingly and maliciously interferes with the possession or use of the property of another person without his consent; or 
(3)  Commits any of the following acts concerning the premises or property of another: 
a.  Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft or watercraft of another person for an unlawful purpose; 
b.  Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft or watercraft of another person after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner, rightful occupant or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant that such entry is forbidden; or 
c.  Remains upon the land or premises of another person after receiving notice from the owner, rightful occupant or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant to depart. 
Sec. 46-204. - Criminal damage to property. 
A person commits the offense of criminal damage to property when he: 
(1)  Knowingly and without authority interferes with any property in a manner so as to endanger human life; 
(2)  Knowingly and without authority and by force or violence interferes with the operation of any system of public communication, public transportation, sewerage, drainage, water supply, gas, power or other public utility service or with any constituent property thereof; 
(3)  Recklessly or intentionally, by means of fire or explosive, damages the property of another person; or 
(4)  With intent to damage, starts a fire on the land of another without his consent. 
Sec. 46-205. - Interference with city property. 
A person commits the offense of interference with city property when he destroys, damages or defaces property of the city. 
Sec. 46-206. - Injuring, tearing down or destroying mailboxes; injuring, defacing or destroying mail. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to injure, tear down or destroy any mailbox or receptacle intended or used for the receipt or delivery of mail or willfully or maliciously to injure, deface or destroy any mail deposited therein. 
Secs. 46-207—46-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC INTOXICATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; open containers of alcoholic beverages, § 46-96 et seq. 

Sec. 46-241. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to establish jurisdiction in the municipal court to try the offense of public intoxication, to define public intoxication and to provide for penalties. 
Sec. 46-242. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person charged with public drunkenness or intoxication shall be arrested and required to post bond prior to his release. Upon conviction, the offender shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 46-243. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage while a pedestrian in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way or place within the city, or within any public building. 
Sec. 46-244. - Determination based on chemical analysis. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be drunk or intoxicated upon the public streets, sidewalks and parking lots or at any public place or public meeting within the city. If any person is charged with the offense of public intoxication, he shall submit to chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance. Upon the trial of the charge of public intoxication, evidence of the amount of alcohol or drug in a person's blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance at the alleged time, as determined by a chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance shall be admissible. Where such a chemical test is made, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath or bodily substance, to be considered valid under this article, shall have been performed according to the methods approved by the division of forensic sciences of the state bureau of investigation on a machine which was operated with all its electronic and operating components prescribed by its manufacturer, properly attached and in good working order and by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the division of forensic sciences for this purpose. The division of forensic sciences of the state bureau of investigation shall approve satisfactory techniques or methods to ascertain the qualifications and competence of individuals to conduct analyses and to issue permits, along with requirements for properly operating and maintaining any testing instruments, and to issue certificates certifying that instruments have met those requirements, which certificates and permits shall be subject to terminations or revocation at the discretion of the division of forensic sciences. 
(2)  In any criminal trial, the refusal of the defendant to permit a chemical analysis to be made of his blood, breath, urine or other bodily substance at the time of his arrest shall be admissible in evidence against him. 
(3)  When a person shall undergo a chemical test at the request of a law enforcement officer, only a physician, registered nurse, laboratory technician, emergency medical technician or other qualified person may withdraw blood for the purpose of determining the alcohol or drug content therein, provided that this limitation shall not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. 
(4)  The person tested may, at his own expense, have a physician or a qualified technician, chemist, registered nurse or other qualified person of his own choosing administer a chemical test in addition to any administered at the direction of a law enforcement officer. The justifiable failure or inability to obtain an additional test shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the test taken at the direction of a law enforcement officer. 
Sec. 46-245. - Acts constituting. 
A person shall be considered drunk or intoxicated when found upon the public streets, sidewalks and parking lots or in any public place or public meeting within the city while: 
(1)  Under the influence of alcohol to the extent that the person creates a danger to himself or others; 
(2)  The person's alcohol concentration is 0.10 grams or more at any time within three hours after his arrest from alcohol consumed before such arrest; or 
(3)  There is any amount of marijuana or a controlled substance, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-13-21, present in the person's blood or urine, or both, including the metabolites and the derivatives of each or both without regard to whether or not any alcohol is present in the person's breath or blood. 
Sec. 46-246. - Probable cause. 
An officer shall have probable cause to charge a suspect under this article if such person is found in possession of any illegal drugs or paraphernalia commonly associated with drugs of abuse and controlled substances, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-21. While possession of such paraphernalia shall not be a separate violation, it shall authorize an officer to request a sample of breath, blood, urine or other bodily substance, in order to determine whether or not the suspect is under the influence of any drugs or alcohol in violation of this article. 
Secs. 46-247—46-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WEAPONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; discharge of firearm on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105; Georgia Firearms and Weapons Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120 et seq. 

Sec. 46-281. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public gathering means, but shall not be limited to, athletic or sporting events, churches or church functions, political rallies or functions, publicly owned or operated buildings or establishments at which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises. 
School safety zone means in, on or within 1,000 feet of any real property owned by or leased to any public or private elementary school, secondary school or school board and used for elementary or secondary education and in, on or within 1,000 feet of the campus of any public or private technical school, vocational school, college, university or institution of postsecondary education. 
Weapon means any pistol, revolver or any weapon designed or intended to propel a missile of any kind; or any dirk, Bowie knife, switchblade knife, ballistic knife or any other knife having a blade of three or more inches; straight-edge razor, spring stick, metal knucks, blackjack; any bat, club or other bludgeon-type weapon; or any flailing instrument consisting of two or more rigid parts connected in such a manner as to allow them to swing freely, which may be known as a nun chahka, nun chuck, nunchaku, shurirken or fighting chain; or any disc of whatever configuration, having at least two points or pointed blades which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart or any weapon of like kind; and any stun gun or taser as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-106(a). 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-282. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person committing any violation of this article may be prosecuted in the municipal court of the city or in any other state or federal court at the discretion of the prosecutor. Any person convicted of any violation of this article in the municipal court of the city shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 46-283. - Carrying at schools and public gatherings. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 46-284, it shall be unlawful for any person to carry to or to possess or have under such person's control while within a school safety zone or at a school building, school function or school property, or on a bus or other transportation furnished by the school any weapon or explosive compound. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to carry to or to possess or have under such person's control any weapon or explosive compound while at a public gathering. 
Sec. 46-284. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Baseball bats, hockey sticks or other sports equipment possessed by competitors for legitimate athletic purposes. 
(2)  Participants in organized sport shooting events or firearm training courses which have been properly permitted in advance by the city council. 
(3)  Persons participating in military training programs conducted by or on behalf of the Armed Forces of the United States or the state. 
(4)  Persons participating in law enforcement training conducted by a police academy certified by the Peace Officers Standards and Training Council or by a law enforcement agency of the state, or the United States or any political subdivision thereof. 
(5)  The following persons, when acting in the performance of their official duties or when en route to or from their official duties: 
a.  A peace officer as defined by O.C.G.A. § 35-8-2; 
b.  A law enforcement officer of the United States government; 
c.  A prosecuting attorney of this state or of the United States; 
d.  An employee of the state department of corrections or a correctional facility operated by a political subdivision of this state or the United States who is authorized by the head of such correctional agency or facility to carry a firearm; 
e.  A person employed as a campus police officer or school security officer who is authorized to carry a weapon in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 20-8-1 et seq.; and 
f.  Medical examiners, coroners and their investigators who are employed by the state or any political subdivision thereof. 
(6)  A person who has been authorized in writing by a duly authorized official of the school to have in such person's possession or use as part of any activity being conducted at a school building, school property or school function, a weapon which would otherwise be prohibited by this article. Such authorizations shall specify the weapon which has been authorized and the time period during which the authorization is valid. 
(7)  A person who is licensed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-11-129 or issued a permit pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-38-10, when such person carries or picks up a student at a school building, school function or school property, or on a bus or other transportation furnished by the school or any weapon legally kept within a vehicle in transit through a designated school zone by any person other than a student. 
(8)  A weapon which is in a locked compartment of a motor vehicle or one which is in a locked container in or a locked firearms rack which is on a motor vehicle which is being used by an adult over 21 years of age to bring to or pick up a student at a school building, school function or school property or on a bus or other transportation furnished by the school, or when such vehicle is used to transport someone to an activity being conducted on school property which has been authorized by a duly authorized official of the school; provided, however, that this exception shall not apply to a student attending such school. 
(9)  Persons employed in fulfilling defense contracts with the government of the United States or agencies thereof when possession of the weapon is necessary for the manufacture, transport, installation and testing under the requirements of such contract. 
(10)  The employees of the state board of pardons and paroles when specifically designated and authorized in writing by the members of the state board of pardons and paroles to carry a weapon. 
(11)  The attorney general and those members of his staff whom he specifically authorizes in writing to carry a weapon. 
(12)  Probation supervisors employed by and under the authority of the department of corrections pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-20 et seq., known as the Statewide Probation Act, when specifically designated and authorized in writing by the director of the division of probation. 
(13)  Public safety directors of municipal corporations. 
(14)  State and federal trial and appellant judges. 
(15)  United States attorneys and assistant United States attorneys. 
(16)  Clerks of the superior courts. 
(17)  Teachers and other school personnel who are otherwise authorized to possess or carry weapons, provided that any such weapon is in a locked compartment of a motor vehicle or one which is in a locked container in or a locked firearms rack which is on a motor vehicle. 
Sec. 46-285. - Persons who reside or work within school safety zones. 
This article shall not prohibit any person who resides or works in a business or is in the ordinary course of transacting lawful business or any person who is a visitor of such resident located within a school safety zone from carrying, possessing or having under such person's control, a weapon within a school safety zone; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any such person to carry, possess or have under such person's control while at a school building or school function, or on school property, a school bus or other transportation furnished by the school, or at a public gathering, any weapon or explosive compound. 
Sec. 46-286. - Certain actions not defense to prosecution. 
It shall be no defense to a prosecution for a violation of this article that: 
(1)  School was or was not in session at the time of the offense; 
(2)  The real property was being used for other purposes besides school purposes at the time of the offense; or 
(3)  The offense took place on a school vehicle. 
Sec. 46-287. - Map as admissible evidence. 
In a prosecution under this article, a map produced or reproduced by the city for the purpose of depicting the location and boundaries of the area on or within 1,000 feet of the real property of a school board or a private or public elementary or secondary school that is used for school purposes, or within 1,000 feet of any campus of any public or private technical school, vocational school, college, university or institution of postsecondary education, or a true copy of the map shall, if certified by the city clerk as a true copy, be admissible and shall constitute a prima facie evidence of the location and boundaries of the area, provided the city council has approved the map as an official record of the location and boundaries of the area. The prosecutor shall not be precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or testimony to establish any element of this offense, nor from using any map or diagram other than the one which has been approved by the city council. 
Sec. 46-288. - Discharging firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without legal justification, to discharge any firearm within the city limits or at any location where the projectile so discharged could be reasonably expected to enter the geographical or corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 46-289. - Discharging air guns, air pistols or bows. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air gun or air pistol, or any longbow, crossbow or any other type of bow designed to discharge arrows, in any of the streets or sidewalks of the city or in any of the lots thereof unless permission for the discharge of such devices has been given to the person discharging such device by the owner of the property on which such devices are discharged, and unless the discharging of such device is so controlled that no pellet, shot, arrow or any matter so discharged shall cross the property line of the person granting such permission. 
Sec. 46-290. - Offenses involving persons under 18. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article and except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess or have under such person's possessive control a pistol or revolver, whether loaded or unloaded. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally, knowingly or recklessly to sell or furnish a pistol or revolver to any person below the age of 18 years. 
(c)  It shall be lawful for a person under the age of 18 years to possess a pistol or revolver only if such person is: 
(1)  Attending a hunter education course or a firearms safety course; 
(2)  Engaging in practice in the use of a firearm or target shooting at an established range authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction where such range is located; 
(3)  Engaging in an organized competition involving the use of a firearm or participating in or practicing for a performance by an organized group under 26 USC 501(c)(3) which uses firearms as part of such performance; or 
(4)  Traveling to or from a properly licensed hunting activity or any of the other activities described in this subsection, provided such person has in his possession a valid hunting license or other proof that he is engaged in one of the excepted activities, and further provided that the pistol or revolver in such person's possession is not loaded. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without legal justification point or aim at another any gun, pistol or other weapon as defined by this article. For purposes of this offense, it shall be irrelevant whether such firearm pointed at another was loaded or unloaded. 
Sec. 46-291. - Concealed weapons. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of carrying a concealed weapon when he knowingly has or carries about his person any weapon or instrument of like character outside of his home or place of business, unless such weapon or instrument of like character is being carried in an open manner and fully exposed to view. 
(b)  This section shall not permit, outside of his home, motor vehicle or place of business, the carrying of a pistol, revolver or concealed firearm by any person unless he has on his person a valid license issued under O.C.G.A. § 16-11-129, and the pistol, revolver or firearm may only be carried in a shoulder or waist belt holster, hipgrip or in any other similar device, handbag, purse, attache case, briefcase or other closed container. Carrying on the person in a concealed manner other than as provided in this section shall not be permitted and shall be a violation of this section. 
(c)  This section shall not forbid the transportation of any firearm by a person who is not among those enumerated as ineligible for a license under O.C.G.A. § 16-11-129, provided the firearm is enclosed in a case, unloaded and separated from its ammunition. This section shall not forbid the transportation of a loaded firearm in any private passenger motor vehicle in an open manner and fully exposed to view or in the glove compartment of the vehicle. 
Sec. 46-292. - Fireworks prohibited. 
(a)  'Fireworks', as used in this section, means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, balloons requiring fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, sparklers, and other devices containing an explosive substance. The term 'fireworks' shall not include model rockets and model rocket engines, designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models; toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content does not average more than 0.25 grains of explosive mixture per paper cap; nor toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term 'fireworks' include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to sell, offer to sell or use, explode, cause to be exploded, possess, manufacture, transport or store any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city, except as may be permitted under the provisions of Section 3308 of the International Fire Code, 2003 edition, a copy of which is maintained for public inspection during business hours at the Offices of the City of Colquitt, Fire Department, or the Office of the City Administrator, located at 154 West Street, Colquitt, Georgia 39837. 
(Ord. of 10-11-05(2)) 
Chapter 50 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Disposition of dead animals, § 14-12; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Solid waste management plan adopted. 
The city having officially adopted on June 8, 1993, the draft Colquitt/Miller County Consolidated Solid Waste Management Plan in its entirety, as approved by the state department of community affairs, such plan is confirmed and ratified. 
Secs. 50-2—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WASTE MANAGEMENT AND LITTER CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
Building material means any material defined as, but not limited to lumber, brick, block, stone, carpet, plumbing materials, plaster, concrete, roofing, floor tile, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of the construction of repairs or additions to structures or accessory structures, or the demolition of such. 
Business trash means any accumulation of paper, cardboard, packaging materials, rags or accumulations other than garbage or household trash, which result from the operation of stores, offices and similar business or commercial enterprises. 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, restaurant, business, public or semipublic establishment of any kind, and any master-metered apartment. An operation conducted from a residence requiring a business license is a commercial establishment for purposes of this article. 
Container means a refuse receptacle. 
Disposal site means an area, location, tract of land or facility used or intended to be used for the disposal of solid waste, putrescible waste or other waste. 
Garbage means the byproduct resulting from the growing, harvesting, processing, handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of animal or vegetable food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction for the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding areas or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
Hazardous refuse means materials which constitute a hazard to health or safety, such as poison, acids, caustic matter or solutions, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, explosives, radioactive materials and highly flammable substances. 
Household trash means waste accumulation usually attendant upon housekeeping, such as paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage. 
Industrial establishment means any establishment involved in the manufacture or assembly of a product or any part thereof. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by or resulting from the operation of factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Litter means all discarded manmade materials including, but not limited to, garbage, household trash, industrial waste, building materials, appliances (or portions thereof), refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Loading and unloading area means a space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons. 
Master-metered apartments means those complexes where the solid waste billing is paid by the owner of the complex. 
Multiple-family dwelling (multifamily) means a building designed for or occupied by two or more families, such as apartments, duplexes and triplexes. 
Person means any natural person, whether owner, agent or tenant; any corporation, partnership, association, firm, receiver, guardian, trustee, executor, administrator, fiduciary, occupant, lessee, tenant; or representative of any of the same. 
Refuse means solid waste accumulations consisting of any combination of ashes, building material, garbage, hazardous refuse, household trash and other waste or discarded materials of all kinds. 
Refuse receptacle means a container approved by the city council as acceptable for the temporary reception and storage of refuse pending transportation to a permanent disposal site. The term shall include plastic bags where approved by the city council. 
Scavenge or scavenging means the unauthorized and uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
Tree, shrubbery and lawn trimmings means waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery cuttings, grass clippings or other natural waste. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § I) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-32. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Offenses triable in municipal court; punishment. The violation of any provision of this article, or of the rules and regulations of the city promulgated under this article, or the failure to do any act or meet any standard required thereby, or the failure to comply in any way with any requirement of this article or such rules and regulations, shall constitute an offense triable in the municipal court and shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  Repeated failure to remove wheeled garbage container. Regarding any owner, occupant, tenant or other person occupying any building, house or structure within the city as a residence or business using a wheeled garbage container for curbside service that repeatedly fails to remove such wheeled garbage container after collection day, the city shall, on the first offense, give notice in writing of the violation and may impose a fine of at least a minimum of $5.00 and a maximum not to exceed $50.00. On the second offense, the city shall give notice in writing of the violation and may impose a fine of at least a minimum of $5.00 and a maximum not to exceed $75.00. For the third and subsequent offense, the owner, occupant, tenant or other person will be prosecuted and subject to penalties in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Specific penalties cumulative. Where any section of this article contains specific remedies or punishments, such specific remedies or punishments shall not be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other remedies and punishments provided in this section, or otherwise provided by law for the violation of or noncompliance with this article, or the rules and regulations of the city council. 
(d)  Additional penalties. In addition to all punishments and penalties provided anywhere in this article, otherwise by law, the city council may impose the following additional or alternative sentences, either as a direct sentence, or as a condition to probation: 
(1)  The city council may direct the convicted person to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way any and all litter deposited hereon by anyone else prior to the date of the execution of the sentence; or 
(2)  The city council may direct the convicted person to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of the execution of the sentence. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § VIII(4), (5), (8), (9)) 
Secs. 50-33—50-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 50-56. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority of the city council. The city council shall have charge of the administration of this article. The collection, transportation and disposal by the city's solid waste division, public works department, all materials regulated by this article shall be under the supervision and control of the city council. The mayor is authorized, with the approval of the city council, to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations concerning such waste collection, conveyance and disposal, and respecting the size, type, specifications, number and location of all containers and fees charged for special collections. Such rules and regulations shall have the force of law, but shall not be contrary to anything in this article, but supplementary thereto. This article and the rules and regulations of the city promulgated under this article, shall apply to the storage, collection, transportation and disposition of refuse in the city by private collectors, as well as the city solid waste collection service, except that private collectors may establish their own hours and days of collection. 
(b)  Residential and commercial service. All single-family residential units in the city are required to utilize the solid waste collection service of the city for the disposition of refuse. Garbage, tree, shrubbery and lawn trimmings shall be collected once a week. All commercial units are required to utilize the solid waste collection service provided by the city or a service provided by an approved state certified hauler operating under a permit from the city. Nothing in this subsection or anywhere in this article shall be construed as a surrender by the city of its legal authority to franchise commercial collectors of refuse, or to become the sole and exclusive hauler of refuse, including commercial and industrial, in the city. 
(c)  Receptacles and containers required. Every person in possession, charge or control of any building or premises upon which refuse is accumulated or produced shall be required by this article to provide and keep in a suitable place readily accessible to the solid waste collection crews of the city, or to the private collectors, as the case may be, receptacles and containers approved by the city council as suitable for the storage of all such refuse which will normally accumulate between the established collection dates. The city council shall determine the type, size, specifications, number and location of such receptacles and shall determine whether such receptacles and containers are in a serviceable condition. 
(d)  Receptacles and containers to be safe. All receptacles and containers shall be maintained in good serviceable condition at all times. Any receptacle or container which does not conform to the requirements of this article or to the rules and regulations of the city, or which has ragged or sharp edges or other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents therefrom or the public generally, shall be replaced promptly by the user thereof. If any such container, after request, has not been replaced, the city council shall have the right to suspend further collection of refuse from such container until such time as the container is brought into compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § II) 
Sec. 50-57. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. It is the principal objective of this article to obtain a clean and litter-free community and encourage recycling of selected material through education and voluntary compliance. Enforcement procedures shall be utilized only where other means fail. 
(b)  Solid waste management plans. A solid waste management plan to include on-site dumpster for building materials for collection and disposal must be submitted with every application for a building permit. The building inspector shall obtain the approval or disapproval of the city council or designated official of such solid waste management plan. 
(c)  Monitoring by employees. Solid waste collection employees, building inspector, city police officers, and other city employees should be alert to observe violations of the provisions of this article including, but without limitation, loose trash and garbage, waste, litter, containers not in compliance, or any other thing or matter which may be in violation of this article or of the rules and regulations of the city. An employee observing such violations shall report the violations to his supervisor, who in turn shall cause the information to be conveyed to the city council for required action. 
(d)  Prima facie case. Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, wagon, wheelbarrow or other conveyance in violation of this article or the rules and regulations promulgated by the city council under this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(e)  Presumption. Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article or of the rules and regulations promulgated by the city under this article is discovered to contain any articles including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such manner as to indicate that the articles belong to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(f)  Action in emergencies. Nothing contained in this section or elsewhere in this article shall require intermediate measures where the violation is of such nature or degree as to constitute an immediate, clear and present danger to the health and safety of the public. The failure to take the steps provided in this section shall not constitute a defense to any proceeding to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § VIII(1)—(3), (6), (7), (10)) 
Sec. 50-58. - Nonrepealer. 
This article is not intended to repeal or modify in any way any other ordinance of the city relating to the abatement of or punishment for nuisances, junk, weeds or other matters affecting the health and safety of the public. All remedies provided in this article are supplemental to and in addition to all remedies provided by the codes and ordinances of the city and by the state laws. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § VIII(11)) 
Secs. 50-59—50-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 50-81. - Precollection practices. 
The following practices and procedures shall be followed by persons within the corporate limits of the city in order to facilitate the collection of solid waste: 
(1)  Refuse. All refuse shall be placed and maintained in containers satisfying the requirements of this article and of the rules and regulations of the city council. Containers shall be maintained at all times with tightfitting lids or covers, and secured in such a manner as to prevent the overturning by the elements or by dogs or other animals. 
(2)  Garbage. Garbage shall be placed in containers for collection. Household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its being placed in refuse receptacles. Household trash shall be combined with garbage. 
(3)  Injurious trash items. Waste material with potential for inflicting injury, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes and television tubes shall be securely packaged or wrapped in such a manner as will prevent injury to the collection crews or other persons. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to material placed in mechanically handled containers. 
(4)  Hazardous refuse. Hazardous refuse will not be collected by the solid waste collection service of the city. No person shall place any items of hazardous refuse in any refuse receptacle or other container for collection by the city. Private contractors or collectors may collect hazardous refuse. Federal and state hazardous waste laws shall be observed by all persons, and any violations will be reported to the applicable state or federal authorities. 
(5)  Building materials. Building materials will not be collected by the solid waste collection service of the city. Private contractors or collectors may collect building materials. The owner of the premises or the contractor, builder or person doing the repairs, remodeling construction or demolition shall be required to haul away and legally dispose of all such debris. 
(6)  Tree and vegetation removal; home occupants. The city will remove trees cut by the owner or occupant. The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling trees and stumps left by or resulting from the operation of commercial tree trimmers, landscapers, grading contractors, building contractors, lawn services or other commercial workmen. When a tree is cut from private property by anyone other than the owner, such party shall remove and legally dispose of all wood and limbs. The owner, tenant or other persons in possession of the property shall be responsible to see that such tree trimmer or other person complies with this subsection. 
(7)  Tree trimmings and shrubbery cuttings removal. Tree trimmings and shrubbery cuttings must be cut in lengths of four feet or less and not more than six inches in diameter and placed in an orderly manner adjacent to an alley or on a street curb where alleys are not available so that it can be readily handled. No other materials shall be mixed with the tree trimmings and shrubbery cuttings. Abnormally large amounts of tree trimmings and shrubbery cuttings will be rescheduled for a nonpickup day. 
(8)  Other. Only grass clippings, leaves, pine straw and/or pine cones may be mixed in at the designated location for pickup service. 
(9)  Ashes. It shall be unlawful to deposit hot ashes in garbage containers. Ashes or clinkers shall not be placed or deposited upon streets, sidewalks or sideparks. 
(10)  Pet litter. Pet litter must be placed in securely tied plastic bags not to exceed ten pounds in weight and placed in the container. 
(11)  Household furniture and furnishings. Upon request, the city shall collect discarded or junked household items such as: sofas, chairs, beds, yard furniture, clothing, swings and other such items. However, pickup will be scheduled upon request, and the owner may be required to pay a disposal fee. 
(12)  Appliances. The city will pick up household appliances such as stoves, refrigerators, washers, dryers, etc. However, pickup will be scheduled upon request, and the owner may be required to pay a disposal fee. 
(13)  Disposable diapers. Disposable diapers must be placed and tied securely in plastic bags and placed in your regular container. 
(14)  Tires and batteries. Tires and auto batteries will not be picked up by the city sanitation department. 
(15)  Other waste. Removal responsibility for all other waste not covered in this section, and including building material and major tree and yard trimming waste, is the owner's, tenant's, resident's, customer's or contractor's. 
(16)  Separation of garbage; cardboard. All commercial customers of the solid waste department or private contractor or collector shall separate their cardboard waste for pickup. Any commercial customer not separating cardboard waste from other waste for pickup by the city's solid waste department, private contractor or collector shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.00 for each violation. Each failure to separate solid waste as required in this subsection shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(17)  Dead animal collection. Small dead animals, not over 30 pounds in weight, if kept separate from garbage and rubbish, will be collected without charge upon notice to the city or private contractor or collector, provided that a charge will be made for all such animals collected from animal hospitals, kennels, pet shops and the like. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § III) 
Sec. 50-82. - Collection practices. 
(a)  Residential. Garbage and household trash accumulated by residence shall be stored in refuse receptacles complying with the requirements of the city as to size, shape and materials, and shall be placed at such locations convenient for servicing by the solid waste collection services of the city as shall be designated by the city for once a week pickup. Yard trash shall be placed at the designated location for once a week pickup. Service for disabled citizens will be handled on a case-by-case basis, once disability is certified by a licensed physician, and the certification is submitted to the city council for approval. The city or the private collector will also provide a roll-back only service for those persons who specifically request in writing such roll-back service, under the rules and regulations to be promulgated by the city or designated representative, and upon payment of a monthly fee fixed by the city council, in an amount sufficient to cover cost of service provided. Such service will be implemented when sufficient collection equipment is available. 
(b)  Commercial. Refuse accumulated by commercial establishments shall be stored in containers meeting the requirements of the city council as to size, shape and materials, and such receptacles compatible with the collection equipment and methods of the city's solid waste collection service designated by the city council. The provisions of this subsection apply to private solid waste collection as well as to the city. 
(c)  Issuance of permits. The building inspector of the city shall not issue a building permit for industrial, commercial or multifamily dwellings until the city council or their designated official gives their approval to proposed plans for the storage and collection of solid waste. 
(d)  Location of containers. The city or private collector will not collect solid waste from industrial, commercial or multifamily dwellings unless the solid waste is placed in approved containers and located at a place approved by the city council or their designated official. 
(e)  Multifamily units. All multifamily units of six or more units serviced by the city shall be containerized with plastic or metal containers furnished by the city or private collector. Each occupant of a multifamily unit, who is served by a cubic yard dumpster, will be billed at a single residential rate. 
(f)  Containerizing trash. All commercial and industrial users shall containerize all solid waste generated by the establishment, including outside as well as inside debris from the premises. 
(g)  Availability of services. Collections shall not be made on the following holidays unless otherwise specified by the city or private contractor or collector: New Year's Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § IV) 
Sec. 50-83. - Wheeled garbage containers. 
(a)  Inspections. Where a wheeled garbage container is furnished by the city or private collector, it shall be the only container authorized for garbage collection and shall be subject to inspection by the city. Should additional containers be needed, they may be obtained for a fee by contacting the city or private collector. 
(b)  Placing for collection. The owner, occupant, tenant or other person occupying any building, house or structure within the city as a residence or business using a wheeled garbage container shall have such container at the curb or designated location within 24 hours of the day before, and not later than 7:00 a.m. on the designated garbage pickup days. 
(c)  Removal after collection. The owner, occupant, tenant or other person occupying any building, house or structure within the city as a residence or business using a wheeled garbage container for curbside service shall return such container to the side or rear of the building or off the public right-of-way within 24 hours of the designated garbage pickup days. 
(d)  Vacating dwelling. Wheeled garbage containers furnished by the city or private collector shall not be removed from the premises to which they are delivered. Only the city or private garbage collector shall have the authority to remove containers from the premises in which they are delivered. 
(e)  Loss or damage to container. If the wheeled garbage container furnished by the city or private collector is damaged, lost or destroyed through negligence of the person to whom the container was assigned, the person shall reimburse the city or the private collector for the cost of a replacement container. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § V) 
Sec. 50-84. - Commercial establishments. 
(a)  Generally. Commercial establishments shall store refuse in containers meeting the requirements of this article and of the rules and regulations promulgated by the city so as to eliminate wind driven debris and unsightly litter in and about the establishment. Any spillage or overflow shall be cleaned up immediately by the establishment. 
(b)  Loading and unloading areas. All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash and refuse. The owner or occupant of the commercial establishment shall place a sufficient number of containers, not less than the number required by the city for that establishment, in such area to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. The occupant of the premises shall maintain surveillance to ensure that all refuse is placed in the proper container and that area is kept clean and free of litter. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § VI) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
Sec. 50-85. - Prohibited acts. 
The following activities are hereby declared to be unlawful and in violation of this article: 
(1)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any litter, refuse, garbage or trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any other public property, nor upon any private property. 
(2)  Blockage of drainage. No person shall place any litter, refuse, trash, trees, grass, refuse receptacles, containers or garbage, on, over or near any storm drain or drainage ditch, street gutter or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. 
(3)  Appliances. No person shall leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing such lock or other device from the door. This subsection shall not apply to any appliance, refrigerator or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and which has been crated, strapped or locked so that it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment thereof. 
(4)  Vacant units, lots and rental units. The city will not remove garbage, trash, building material, household trash or tree shrubbery or lawn trimmings, or any other debris that is accumulated. Once advised of a violation of this subsection in writing, the owner/manager shall have seven calendar days to remove or have removed all debris. If not accomplished in allotted time, the city may dispose of the debris and charge the owner/manager the amount necessary to pay for such removal. 
(5)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof shall disturb or interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, or remove any contents therefrom or remove such container from its location. 
(6)  Scattering of refuse and littering. No person shall: 
a.  Throw or deposit any refuse on any public or private street or scatter such refuse or litter on any public or private property; or 
b.  Throw or deposit any refuse, trash or debris in any marsh area, stream, drainage ditch, body of water or beach area. 
(7)  Use of streets. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any of the streets of the city to transport such materials without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle in such manner as to prevent such loose material from being deposited on the streets or adjoining areas. 
(8)  Accumulation of litter. No owner or occupant of any property in the city shall allow litter, garbage, refuse, rubbish, filth, carrion and debris to accumulate thereon. If any owner, occupant or other person responsible for the existence of such conditions shall fail to remedy such conditions within seven days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after notice to remedy the same from the mayor or designated official, such condition shall be a violation of this article and punishable hereunder, and abatable as a nuisance. Any owner or occupant of any property in the city that is found in violation of accumulation of litter is not only responsible for their fines, but also responsible for any expenses incurred by the city in abating this nuisance. 
(9)  Unlawful dumping. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, drop, dump or otherwise leave any litter on premises of another without the written consent of such other person, and without complying with the other provisions of this article, or the rules and regulations of the city adopted pursuant hereto. 
(10)  Ownership of refuse. All refuse, including refuse deposited in refuse containers provided by the city or private collector, shall be the property of the owner or occupant until the refuse has been placed in city or private collector vehicles. The city has no responsibility or liability for any injuries or damage resulting from such refuse. 
(11)  Incinerators; prohibited use; violation and punishment. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other commercial entity to use an incinerator or other apparatus to burn trash or other waste material which does not comply with all governmental regulations, state and federal, governing the use, design and construction of incinerators or other apparatus used to burn waste material and the pollutants emitted therefrom. Any person, firm, corporation or commercial entity violating this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. Each usage by a person, firm, corporation or commercial entity of an incinerator or apparatus to burn trash or other waste material not in compliance with this article, shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(12)  Transportation of garbage; prohibited use. No garbage, hazardous refuse, household trash, industrial waste or litter may be brought within the corporate limits of the city by any person, except for purposes of collecting and disposing of waste in accordance with this article or unless provided by the city council. 
(Ord. of 5-10-94, § VII) 
Chapter 54 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-7(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; subdivisions, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 74; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Maintenance and repair of public streets. 
All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the director of public works, which officer shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of this chapter and all ordinances of the city relating to such public ways. 
(Code 1976, § 22-101(1)) 
Sec. 54-2. - Maintenance of sidewalks. 
It shall be the duty of all owners of property in the city upon which sidewalks have been laid to keep such walkways in good repair at all times and to remove from them all snow or ice within 12 hours from the time such snow or ice ceases to fall, or within less time if so ordered by the chief of police or the director of public works. 
(Code 1976, § 22-101(2)) 
Sec. 54-3. - Maintenance of property between sidewalks and streets. 
All persons who own real estate in the city, whose real estate abuts upon any sidewalk which is paved, shall be required to keep that portion of such sidewalk which lies between the property line and the curbline of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts, in good and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and other obnoxious and unsightly vegetation or other thing which would mar or detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property abuts. Any property owner who shall place or allow grass to grow upon the portion of the sidewalk lying between the property line and the curbline of the street as aforesaid, and upon which his real estate abuts, shall keep such grass properly mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. If such owners are not in the possession of their property, then this section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession or control of the property. 
(Code 1976, § 22-101(3)) 
Sec. 54-4. - Defacing sidewalks, streets and curbs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, street or curb in the city by painting any signs thereon, whether for commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk or drive any vehicle upon or injure in any way any newly laid street, sidewalk or curbing pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or is soft or newly laid. 
(Code 1976, § 22-101(4)) 
Sec. 54-5. - Obstructions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as may be provided in this chapter or in the ordinances and laws of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 22-101(5)) 
Sec. 54-6. - Deposits and discharges onto streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other article which may do injury to any person, animal or property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged onto any public street or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste milk or other organic material. 
(Code 1976, § 22-101(6)) 
Sec. 54-7. - Report of defects, obstruction, deposits and discharges. 
It shall be the duty of every city officer and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction, or of any unlawful deposit or discharge, in or on any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk or other public way of the city to report the same to the director of public works as soon as possible. 
(Code 1976, § 22-101(7)) 
Sec. 54-8. - Private use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to write or make any sign or advertisement on any such pavement. 
(Code 1976, § 22-101(8)) 
Sec. 54-9. - Encroachments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property, or to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley or other public way without having first secured a permit from the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 22-101(9)) 
Sec. 54-10. - Openings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk or alley without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk. All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the director of public works. 
(Code 1976, § 22-101(10)) 
Sec. 54-11. - Trees and shrubs. 
(a)  Planting and removal; permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure or cut any tree, bush or shrub in or from any public street, parkway or other public place without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city clerk. 
(b)  Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(c)  Dangerous trees. Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel, shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. The director of public works may cause to be trimmed or removed any and all such trees or shrubs so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be removed. 
(d)  Poles and wires. Any person or company which maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other public places of the city shall keep such wires and poles free and away from any nearby trees or shrubs in such places, and keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the director of public works, so that no injury shall befall either the poles and wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact. 
(Code 1976, § 22-101(11)) 
Sec. 54-12. - Burning of leaves and rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 22-101(12)) 
Cross reference— Outside burning permit, § 46-3. 
Sec. 54-13. - Street construction and improvements. 
(a)  Council resolution. Whenever the improvement of any street or part thereof shall be deemed necessary by the city council, a resolution stating the nature and location of the proposed improvement shall be declared. Under the state municipal street improvement act, street improvements in municipalities can be authorized in one of two ways: 
(1)  By a referendum of the voters; or 
(2)  By a resolution of the municipal governing authority declaring an improvement necessary, as provided in this section. 
(b)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement for or on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley or other public way, or to repair the same, without having first obtained a permit. 
(c)  Specifications. Street construction and improvements specifications are as follows: 
(1)  Generally. All street and sidewalk pavements, and all curbing shall be laid in conformity with the specifications established or approved from time to time by the city council. 
(2)  Curb ramping. (Reserved) 
(d)  Barricades. Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work, which barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. 
(Code 1976, § 22-102) 
Secs. 54-14—54-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 54-46. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner break up any street or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose or to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit from the city clerk. 
(b)  Conditioned upon the permittee's agreement to secure and hold harmless the city and its officers against any and all claims, judgements or other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for which the city, the city council or any city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and further conditioned on the permittee's agreement to fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the director of public works, all openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any street where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of 24 months after such work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it was in before such work shall have been done. Any settlement of the surface within such two-year period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee, except that nothing contained in this article shall be construed to require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the city if such repairs should prove defective. Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond but it shall in its entirety cover any or all future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given. In the event of any suit or claim against the city by reason of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the city's giving written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the city requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee and his surety. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(1)) 
Sec. 54-47. - Routing of traffic. 
The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that during the performance of the excavation work traffic conditions shall be maintained at all times as nearly normal as practicable so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the general public, provided that the director of public works may recommend the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time if, in his opinion, it is necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic including its own vehicles as directed by the city police department. The following steps shall be taken before any highway may be closed or restricted to traffic: 
(1)  The permittee must receive the approval of the director of public works and the police department; 
(2)  The permittee must notify the chief of the fire department of any street so closed; 
(3)  Upon completion of construction work the permittee shall notify the director of public works and city police department before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made; 
(4)  Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the chief of police they shall be furnished by the permittee at its own expense. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible. In instances in which this would not be feasible the director of public works will designate detours. The city shall maintain roadway surfaces of existing highways designated as detours without expense to the permittee, but, in case there are not existing highways, the permittee shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the specifications of the director of public works. The permittee will be responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any highways by the operation of its equipment. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(2)) 
Sec. 54-48. - Clearance for fire equipment. 
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fireplugs. Passageways leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be kept free of piles of material or other obstructions. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(5)) 
Sec. 54-49. - Protection of traffic. 
The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement to accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections. Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of plank timbers and blocking of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic safely, and pedestrian crossings shall be of adequate thickness, width and length, together with necessary blocking, to ensure safe passage by pedestrians. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(6)) 
Sec. 54-50. - Interference with utilities. 
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the director of public works and the utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across such work. In case any of such pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be rerepaired by the agency or person owning them, and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and his bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or other utility, and his bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect such utilities against damage. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(7)) 
Sec. 54-51. - Protection of adjoining property. 
The permittee shall at all times and at his own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain permission from the owner of such private property for such purpose. The permittee shall, at his own expense shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work, and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure properly to protect and carry out such work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove even temporarily any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner, or in the case of public property the director of public works. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(8)) 
Sec. 54-52. - Sidewalk excavations. 
Any excavation made in any sidewalk or under a sidewalk shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge over such excavation on the line of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely railed on each side so that foot passengers can pass over safely at all times. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(9)) 
Sec. 54-53. - Protective measures. 
The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the street or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight there shall be placed upon each place of excavation and upon any excavated materials or structures, or other obstructions to streets, suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept burning throughout the night during the maintenance of such obstructions. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(10)) 
Sec. 54-54. - Attractive nuisances. 
It shall be unlawful for the permittee to allow to remain unguarded at the place of excavation or opening any machinery, equipment or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to attract children and be hazardous to their safety or health. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(11)) 
Cross reference— Nuisances generally, § 34-31 et seq. 
Sec. 54-55. - Care of excavated material. 
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining property. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(12)) 
Sec. 54-56. - Damage to existing improvements. 
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such repair shall conform with the requirements of any applicable Code provision or ordinance. If upon being ordered the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the director of public works shall have the authority to cause such necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the city, and the cost shall be charged against the permittee. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(13)) 
Sec. 54-57. - Cleanup. 
As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the director of public works. From time to time as may be ordered by the director of public works, and in any event immediately after completion of such work, the permittee shall at his own expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from such work, and, upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the director of public works, such work may be done by the city, and the cost of such work shall be charged to the permittee. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(14)) 
Sec. 54-58. - Backfilling. 
Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation permit issued under this article shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug and in a manner consistent with sound engineering practices generally recognized in the construction industry. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(15)) 
Sec. 54-59. - Restoration of surface. 
(a)  The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work to its original condition in accordance with the specifications of the director of public works. The permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes and shall be required to exercise special care in making and maintaining such temporary restorations to ensure safe traveling conditions until such time as permanent restorations are made. Permanent restoration of streets shall be made by the permittee in strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the director of public works. 
(b)  Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the director of public works shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee and his surety under the surety bond required under this article for incomplete or defective work, if discovered within 24 months from the completion of the excavation work. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(16)) 
Sec. 54-60. - City's right to restore surface. 
(a)  If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by the permit, or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the director of public works, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the street and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and 25 percent of such cost in addition for general overhead and administrative expenses. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the excavation for two years after restoring it to its original condition. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(17)) 
Sec. 54-61. - Prompt completion of work. 
The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, as soon as practicable and, in any event, not later than the date specified in the excavation permit. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(18)) 
Sec. 54-62. - Emergency work. 
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit under this article, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the city clerk's office is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(19)) 
Sec. 54-63. - Noise, dust and debris. 
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest extent practicable, noise, dust and unsightly debris, and during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with the express written permission of the director of public works or in case of an emergency as provided in section 54-62, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(20)) 
Cross reference— Noise generally, § 34-106 et seq. 
Sec. 54-64. - Inspections. 
The director of public works shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article, and shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be required to enforce and carry out the intent of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(21)) 
Sec. 54-65. - Drawings. 
Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans and profiles showing the location and character of all underground structures including abandoned installations, and shall provide the director of public works with a copy of the same. Corrected maps shall be filed with such officer within 60 days after new installations, changes or replacements are made. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(22)) 
Sec. 54-66. - Exemption. 
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any excavation work carried out under the direction of competent city authorities by employees of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 22-103(23)) 
Secs. 54-67—54-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3). 

Sec. 54-101. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Section 32-212 of the 1976 Code relating to parades and demonstrations is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Chapter 58 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-7(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 74; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Approval by planning commission or governing authority on plat of subdivision required for filing or recording in superior court clerk's office, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d); Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 58-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The city's subdivision regulations as adopted January, 1974, are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Chapter 62 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-7(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(14); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-236 et seq.; taxation of alcoholic beverages, § 6-86 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; occupation taxes and regulatory fees, § 22-31 et seq.; gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers, § 22-201; gross premiums tax on all other insurers, § 22-202; occupation tax registration certificate for junk dealers and junkyards, § 22-261 et seq.; telephone occupational license tax, § 22-401 et seq. 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Tourist courts, O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq.; local excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 62-31. - Imposed; rate. 
There is hereby levied an excise tax in the amount of five percent of the charges to the public for such furnishings of any rooms, lodgings or accommodations within the city. 
(Ord. of 6-13-95(1), § 1) 
Sec. 62-32. - Collection; remittance. 
Each person collecting the tax shall, on or before the 20th day of the month following the month in which this tax shall become effective, and on or before the 20th day of each month thereafter, transmit to the city, upon forms as prescribed by the city, returns showing the total charges for the furnishing of such rooms, lodgings or accommodations as provided for in this article during the preceding calendar month and shall account for and remit the tax levied in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-13-95(1), § 2) 
Sec. 62-33. - Percentage kept by collectors. 
Each person collecting the tax as provided for in this article shall be allowed three percent of the tax due and accounted for and remitted to the city in the form of a deduction in submitting the report and paying the amount due, provided such amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 6-13-95(1), § 3) 
Sec. 62-34. - Failure to make returns; penalties. 
(a)  When any person liable under this article shall fail to make any return or pay the full amount of the tax required in this article, there shall be imposed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than 30 days, with an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional 30 days, or fraction thereof, during which the failure continues, not to exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater; provided, however, that if such failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the mayor for the city in affidavit form attached to the return and remittance within ten days of due date, such returns may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. In the case of a false or fraudulent return or the failure to file a return, where wilful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due herein, a specific penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be assessed. 
(b)  When any person fails to remit the tax, or any portion thereof, on or before the day when such tax shall be required by law to be paid, there shall be added to the amount due interest at the rate provided for executions from the date until paid. 
(c)  All penalties and interest imposed in this section shall be payable and collectible by the city in the manner as if they were a part of the tax imposed. 
(Ord. of 6-13-95(1), § 4) 
Sec. 62-35. - Disposition of collected revenue. 
All revenues raised pursuant to such excise tax shall be budgeted and applied for the promotion of tourism in the city, and in accordance with applicable provisions of state law. 
(Ord. of 6-13-95(1), § 5) 
Secs. 62-36—62-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GROSS RECEIPTS TAX ON SECONDARY ELECTRIC SUPPLIERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Power to grant franchises or make contract with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7). 

Sec. 62-66. - Imposed; rate; verified statement of revenues to be filed. 
Each secondary electric supplier (including specifically Electric Membership Corporations whether or not operated for profit), within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq., distributing and selling electric power within the city which is not otherwise paying a franchise fee pursuant to a franchise agreement, and whether or not such secondary electric supplier has, operates and maintains offices within the city, shall pay a gross receipts tax at the rate of four percent on any and all gross revenue derived from distribution and sale of electric power to their customers, members or purchasers within the city, according to the verified statement of the gross revenues which shall be submitted by the secondary electric supplier at the time such taxes are paid. This gross receipts business tax is levied pursuant to authority granted the city in 1983 Ga. Laws, page 4710. 
(Ord. No. 4-110, § 1(1), 6-13-95) 
Sec. 62-67. - Taxes payable monthly; taxes to be in lieu of certain other taxes. 
The taxes set out in this article shall be due and payable to the city on the 20th day of each month, calculated on gross revenues billed for the immediately preceding month; also, the percentage of such gross revenues prescribed to be collected shall be in lieu of all other license and business or occupation taxes, but shall not at any time be considered to interfere with, or in any way prevent the collection of, ad valorem taxes upon the property of the secondary electric supplier in the same manner as all other property, real and personal, in the city is taxed. 
(Ord. No. 4-110, § 1(2), 6-13-95) 
Sec. 62-68. - Electric service within the city. 
Secondary electric suppliers distributing and selling electric power within the city, who do not have a franchise agreement with the city, do not acquire any additional rights by the payment of the tax levied under this article other than those rights granted under the Georgia Electric Territorial Service Act. 
(Ord. No. 4-110, § 1(3), 6-13-95) 
Sec. 62-69. - Enforcement and administration of article. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article, and shall have the power to prepare and provide the necessary forms and for the collection of the tax levied in this article. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding and unpaid taxes imposed and assessed by this article. The unpaid taxes and executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due the city. 
(Ord. No. 4-110, § 1(4), 6-13-95) 
Secs. 62-70—62-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRIC UTILITY FRANCHISE FEE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Power to grant franchises or make contract with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7). 

Sec. 62-101. - Use of streets, alleys and public places by franchisee. 
The authority, right, permission and consent are hereby granted to Three Notch Electric Membership Corporation, its successors, lessees and assigns (the company), subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this article for a period of 35 years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city within the present and future limits of the city as from time to time the company may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for light, heat, power and other purposes for which electric current may be or become useful or practicable for public or private use, and to reenter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as the company may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of the company, to ensure safe and efficient service. 
(Ord. of 6-13-95(2)) 
Sec. 62-102. - Franchise fees required to be paid for continued use of streets, alleys and public places. 
From and after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives, the future use by Three Notch Electric Membership Corporation of the streets, alleys, public places and other property of the city for the operation of Three Notch Electric Membership Corporation's electric distribution systems, and the grant of the requisite street franchise rights, is expressly conditioned upon payment of franchise fees pursuant to this article, and continued use and occupancy of such city property for such purpose without payment of such franchise fees shall be unlawful. The city shall be entitled to enforce compliance with this article, and continued use and occupancy of such city property for such purpose without payment of such franchise fees shall be unlawful. The city shall be entitled to enforce compliance with this article by appropriate proceeding at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 6-13-95(2)) 
Sec. 62-103. - Levy; rate. 
The company shall pay to the city on or before March 1, 1995, a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to all of the company's customers served within the corporate limits of the city during the period beginning May 1, 1995, through and including December 31, 1995, and on or before March 1, 1996, and the same day of each year thereafter during the term of the franchise granted in this article a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to all of the company's customers served within the corporate limits of the city during the preceding calendar year; provided, however, that, if the city shall grant to any other electric utility the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those contained in this article, including the payment provisions in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-13-95(2), § 1) 
Sec. 62-104. - Reduction of tax amount due from gross sales. 
The amount, if any, of any tax, fee, charge or imposition of any kind required, demanded or exacted by the city on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of home appliances, shall operate to reduce to the extent of such tax, fee, charge or imposition the amount due from the percentage of gross sales as provided in section 62-103. 
(Ord. of 6-13-95(2), § 2) 
Sec. 62-105. - Indemnification of city by company. 
The company shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless the city from all damages to person or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or extension of poles, wires or other apparatus, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting therefrom, for which the city would otherwise be liable. 
(Ord. of 6-13-95(2), § 3) 
Sec. 62-106. - Company subject to police powers of city in maintaining, operating or extending poles, wires or other apparatus; limitation on such powers. 
The company shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending its poles, wires and other apparatus, submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power by the city and shall be responsible for the removal and relocation of its poles, wires and other apparatus located within the right-of-way of the city, if required by the city, with all costs and expenses for the removal being paid by the company. Nothing contained in this section, however, shall require the company to surrender or limit its property rights created hereby without due process of law, including adequate compensation, for any other purpose at the instance of the city or for any purpose at the instance of any other entity, private or governmental. 
(Ord. of 6-13-95(2), § 4) 
Sec. 62-107. - Rights, permission and consents granted to company conditioned on payment of sums due city. 
The grant of the rights, permission and consents by the city to the company contained in this article are specifically conditioned upon the payment of all sums due the city in accordance with the rate, conditions and payment dates set forth in section 62-103, and failure by the company to timely pay the franchise fees required by section 62-103 shall constitute a forfeiture of all rights granted by this article. From and after May 1, 1995, the company's continued use and occupancy of the streets, alleys and public places of the city for the purposes enumerated in section 62-101 shall evidence the company's acceptance of the franchise granted hereby and shall render the company liable for payment of all fees required by section 62-103. In the event of a forfeiture for failure to comply with such requirements, the company shall nevertheless remain liable for all sums accrued until such time as the streets are vacated due to such forfeiture. 
(Ord. of 6-13-95(2), § 5) 
Secs. 62-108—62-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The exemption of all allowable classes of tangible personal property from ad valorem taxation as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2 was approved by referendum held November 21, 1989. 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 

Sec. 62-141. - Granted upon filing proper forms before due date. 
One hundred percent of the value of class one, 100 percent of the value of class two and 100 percent of the value of class three of tangible personal property set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2 are exempted from taxation, provided that the person seeking this exemption shall file a written application and schedule of property with the city treasurer on forms to be furnished by the city treasurer by April 1 in the year in which the exemption from taxation is sought. 
Secs. 62-142—62-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 62-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts means the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized as follows during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax imposed by this article is due. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-172. - Imposed; rate. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is hereby levied for each year, an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institutions pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
Sec. 62-173. - Calculation of gross receipts for financial institutions; enumeration of items to be included. 
(a)  Banks. Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are as follows: 
(1)  Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
(2)  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions; 
(3)  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements of resale; 
(4)  Interest on other bonds, notes and debentures, excluding interest on obligations in the state or its political subdivisions and obligations on the United States; 
(5)  Dividends on stocks; 
(6)  Income from direct lease financing; 
(7)  Income from fiduciary activities; 
(8)  Service charges, commissions, and fees; and 
(9)  Other income. 
(b)  Savings and loan associations. Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: 
(1)  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold in service for others; 
(2)  Interest on mortgages, participations or mortgage-backed securities; 
(3)  Interest on real estate sold on contract; 
(4)  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased; 
(5)  Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
(6)  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits; 
(7)  Loan fees; 
(8)  Loan servicing fees; 
(9)  Other fees and charges; 
(10)  Gross income from real estate owned operations; 
(11)  Net income from office building operations; 
(12)  Gross income from real estate held for investment; 
(13)  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries; 
(14)  Miscellaneous operating income; 
(15)  Profit on sale of real estate owned, investment securities, loans, and other assets; and 
(16)  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. 
(c)  Deductions from gross receipts. The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of this section: 
(1)  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period; 
(2)  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 7-1-730 et seq.; 
(3)  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions; 
(4)  An amount equal to a depository financial institution's gross income which is taxed under the tax laws of a state other than Georgia; and 
(5)  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections (c)(2), (c)(3) and (c)(4) of this section, any deductions taken under subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subsections (c)(2)—(c)(4) of this section bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (c)(1)—(c)(4) of this section. 
Sec. 62-174. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1, 1984, and April 1 of each subsequent year. 
Chapter 64 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 64-1—64-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FRANCHISES AND LICENSES 

Sec. 64-31. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
Affiliated person means each person who falls into one or more of the following categories: (1) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; (2) each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (3) each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicant; and (4) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the applicant; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant. 
Cable services means cable services as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system means any cable system as defined in the Cable Act. 
City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
Control or controlling interest means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the applicant or the telecommunications system in the streets. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than five percent of any person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one person or group of persons. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to: (a) furnish, supply and distribute telecommunications services to any locations or persons in the franchise or license area; (b) provide private telecommunications services along licensed routes pursuant to a license; or (c) transport telecommunications services across the city along licensed routes pursuant to a license without terminating or originating any telecommunications services at or from any person or location in the city. 
Ordinance means this article and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Private telecommunications services means the transmission of telecommunications by a person, regardless of the facilities used, for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person, and shall not mean cable services. 
Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in section 64-32(b). 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications means telecommunications as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. 
Telecommunications service means telecommunications service as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "telecommunications service" shall mean telecommunications service as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Telecommunications system means the system in the franchise or license area over which telecommunications service or private telecommunications service is provided, and to be constructed, operated and maintained by a grantee pursuant to a franchise or license ordinance or agreement. 
(Ord. of 12-4-00(2), § 1.1) 
Sec. 64-32. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications services or private telecommunications services or operate a telecommunications system without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city intends to exercise its authority to franchise or license persons pursuant to this article to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, including the 1996 Act. 
(b)  A person shall not use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications services or operate a telecommunications system without a franchise, except that such person may use or occupy specific streets without a franchise if the person obtains a revocable license in accordance with the terms of this article. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets and: (a) may be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is for the sole purpose of providing private telecommunications services; or (b) shall be granted to provide telecommunications services only if the use or occupation of such streets, together with the use or occupation of any streets pursuant to revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed 500 linear feet; or (c) shall be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is by a telecommunications system that is not used by the grantee or any other person to sell, resell or otherwise provide telecommunications services to any person in the city. In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a person to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in this subsection (b), then such person must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this article, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. 
(c)  The city council may grant one or more franchises or revocable licenses in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. 
(d)  The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(e)  Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises or revocable licenses as it deems appropriate, and/or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. 
(f)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. A revocable license may only be granted for use of specifically identified streets. 
(h)  The grant of franchises and revocable licenses to persons providing telecommunications services by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the 1996 Act, as amended, governing telecommunications franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-4-00(2), § 2.1) 
Sec. 64-33. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise or revocable license shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity; 
d.  For purposes of determining whether an applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain the telecommunications system in a safe manner and in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law, a detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for any conclusions by such lending institution or funding source regarding the applicant's financial ability to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system in the city; and 
e.  For purposes of determining whether the applicant will construct, maintain, operate, and repair the telecommunications system in compliance with the policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and in a manner protective of the public health, safety and welfare, the names and addresses for telecommunications systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiaries, and the areas served by such systems; 
(3)  In order to permit the city to manage its streets, a detailed description of the proposed plan of construction and maintenance of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
b.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the proposed and actual location of facilities and equipment to be used in the streets by the applicant; and 
c.  For purposes of assisting the city in determining whether the telecommunications system will be constructed in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets, a detailed statement setting forth the provisions in any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to such person, firm, or corporation constructing, or assisting the applicant with the construction of, the telecommunications system in the streets; and 
(4)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law. 
(c)  Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises and revocable licenses. No application for a new franchise or revocable license shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise or revocable license is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded, except if required by law. 
(1)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(2)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant for a franchise must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $1,500.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city, and each applicant for a revocable license must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $1,500.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. In the event the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. In the event the city's reasonable costs are less than the application amount, the city may reimburse to the applicant the amount in excess of the city's actual cost if required by applicable law. 
(Ord. of 12-4-00(2), § 2.2) 
Sec. 64-34. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 12-4-00(2), § 2.3) 
Sec. 64-35. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises or revocable licenses, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. of 12-4-00(2), § 2.4) 
Sec. 64-36. - Evaluation criteria. 
An applicant shall be granted a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services, provided the city council reasonably determines that the applicant has agreed to or meets the following factors and such terms, conditions and other factors as the city council deems appropriate and not prohibited by applicable law: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any in-kind facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The financial and technical ability of the applicant to construct and maintain a telecommunications system in the streets, and a certificate of public convenience or other authorization from the state or federal communications commission permitting the applicant to provide telecommunications services in the city; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise, the public health, safety and welfare, and the city's management of streets; and 
(5)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services and in accordance with applicable law, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation, the foregoing factors to the extent applicable. 
(Ord. of 12-4-00(2), § 2.5) 
Sec. 64-37. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises or revocable licenses, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  After considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council shall consider the application for a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services in accordance with this article and applicable law, including 47 U.S.C. § 253, and shall grant the franchise or revocable license, provided that the applicant has agreed to the terms on which the franchise or revocable license is to be granted and meets the evaluation criteria set forth in section 64-36. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby or that such waiver is required by applicable law. 
(e)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the revocable license to provide private telecommunications services, and may specify the conditions under which the revocable license is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby. 
(Ord. of 12-4-00(2), § 2.6) 
Sec. 64-38. - Terms and conditions of franchise and revocable license. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise or revocable license granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or revocable license or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects, to the extent not prohibited by law: 
(1)  The term of the franchise or revocable license, provided, however, that the initial term of the revocable license shall not exceed five years and shall not be renewed for terms exceeding five years; 
(2)  The franchise area under the franchise, or the streets that may be used pursuant to the revocable license; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise or revocable license may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise or revocable license; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
(8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight of the grantee by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise or revocable license without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise or revocable license; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise or revocable license; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise or revocable license; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
(Ord. of 12-4-00(2), § 2.7) 
Sec. 64-39. - Revocation of revocable license. 
The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause or, if the revocable license is for the provision of private telecommunications services, for the city's convenience. The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than 500 linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services by the grantee, any affiliated persons or any other persons to or from any person or location in the city. 
(Ord. of 12-4-00(2), § 2.8) 
Sec. 64-40. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this article to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this article or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or revocable license or grantee. The city council may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-4-00(2), § 3.2) 
Sec. 64-41. - Application to existing telecommunications systems and providers of telecommunications services and private telecommunications services. 
This article shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for the operation of telecommunications systems or to provide telecommunications services existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(Ord. of 12-4-00(2), § 3.3) 
Secs. 64-42—64-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CABLE CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS 

Sec. 64-71. - Applicability. 
The cable company ("cable operator") shall be subject to the following customer service standards. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to preclude the company from adopting customer service standards that exceed the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-14-00) 
Sec. 64-72. - Definitions. 
When used in this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section: 
Normal business hours means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the communications system. 
Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
(Ord. of 11-14-00) 
Sec. 64-73. - Office hours and telephone availability. 
(a)  The cable operator will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(1)  Trained company representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
(2)  After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
(b)  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(c)  The operator will not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. 
(d)  Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. 
(e)  Bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located in the county in which the franchising authority is located. 
(Ord. of 11-14-00) 
Sec. 64-74. - Installations, outage correction and customer service calls. 
Under normal operating conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than 95 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
(1)  Standard installations will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed. "Standard" installations are those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system. 
(2)  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, the cable operator will begin working on "service interruptions" promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The cable operator must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
(3)  The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. (The operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.) 
(4)  An operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
(5)  If a cable operator representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
(6)  The cable operator's failure to correct outages or to make repairs within the stated time periods shall be excused in the following circumstances: 
a.  If the cable operator could not obtain access to the customer's premises; or 
b.  If the franchising authority, acting reasonably, agrees with the cable operator that correcting such outages or making such repairs was not reasonably possible within the allotted time period. 
(Ord. of 11-14-00) 
Sec. 64-75. - Customer communications, notices and billing. 
(a)  Notifications to subscribers. 
(1)  The cable operator shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
a.  Products and services offered; 
b.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
c.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
d.  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
e.  Channel positions programming carried on the system; and 
f.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the local franchise authority's cable office. 
(2)  Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible using any reasonable means at the company's sole discretion. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the cable operator. In addition, the cable operator shall notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by the preceding paragraph. 
(b)  Billing. 
(1)  Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
(2)  In case of a billing dispute, the cable operator must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
(c)  Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either: 
(1)  The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or 
(2)  The return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated. 
(d)  Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(Ord. of 11-14-00) 
Sec. 64-76. - Customer complaints. 
(a)  Definition. A "complaint" shall mean any written communication by a subscriber or oral communication by a subscriber reduced to writing, including to a computer form, expressing dissatisfaction with any non-programming aspect of the cable operator's business or operation of the system. 
(b)  Referral of complaints from the franchising authority to the company. 
(1)  If the franchising authority is contacted directly about a complaint concerning the cable operator, the franchising authority shall notify the company. 
(2)  Within seven business days after being notified about the complaint, the company shall issue to the franchising authority a report detailing the investigation thoroughly, describing the findings, explaining any corrective steps which are being taken and indicating that the person who registered the complaint has been notified of the resolution. 
(c)  Complaint records. The cable operator shall maintain complaint records, which shall record the date a complaint is received, the name and address of the affected subscriber, a description of the complaint, the date of the resolution, a description of the resolution and an indication of whether the resolution was appealed. 
(Ord. of 11-14-00) 
Sec. 64-77. - Credits. 
As a result of the cable operator's failure to comply with these customer service standards, the cable operator shall provide to each affected subscriber or potential subscriber, as applicable, the following credits: 
(1)  For a failure of the cable operator's crew to arrive at the subscriber's premises within the promised period for any installation service, a credit equal to free installation; 
(2)  For a failure of the cable operator to complete installation of service within the scheduled time period, unless otherwise excused, a credit equal to free installation; 
(3)  For a "service interruption" as defined herein or for any other service problem which remains unrepaired for more than 48 hours after either the cable operator receives from the subscriber a request for repair service (provided that, to the extent access to the subscriber's premises is required to effect such repair, the subscriber has granted the cable operator such access) or the cable operator learns of such problem, upon subscriber request a minimum credit in an amount equal to one-thirtieth times the total bill for cable services of such subscriber for the preceding billing period, for each 24-hour period during which such reception problem persists for at least four hours; 
(4)  For a failure of the cable operator's crew to arrive to correct any outage or make any repair during the stated time period, (except where such failure is excused or except where such crew is no longer required due to a repair effected in a nearby portion of the system, in which case the subscriber shall be notified by telephone that a visit to such subscriber's residence is no longer necessary), a credit in an amount equal to the total number of days such subscriber does not have service; and 
(5)  For the improper termination of service to a subscriber, free reconnection and a credit in an amount equal to all charges billed to such subscriber for the period such subscriber does not have service. 
(Ord. of 11-14-00) 
Sec. 64-78. - Failure to comply with these requirements. 
(a)  Material requirements. Subject to the due process procedures set forth in section 9 of the franchise agreement, the company agrees that substantial failure to comply with any material requirement set forth in these customer service standards shall constitute a failure to comply with a material provision of the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Liability for contractors'/subcontractors' failure to comply. If the company fails to take reasonable steps to ensure that its contractors, subcontractors or agents abide by these customer service standards, the company shall be liable for any breach of these customer service standards committed by its contractors, subcontractors, or agents just as if the company itself had committed the breach. 
(Ord. of 11-14-00) 
Chapter 66 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 30; junked motor vehicles, § 34-141 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; parades and demonstrations, § 54-101 et seq. 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; Handicapped Parking Law, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq.; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); sirens, whistles and bells prohibited on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70(b); responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197; traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM RULES OF THE ROAD 

Sec. 66-31. - Uniform rules of the road adopted; violations and penalty. 
(a)  The provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the uniform rules of the road adopted by this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11. 
Secs. 66-32—66-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED ZONES 

Sec. 66-61. - Enumeration of zones. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183 concerning local authorities power to alter lawful speed limits, the following speed zones are hereby established, based on an engineering and traffic investigation as is prescribed by law: 
(1)  On-system. The on-system zone is as follows: 
SR 1 (US 27) from a point 4,329 feet north of CR 48 (Colquitt south city limits, M.L. 6.46) to a point 350 feet south of Brooks Street (M.L. 7.20), a distance of 0.74 mile, to be zoned 55 mph. 
SR 1 (US 27) from a point 350 feet south of Brooks Street (M.L. 7.20), to a point 400 feet north of SR 310 (M.L. 7.70), a distance of 0.50 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
SR 1 (US 27) from a point 400 feet north of SR 310 (M.L. 7.70), to a point 70 feet south of Virginia Street (M.L. 8.71), a distance of 1.01 miles, to be zoned 35 mph. 
SR 1 (US 27) from a point 70 feet south of Virginia Street (M.L. 8.71), to a point 1,500 feet north of Virginia Street (M.L. 9.18), a distance of 0.47 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
SR 1 (US 27) from a point 1,500 feet north of Virginia Street (M.L. 9.18), to a point 158 feet northwest of City Street 543/Colquitt north city limits (M.L. 9.86), a distance of 0.68 mile, to be zoned 55 mph. 
SR 45 from a point 3,009 feet north of CR 56 (Colquitt south city limits, M.L. 6.26), to SR 1 (M.L. 7.76), a distance of 1.50 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
SR 45: This segment of roadway runs common with SR 1/US 27: 
SR 45 from Crawford Street (M.L. 8.98), to Miller Street (M.L. 9.70), a distance of 0.54 mile, to be zoned 35 mph. 
SR 45 from Miller Street (M.L. 9.70), to Perry Street (M.L. 10.21), a distance of 0.51 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
SR 45 from Perry Street (M.L. 10.21), to a point 2,006 feet north of Perry Street (Colquitt north city limits, M.L. 10.57), a distance of 0.36 mile, to be zoned 55 mph. 
SR 45 from a point 2,006 feet north of Perry Street (Colquitt north city limits, M.L. 10.57), to Early County line (M.L. 14.84), a distance of 4.27 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
SR 91 from a point 634 feet north of County Road 97 (Colquitt city limits, M.L. 10.20), to SR 45 (M.L. 10.36), a distance of 0.16 mile, to be zoned 55 mph. 
SR 91: This segment of roadway runs common with SR 1/US 27: 
SR 91 from SR 45 (M.L. 11.95), to SR 91 Spur (M.L. 12.49), a distance of 0.54 mile, to be zoned 35 mph. 
SR 91 from SR 91 Spur (M.L. 12.49), to a point 70 feet east of Phillips Road (CS 541) (M.L. 12.94), a distance of 0.45 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
SR 91 School Zone (from Miller County Elementary, 7:45 to 8:30 a.m., 2:45 to 3:15 p.m. school days only), from a point 100 feet west of Third Street (M.L. 12.26), to a point 215 feet east of Kirk Street (M.L. 12.39), a distance of 0.13 mile, to be zoned 25 mph. 
SR 91 from a point 70 feet east of Phillips Road (CS 541) (M.L. 12.94), to a point 2,218 feet east of Phillips Road (CS 541) east city limits (M.L. 13.36), a distance of 0.42 mile, to be zoned 55 mph. 
SR 91 Spur from SR 1 (M.L. 0.00), to SR 91 (M.L. 0.32), a distance of 0.32 mile, to be zoned 35 mph. 
SR 310 from 0.35 mile north of C.R. 207 (Colquitt south city limits, M.L. 5.93), to First Street (M.L. 6.91), a distance of 0.98 mile, to be zoned 55 mph. 
SR 310 from First Street (M.L. 6.91), to SR 1 (M.L. 7.35), a distance of 0.44 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
Signs shall be erected by the state department of transportation. 
(2)  Off-system. The off-system zone is as follows: 
Bellview Road from Thompsontown Road to a point 2,800 feet east of Thompsontown Road (city limits), a distance of 0.55 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
Bremond Street from First Street to Bush Street, a distance of 0.56 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
Bush Street from SR 1 to Cuthbert Street, a distance of 0.55 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
College Street from SR 1 to SR 45, a distance of 0.45 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
Cuthbert Street from SR 45 to SR 91 (Main Street), a distance of 0.93 mile, to be zoned 35 mph. 
Cuthbert Street from Sexton Street to SR 1, a distance of 0.33 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
Dancer Street from Phillipsburg Road to Fourth Street, a distance of 0.20 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
Delores Street from Pine Street to Miller Street, a distance of 0.33 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
First Street from SR 1 to SR 310, a distance of 0.43 mile, to be zoned 35 mph. 
Fourth Street from Phillipsburg Road to SR 91, a distance of 0.65 mile, to be zoned 35 mph. 
Fourth Street from Phillipsburg Road to Perry Street, a distance of 0.59 mile, to be zoned 40 mph. 
Geer Street from Delores Street to Second Street, a distance of 0.44 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
Grace Street from Miller Street to Geer Street, a distance of 0.21 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
Myrtice Street from Perry Street to Phillipsburg Road, a distance of 0.25 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
Perry Street from SR 45 to Phillipsburg Road, a distance of 1.0 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
Perry Street School Zone (from Miller County High School and Middle School, 7:30 to 8:30 a.m., 2:30 to 3:15 p.m. school days only), from a point 2,429 feet east of SR 45 to a point 3,529 feet east of SR 45, a distance of 0.20 mile, to be zoned 35 mph. 
Phillips Road from SR 91 to Jones Road, a distance of 1.02 miles, to be zoned 35 mph. 
Phillipsburg Road from SR 45 to Milford Street, a distance of 0.24 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
Phillipsburg Road from Milford Street to Fourth Street, a distance of 0.60 mile, to be zoned 35 mph. 
Phillipsburg Road from Fourth Street to Perry Street, a distance of 0.54 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
Phillipsburg Road from Perry Street to Cooktown Road, a distance of 0.75 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
Phillipsburg Road from Cooktown Road to a point 1,155 feet south of Keaton Road (CR 138), a distance of 2.0 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
Pine Street from West Street to Phillips Road, a distance of 1.26 miles, to be zoned 35 mph. 
Reed Street from Phillipsburg Road to SR 45, a distance of 0.29 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
Second Street from Dancer Street to College Street, a distance of 0.46 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
Smiley Street from SR 91 to Thompsontown Road, a distance of 0.26 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
Third Street from Bush Street to Pine Street, a distance of 0.46 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
Thompsontown Road from Brooks Street to a point 2,900 feet south of Brooks Street (city limits), a distance of 0.55 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
Twilight Church Road from SR 45 to a point 3,907 feet southeast of SR 45 (city limits), a distance of 0.74 mile, to be zoned 55 mph. 
West Street from SR 1 to Pine Street, a distance of 0.28 mile, to be zoned 30 mph. 
Signs to be installed by the city. 
(Ord. of 3-13-90; Ord. of 5-8-01) 
Chapter 70 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 34; water conservation, § 34-181 et seq.; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility, § 46-2; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 58; gross receipts tax on secondary electric supplies, § 62-66 et seq.; electric utility franchise fee, § 62-101 et seq.; trees and shrubs near utilities, § 74-36. 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; limitation on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; authority to provide for the development, storage and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER WELLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; waterwell standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq. 

Sec. 70-31. - Permit required; application. 
Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity desiring to dig a well within the city shall make application and show the following facts: 
(1)  The name of the applicant. 
(2)  The exact location of the proposed well. 
(3)  The size of the well. 
(4)  The depth of the well. 
(5)  The length of the casing to be used in connection with such well. 
(6)  The purpose for which the water from such well is to be used. 
(7)  The maximum amount of water to be obtained from the well. 
(8)  The aquifer from which the water is to be obtained. 
(9)  Safeguards to be installed which would prohibit the contamination of the aquifer from surface waters. 
(10)  An opinion from a geologist, expert in the field, that the drilling and the proposed use of the well will not interfere with the public water supply of the city, nor would it tend to contaminate the water supply of the city, nor would it tend to add dissolved iron to the supply of the water for the city. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 1) 
Sec. 70-32. - Permit application fee. 
Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee in the sum set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, to be used by the city to verify the facts contained in the application. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 2) 
Sec. 70-33. - Conditions resulting in denial of permit. 
The drilling of no well will be permitted which would, in the opinion of geologists, expert in the field, tend to reduce the public water supply of the city or endanger the water supply through contamination, or add dissolved iron to the water supply. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 3) 
Sec. 70-34. - Issuance of permission to drill subject to inspection; certificate of compliance to be issued by driller. 
If the application for the drilling of a well is favorably acted upon by the city, it will be drilled subject to inspection by the city, and a log of such well will be maintained by the driller, and a copy thereof furnished to the city. At the completion of the drilling and the installation of the pump, the driller of the well will supply to the city a certificate, under oath, that the well was drilled in compliance with the application. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 4) 
Sec. 70-35. - Analyses of water; monthly fee. 
On the first day that the well is used, a supply of one gallon of water from the well will be furnished to the city, and a further supply of one gallon on the same day of each month thereafter will be furnished to the city so that the proper analyses may be run on the water supply. In addition thereto, the property shall be physically inspected by the city, and a monthly fee set forth in the schedule of fees and charges will be charged in connection therewith. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 5) 
Sec. 70-36. - Shutting down due to contaminating effects. 
If, from the monthly inspection, an analysis of the well and the water obtained therefrom or if, from any other source, it is determined that the well and its operation are contaminating the aquifer from which the water is obtained; or if it is determined that the well and its operation are causing an increase in the iron content of the public water supply of the city, the well shall be immediately shut down and not used thereafter. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 6) 
Sec. 70-37. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity convicted of violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 2-12-74, § 7) 
Secs. 70-38—70-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 70-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Damage means the substantial weakening of structural or lateral support of an underground utility; penetration or destruction of any protective coating, housing or other protective device of an underground utility; and the partial or complete severance of an underground utility. 
Demolish or demolition means any operation by which a structure or mass of material is wrecked, razed, rendered, moved or removed by means of any tools, equipment or discharge of explosives. 
Excavate or excavation means an operation for the purpose of the movement or removal of earth, rock or other materials in or on the ground by use of mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives, and including augering, backfilling, digging, ditching, drilling, grading, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling, but not including the tilling of soil for agricultural purposes. 
Mechanized equipment means equipment operated by means of mechanical power including trenchers, bulldozers, power shovels, augers, backhoes, scrapers, drills, cable and pipe plows and other equipment used for plowing-in or pulling-in cable or pipe. 
Operator means any city or utility commission who owns or operates a utility. 
Person means any individual; any corporation, partnership, association or any other entity organized under the laws of any state; any state; any subdivision or instrumentality of a state; and any employee, agent or legal representative thereof. 
Utility means any line, system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting or distributing communication, electricity, gas petroleum, petroleum products, hazardous liquids, water, steam or sewage. 
Working day means every day except Saturday, Sunday and national and legal state holidays. 
(Ord. of 5-10-83, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-72. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such violation. This article does not affect any civil remedies for personal injury or property (including underground utilities) damage, except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-83, § 10) 
Sec. 70-73. - Excavation and demolition permits. 
A permit issued pursuant to law authorizing excavation or demolition operations shall not be deemed to relieve a person from the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-83, § 3) 
Sec. 70-74. - Prohibited acts. 
Except as provided in section 70-77, no person may excavate in a street, highway, public space, a private easement of an operator or near the location of a utility installed on the premises of a customer served by such utility, or demolish a building without having first ascertained in the manner prescribed in sections 70-75 and 70-76 the location of all underground utilities in the area that would be affected by the proposed excavation or demolition. Each operator shall maintain a list of all underground utilities and plants or maps showing their location. 
(Ord. of 5-10-83, § 4) 
Sec. 70-75. - Notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 70-77, before commencing any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 70-74, each person responsible for such excavation or demolition shall serve written or telephonic notice of intent to excavate or demolish at least three, but not more than ten, full working days on each operator which has a list required by section 70-74 indicating that it has underground utilities located in the proposed area of excavation or demolition. Where demolition of a building is proposed, operators shall be given reasonable time to remove or protect their utilities before demolition of the building is commenced. 
(b)  The written or telephonic notice required by subsection (a) of this section must contain the name, address and telephone number of the person filing the notice of intent, and, if different, the person responsible for the excavation or demolition, the starting date, anticipated duration and type of excavation or demolition operation to be conducted, the location of the proposed excavation or demolition, and whether or not explosives are to be used. 
(c)  If the notification required by this section is made by telephone, an adequate record of such notification shall be maintained by the operators notified to document compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-83, § 5) 
Sec. 70-76. - Response to notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
Each operator or designated representative notified in accordance with section 70-75 shall, not less than two working days in advance of the proposed excavation or demolition (unless a shorter period is provided by agreement between the person responsible for the excavation or demolition and the operator or designated representative), supply, by use of maps when appropriate, the following information to the person responsible for the excavation or demolition: 
(1)  The approximate location and description of all of its underground utilities which may be damaged as a result of the excavation or demolition; 
(2)  The location and description of all utility markers and indicating the approximate location of the underground utilities; and 
(3)  Any other information that would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utilities, including providing adequate temporary markings indicating the approximate location of the underground utility in locations where permanent utility markers do not exist. 
For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utilities is defined as a strip of land at least three feet wide, but not wider than the width of the utility plus 1½ feet on either side of the utility. 
(Ord. of 5-10-83, § 6) 
Sec. 70-77. - Emergency excavation or demolition. 
Compliance with the notice requirements of section 70-75 is not required of persons responsible for emergency excavation or demolition to ameliorate an imminent danger to life, health or property; provided, however, that such persons give, as soon as practicable, oral notice of the emergency excavation or demolition to each operator having underground utilities located in the area where such excavation or demolition is to be performed and request emergency assistance from each operator so identified in locating and providing immediate protection to its underground utilities. An imminent danger to life, health or property exists whenever there is a substantial likelihood that loss of life, health or property will result before the procedures under sections 70-75 and 70-76 can be fully complied with. 
(Ord. of 5-10-83, § 7) 
Sec. 70-78. - Precautions to avoid damage. 
In addition to the notification requirements of section 70-75, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 70-74 shall: 
(1)  Plan the excavation or demolition to avoid damage to or minimize interference with underground utilities in and near the construction area; 
(2)  Maintain a clearance between an underground utility and the cutting edge or point of any mechanized equipment, taking into account the known limit of control of such cutting edge or point, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to such utility; and 
(3)  Provide such support for underground utilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such utilities. 
(Ord. of 5-10-83, § 8) 
Sec. 70-79. - Excavation or demolition damage. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 70-74 that results in any damage to an underground utility shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator of such utility of the location and nature of the damage, and shall allow the operator reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation or demolition in the immediate area of such utility. 
(b)  Each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 70-74 that results in damage to an underground utility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator, police and fire departments, and take any other action as may be reasonably necessary to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until arrival of the operator's personnel or police and fire departments. 
(Ord. of 5-10-83, § 9) 
Secs. 70-80—70-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER RATES AND SERVICES REGULATION 

Sec. 70-111. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The water and sewer rate schedules and service rules and regulations ordinance adopted August 13, 1991, is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 70-112—70-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 70-141. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Sections 21-201 through 21-108 of the 1976 Code on the subject of sanitary sewerage are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Chapter 74 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 58. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways within the city. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-32. - Street tree species to be planted. 
The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the city. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the city tree board. 

 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 7) 
Sec. 74-33. - Spacing. 
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 74-32, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 8) 
Sec. 74-34. - Distance from curb and sidewalk. 
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 74-32, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees, four feet. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 9) 
Sec. 74-35. - Distance from street corner and fireplugs. 
No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fireplug. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 10) 
Sec. 74-36. - Planting distance from utilities. 
No street trees, other than those species listed as small trees in section 74-32 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 11) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 70. 
Sec. 74-37. - Public tree care. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(b)  The city tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners, providing that the selection and location of such trees is in accordance with sections 74-32 and 74-36. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 12) 
Sec. 74-38. - Tree topping. 
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this article at the determination of the city tree board. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 13) 
Sec. 74-39. - Pruning; corner clearance. 
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection, and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Such owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 14) 
Sec. 74-40. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city tree board will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by such owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owners' property tax notice. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 15) 
Sec. 74-41. - Removal of stumps. 
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 16) 
Sec. 74-42. - Arborists license and bond. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall be an annual amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, in advance; provided, however, that no license shall be required of any public service company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file a cash bond of $500.00 with the city clerk to ensure the company removes all debris. Upon removing all debris, as approved by the city, and completion of all work to be performed, the bond shall be refunded. If all debris is not removed, the bond shall be paid to the city for the cost of removal of all debris. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 18) 
Sec. 74-43. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 20) 
Secs. 74-44—74-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-106 et seq. 

Sec. 74-66. - Creation and establishment. 
There is hereby created and established a city tree board for the city which shall consist of five members, citizens and residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 2) 
Sec. 74-67. - Terms of office. 
The term of the five persons to be appointed shall be three years except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one year, and the term of two members of the first board shall be for two years. If a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 3) 
Sec. 74-68. - Compensation. 
Members of the tree board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 4) 
Sec. 74-69. - Duties and responsibilities. 
It shall be the responsibility of the tree board to study, investigate, council and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the city council and, upon their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city. The tree board, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 5) 
Sec. 74-70. - Operation. 
The tree board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 6) 
Sec. 74-71. - Interference with. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street trees, park trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 17) 
Sec. 74-72. - Review of actions and decisions by city council. 
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the city tree board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the city tree board to the city council who may hear the matter and make a final decision. 
(Ord. of 12-13-94, § 19) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the zoning ordinance of the city, as adopted by the city council on August 13, 2010. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-7(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60; authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE I - SHORT TITLE 
This Ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Colquitt. 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "building" includes "structures", the word "may" is permissive and the word "shall" is mandatory. 
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building or structure on the same lot, or part of the main building, occupied by or devoted exclusively to an accessory use. 
ACCESSORY USE: A use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use. 
ADULT CARE FACILITY: Personal care and supervision in a protective setting for adults outside their own home for which a fee is charged. The program may include the provisions of daily medical supervision, nursing and other health care support, psycho-social assistance, or appropriate socialization stimuli or a combination of these. Adult care is available for those persons who, because of physical and/or mental disability, are not capable of full time independent living. 
AGRICULTURE OR AGRICULTURAL: The bona fide use of a parcel of land for forestry, the cultivation of land, raising of crops, or the raising of livestock, animals, poultry, honeybees, aqua culture or similar agrarian activity and the related building structures and appurtenances necessary to carry out the aforementioned activities. 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY: Agricultural practices involving the breeding, hatching, raising, producing, feeding, keeping, slaughtering or processing of poultry or livestock normally raised for food for commercial purposes and facilities for the production, processing or packaging of eggs or egg products. 
ANTIQUE STORE: A retail business that buys and sells second hand items that are generally considered of value due to the age of the item. 
ANTIQUE MALL: A permanently established retail business that not only buys and sells second hand collectable items, but also rents tables, booths, or spaces within the store, which are subject to sales tax and business licenses, to other persons who want to buy and/or sell second hand collectable items. 
APARTMENT HOUSE: A residential structure containing three (3) or more apartments (independent dwelling units). 
APARTMENT UNIT: One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent, self-contained dwelling unit in building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. 
BED AND BREAKFASTS: Overnight accommodations and a morning meal in dwelling unit provided to transients for compensation. Bed and breakfasts (B&B) accommodations differ from rooming and boarding houses in that they are truly transient accommodations, with guests rarely staying more than a few days. In addition, the owner almost always lives in the facility. The impact of a B&B should not be much greater than that of a private home with frequent house guests, with the exception of parking demand. 
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling where meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for compensation to three (3) or more persons by pre-arrangement for definite periods. A boarding house is to be distinguished from a hotel, motel or a nursing home. 
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the primary or predominant use of any lot. 
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the curb level to the highest point of the roof surface, if a flat roof; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. 
CARETAKER OR EMPLOYEE RESIDENCE: An accessory residence located inside or addition to the principal structure or use of a parcel of land. Said residence must be occupied by a bona fide caretaker or the owner himself/herself as necessary to the property's orderly operation or safety. Industrialized buildings (modular homes/units) are allowed to serve as a caretaker's residence as long as the industrialized building (modular home/unit) meets the International Building Code Standards. Caretaker or employee residences will be permitted only in AG, I-1 and I-2 districts. 
CARPORT: A roofed structure providing space for parking or storage of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than three (3) sides. 
CEMETERY: A cemetery is an area of land set apart for the sole purpose of the burial of bodies of dead persons or animals and for the erection of customary markers, monuments, and mausoleums. 
CLINIC: A professional office where the services of more than one (1) practitioner can be obtained and where patients are examined and/or treated on an out-patient basis and where no overnight accommodations are provided. 
CLUB OR LODGE: Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association or other established group of persons for religious, social, educational or recreational or other like activities on a regular basis for the benefit of its members and not the general public. 
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A development design technique that concentrates buildings on a part of the site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive features (See also Section VIII). 
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION: A form of development that permits a reduction in lot area and bulk requirements, provided there is no increase in the number of lots permitted under a conventional subdivision or increase in the overall density of development, and the remaining land area is devoted to open space, active recreation, preservation of environmentally sensitive areas, or agriculture. 
COMMISSION: The word "Commission" shall mean the Planning Commission of Colquitt. 
CONDITIONAL USE: A use which within certain districts specified by this ordinance is not permitted as a matter of right but may be permitted within these districts by the City Council after the Planning Commission has (1) reviewed that proposed site plans for the use, its location within the community, its arrangement and design, its relationship to neighboring property and other conditions peculiar to the particular proposal which would determine its desirability or undesirability; (2) has found the proposal not be contrary to the intent of this ordinance; and (3) has recommended the use as specified after a Public Hearing. The criteria for reviewing a conditional use are listed in Section 20.09. 
CONDOMINIUM HOME: A form of ownership of less than the whole of a building or system of buildings under a statute which provides the mechanics and facilities for formal filing and recording of divided interest in real property, whether the division is vertical or horizontal. 
CONVALESCENT HOME: A convalescent home is a home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, wherein two (2) or more persons are cared for. Said home shall conform and qualify for license under State laws. 
CONVENIENCE STORE: A retail business with primary emphasis placed on providing the public with a convenient location to quickly purchase from a wide array of consumable products and services. Generally, the business will: 1) have a building size less than 5,000 square feet; 2) provide off-street parking and/or convenient pedestrian access; and 3) provide the public with extended hours of operations, many being open twenty-four (24) hours, seven (7) days per week. 
DAY CARE FACILITIES: There are three (3) types of day care: 
(a)  Family Day Care Homes - means a private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care fewer than twenty-four (24) hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, three (3) but not more than six (6) children under eighteen (18) years of age who are not related to such persons and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence. 
(b)  Group Day Care Homes - means any place operated by any person(s), partnership, association or corporation wherein are received for pay for group care not less than seven (7) nor more than eighteen (18) children under eighteen (18) years of age for less than twenty-four (24) hours without transfer of legal custody and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the Department of Human Resources. 
(c)  Day Care Centers - means any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group wherein are received for pay for group care, for fewer than twenty-four (24) hours per day without transfer of legal custody, nineteen (19) or more children under eighteen (18) years of age, and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the Department of Human Resources. 
DENSITY: The number of families residing on, or dwelling units developed on an acre of land. As used in this Ordinance, all densities are stated in families per gross acre. 
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS: An establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicle. 
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: A drive-in restaurant or other drive-in establishment serving food and/or drink so developed that its retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle. 
DWELLING, DUPLEX: A building either designed, constructed, altered or used for two adjoining dwelling units that are connected by a common wall and/or of two stories by a common floor. 
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building or portion thereof used or designed as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other. This definition includes three-family houses, four-family houses, and apartment houses, but does not include hotels or motels. 
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY: A building or portion thereof used or designed for use as a residence for a single family. 
EGRESS: An exit. 
FAMILY: One (1) or more persons living together and related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, and occupying a dwelling unit as a single non-profit housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club, boarding house, fraternity or sorority house. A family shall be deemed to include domestic servants, gratuity guests, and not more than three foster or boarded children whose room and board is paid by a recognized child care agency or organization. 
FLEA MARKET: A market at which new and used items are temporarily displayed and sold on rented tables. A flea market may be open or enclosed. 
GARAGE, MECHANICAL: Buildings and premises where the functions and services for the repair and maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, lawn mowers or other motor vehicles may be rendered. A mechanical garage which provides for the storage of vehicles for the purpose of salvaging parts for sale or repair shall be classified as a junk yard. 
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed or used for the storage of not more than three (3) motor driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any premises used for the storage or care of motor driven vehicles, or place where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
GAS STATION/MINI-MART: Any building or other premises, or portion thereof, used for a combination automobile service station and retail sales of food and other items excluding any automotive service or repair areas; including but not limited to the sales of consumable products, rental of video tapes, use of self service hot and cold beverage facilities and microwave ovens by customers for purchased food items. 
GROUP HOME: A facility or dwelling unit housing persons unrelated by blood or marriage and operating as a group family household. A group care facility may include half-way houses; recovery homes; and homes for orphans, foster children, the elderly, battered children and women. It also could include a specialized treatment facility providing less than primary health care. 
GUEST HOUSE: A building or portion thereof used or designed for uses as a residence, specifically as an accessory use to the principal building. 
HALF-WAY HOME: A group home facility which is licensed or supervised by any Federal, State or County health/welfare agency relating to drug abuse problems, offender rehabilitation or similar purposes. 
HARDSHIP MANUFACTURED HOME: The temporary placement of a hardship manufactured home allowable to accommodate families in providing care to a family members by birth or marriage in cases of documented medical infirmity due to age or medical/mental disability. Hardship manufactured homes may be allowed after application is made and a review of the hardship manufactured home criteria outlined in Section 3.18 is reviewed. 
HOME OCCUPATION: Any use conducted entirely within the dwelling and carried on by the immediate family members thereof, which use is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling and does not change the character thereof. (See Section 3.20, Home Occupations) 
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any constructed hard surface that prevents or retards the flow of water into the soil. Examples of impervious surfaces include rooftops, sidewalks, parking lots, patio, and roads or driveways made of asphalt, concrete or gravel. 
INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING (MODULAR HOME/UNIT): A structure or component which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in or at manufacturing facilities and delivered to a building site for fabrication and installation in such assemblies that all parts or processes cannot be inspected except by disassembly, by the City Building Official but in lieu of such inspection bears an insignia, label, or decal issued by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs to certify the unit as to construction and safety standards. NOTE: Industrialized buildings do not include manufactured housing. 
INGRESS: Access or entry. 
JUNK: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed or other use or disposition. 
Junk shall include vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass, building materials, household appliances, brush, wood, and lumber. 
JUNK YARD: Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded goods, materials, machinery or two (2) or more unregistered, inoperable motor vehicles or other type of junk. Note: Buffers are required for junk yards. (See Article III, Section 3.15 Protective Screenings). 
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs, cats, or other domestic as well as non-domestic animals, four (4) months or more old, are kept either permanently or temporarily, for purpose of sale, care, breeding or training for which an income is provided. 
LOFT DWELLINGS: Loft dwellings are defined as residential dwelling units located on any floor other than the ground or street level floor within existing commercial buildings. (See Section 13.03) 
LOT OF RECORD: A lot or parcel of land which has been lawfully recorded by subdivision plat or deed on the public records of the City of Colquitt on or before the date of adoption of this ordinance. 
MANUFACTURED HOME: "Manufactured Home" is a detached single family dwelling unit, designed for long-term occupancy, which has been prefabricated and then transported to its site or to a sales lot usually on its own wheels, and requires only minor work before occupancy such as connection to utilities or to a foundation. Such units are usually fully equipped and furnished. The manufactured home shall bear an insignia issued by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) certifying that the unit is constructed in conformance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standard which came into effect on June 15, 1976. 
MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS: Manufactured Home Park: shall mean a licensed business operation which leases spaces for permanent or for temporary occupancy for periods exceeding thirty (30) days for manufactured homes and, under some conditions, travel trailers. 
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A Manufactured Home Subdivision is defined as at least a five (5) acre site which has been primarily designed for the subdivision of individual lots for manufactured home development. 
MINI-WAREHOUSE: A building(s) that contains varying sizes or individual, compartmentalized and control-access stalls or lockers for storing the excess personal property of an individual or family. No business activities other than the rental of storage units shall be conducted on the premises. 
MOBILE HOME: "Mobile Home" is a dwelling manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, and is transportable in one (1) or more sections. No mobile home may be located within the city limits of Colquitt. 
MODULAR HOME: See definition for industrialized buildings. 
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING: Any structure, including an accessory structure legally existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance which does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance. A structure or building, the size, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to the Zoning Ordinance but that fail by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
NON-CONFORMING USE: A use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
NURSING HOMES: A facility that admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision. It maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care, rehabilitative nursing care, and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the home. It otherwise complies with the rules and regulations contained in Chapter 290-5-8: Nursing Homes (Rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources) as same hereafter may be amended. 
OPEN AIR BUSINESS USES: Open air business uses shall include the following: 
a.  Retail sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground equipment and other home garden supplies and equipment. 
b.  Retail sale of fruit and vegetables. 
c.  Miniature golf, golf driving range, children's amusement park or similar recreation uses. 
d.  Bicycle, trailer, motor vehicles, boats or home equipment sales, service or rental services. 
e.  Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools and similar use. 
f.  Outdoor display and sale of items not suitable for indoor sales. 
PERMITTED USE: Those uses specifically listed in a district which are permitted by right, not to include the non-conforming use or conditional use and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
PERSONAL CARE HOME: A building or group of buildings, a facility, or place in which is provided two (2) or more beds and other facilities and services—including rooms, meals, and personal care for non-family ambulatory adults for which a fee is charged. It otherwise complies with the rules and regulations contained in Chapter 290-5-35: Personal Care Homes (Rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources) as same hereafter may be amended. For the purpose of this Ordinance, Personal Care Homes are classified as follows: 
A.  Family Personal Care Home: A home for adults in a family type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to two (2) through six (6) persons. 
B.  Group Personal Care Home: A home for adult persons in a residence or other type of building(s), non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven (7) through fifteen (15) persons. 
C.  Congregate Personal Care Home: A home for adults which offers care to sixteen (16) or more persons. 
PERSONAL SERVICE: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel, ex. laundry, photographic studios, beauty shops, shoe repair, health clubs, clothing rental, etc. 
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A Planned Unit Development is a single parcel of land within which a number of buildings are located or intended to be located in accordance with an overall plan of design and not in relation to a prearranged pattern of land subdivision. Examples of a Planned Unit Development (P.U.D.) include a complex of apartment buildings or a commercial shopping center. A comprehensive development plan for such a project shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for their review and approval. 
PLAT, SKETCH: A concept, informal map of a proposed subdivision or site plan of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification. 
QUICK-SERVICE FOOD STORE (QSR): Any building which is used for the retail sale of food or food and other items. This may be the combination of the gas station/mini-mart as well as the addition of fast food restaurants. 
SERVICE STATION: Any building, land area, or other premises, or portion thereof, used for the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels; servicing and repair of automobiles, aircraft or boats, and including the customary space and facilities for the installation of such commodities on or in such vehicles; and including as an accessory use the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, and similar other operating commodities and accessories for motor vehicles. 
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the street property line, rear or side property lines of the lot, and the front, rear or side lines of a building. The term required setback means a line beyond which a building is not permitted to extend under the provisions of this ordinance establishing the minimum depths and widths of yards. 
SIGN, BILLBOARD: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises which the sign is located. 
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING: Any card, cloth, paper, metal, glass, plastic, wood, plaster, stone or sign of other material of any kind, placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building, structure or thing whatsoever. The term "place" as used in the definition of "Outdoor Advertising Sign" and "Outdoor Advertising Structure" shall include erecting, construction, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving or other fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. See also "SIGN, BILLBOARD." 
SITE PLAN: The development plan for one (1) or more lots on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plains, wetlands, and waterways; landscaping and open spaces; walkways; means of ingress and egress; circulation; utility services; structures and buildings; signs and lighting; berms, buffers, and screening devices; surrounding development; and any other information that reasonably may be required in order that an informed decision can be made by approving authority. 
SPOT ZONING: Rezoning of a lot or parcel of land to disproportionally benefit an owner rather than the public for a use incompatible with surrounding uses and that does not further the comprehensive land use plan. 
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground. 
THRIFT STORE: A retail business that operates from the resale of used household items that are donated or purchased at a very low rate. These items may be new or used. 
TOWNHOUSE: One (1) of a group of two (2) or more attached single family residences. Each townhouse unit is separated from the adjoining unit or units by an approved fire wall or walls. Fire walls shall be located on the lot line. Each town house has a front and rear ground level entrance. The town house is located on its own approved, recorded "lot." 
TRAVEL TRAILER: A motorized camper, converted bus, tent-trailer or other similar vehicular or portable structure used or designed for temporary portable housing or occupancy while on vacation, recreation or other trips which provide sleeping accommodations. 
TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS: Travel trailer park where the principal use is for overnight tourists, or for vacationers whose stay will not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
UNDUE HARDSHIP: A condition which shall be considered to exist only when one (1) or more of the following apply to a particular piece of property, and such condition has not been created by action of the property owner: 
a.  The owner cannot comply with the provisions of this ordinance without violating some other ordinance or sections of this ordinance. 
b.  The provisions of this ordinance create for the property owner a peculiar condition not common to other nearby property owners. 
c.  A conforming use or requirement is incongruous with the remainder of the area in which the property is located. 
d.  The topography of the land or shape of a particular lot precludes a conforming use. 
VARIANCE: A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the particular property and not the result of any action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this Ordinance's, requirements would result in unnecessary and undue hardship (See Section 24.10). 
ZERO LOT LINE: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one (1) or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line. 
ARTICLE III - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
In addition to the other requirements, the use of land shall be subjected to the following general provisions. 

Section 3.01. - Conflicting regulations. 
Whenever any provision of this Ordinance imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, the provision of this Ordinance shall govern. 
Section 3.02. - Scope. 
No building or structure or part thereof, shall hereinafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Section 3.03. - Streets, alleys and railroad rights-of-way. 
All streets, alleys and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting such streets, alleys or railroad rights-of-way. Where the center line of a street or alley serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such street or alley, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to the center line. 
Section 3.04. - Permitted uses. 
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered; nor shall any building or land be used, designed or arranged for any purpose other than is permitted in the zoning district in which the building or land is located. 
Section 3.05. - Permitted area. 
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which the building is located. 
Section 3.06. - Only one main structure (principal use) per lot. 
Only one (1) main structure or building and its customary accessory structures shall hereafter be placed or erected on any residential lot, except within the R-PUD zoning district. Within the R-PUD district site development plans will be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
Section 3.07. - Substandard lots. 
Any residentially zoned lot which was of record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance that does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance for yards or other area or open space, may be utilized for single residence purposes, provided the area for such yard or court in width, depth, or open space is not less than seventy five (75) percent of that required by the terms of this Ordinance. The purpose is to permit utilization of recorded lots which lack adequate width or depth as long as reasonable living standards can be provided. 
Section 3.08. - Frontage. 
Every principal residential dwelling shall front upon a public street except that in the case of the planned unit developments in the R-PUD multiple residential zone. 
Section 3.09. - Site distance at intersections. 
In all Zoning Districts, other than the Central Business District (C-2), no fence, wall, hedge or shrub planting which obstructs the site lines at elevations between two (2) and twelve (12) feet above the roadways shall be placed on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the street lines, or in the case of a rounded property corner, from the intersection of the street property lines. 
Section 3.10. - Reduction of lot area prohibited. 
No lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width, yard requirements, lot area per dwelling unit, or other requirements of this ordinance are not maintained. 
Section 3.11. - Accessory residential buildings. 
Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this Ordinance, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of this Ordinance applicable to main or principal buildings. 
b.  Accessory buildings, except garages, shall be erected in any required yard except a front yard, providing further that in no instance shall such a building be nearer than five (5) feet to any adjoining side lot line or rear lot line. 
c.  An accessory building shall not exceed the height of the primary structure. 
d.  An accessory building shall not be located on that portion of the lot in the area of the principal building except when structurally attached to the principal building. 
e.  No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any principal building. 
f.  In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both street frontages wherever there are any principal buildings fronting on said streets in the same block or adjacent blocks. 
g.  When an accessory building is to be located on a corner lot, said building shall not project beyond the front yard line required on the lot of such corner lot. 
h.  Garages/Carports. In any residentially zoned district, no garage or carport shall be erected closer to the side lot line than the permitted distance for the dwelling, unless the garage or carport shall be completely to the rear of the dwelling in which event, the garage or carport may be erected five (5) feet from the side and rear lot line. 
Section 3.12. - Prohibited uses in all residential districts. 
a.  It shall be prohibited in all residentially zoned districts including manufactured home parks to park or store wrecked or junked vehicles, power driven construction equipment, used lumber or metal, or any other miscellaneous scrap or salvageable material in large quantities that exceed those typically needed for homeowner use. 
b.  Tractors, trailers or tractor-trailer combinations, shall not be placed or stored in residentially zoned districts. 
c.  Kennels. 
d.  Commercial ingress and egress will not be permitted in any residentially zoned districts. 
Section 3.13. - Automobile service stations and public garages. 
In order to regulate and control the problems of noise, odor, light, fumes, vibrations, dust, danger of fire and explosion, and traffic congestion which result from the unrestricted and unregulated construction and operation of gasoline service stations and to regulate and control the adverse effects which these and other problems incidental to the service station may exercise upon adjacent and surrounding areas, the following regulations and requirements are provided herein for service stations located in any zone. No service station existing on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be structurally altered so as to provide a lesser degree of conformity with the provisions of this section than existed on the effective date of this Ordinance. 
a.  A service station shall be located on a lot having a frontage along the principal street of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet, and having a minimum area of not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
b.  A service station building housing an office and/or facilities for servicing, greasing and/or washing motor vehicles shall be located not less than forty (40) feet from any street lot line, and not less than ten (10) feet from any other lot line. 
c.  For commercial driveways when one (1) or more driveway serves a given frontage, no single approach shall exceed fifty (50) feet. When a commercial establishment controls seventy five (75) feet or more of street frontage, the number of driveways shall be limited to two (2) for the first seventy-five (75) feet or part thereof and not more than one (1) additional driveway for each additional seventy-five (75) feet. No portion of a driveway shall be less than ten (10) feet away from the property line not located at an intersection. When only one (1) lane of traffic is provided in a single driveway, the width of a driveway approach shall not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
d.  A raised curb six (6) inches in height shall be erected along all street lot lines, except for driveway openings. 
e.  The entire lot, excluding the area occupied by a building, shall be hard surfaced with concrete or a plant-mixed asphalt material, or if any part of the lots is not so surfaced, then that area shall be landscaped and separated from all surface areas by a low barrier or curb. 
f.  All lubrication equipment, motor vehicle washing equipment, hydraulic hoists and pits shall be enclosed entirely within a building. All gasoline pumps shall be located not less than fifteen (15) feet from any lot line, and shall be arranged so that motor vehicles shall not be supplied with gasoline or services while parked upon or overhanging any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way. 
g.  A service station located on a lot having an area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet shall include not more than eight (8) dispensing nozzles and two (2) enclosed stalls for servicing, lubricating, greasing and/or washing motor vehicles. An additional two (2) dispensing nozzles and/or one (1) enclosed stall may be included with the provision of each additional two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area. 
h.  Where a service station adjoins any property located in any residential zone, or is separated from any such property by a public alley only, a masonry wall five (5) feet in height shall be erected and maintained along the common lot line or along the alley lot line. All masonry walls shall be protected by a fixed curb or barrier to prevent vehicles from contacting the wall. 
i.  All exterior lighting, including illuminated signs, shall be erected and hooded or shielded so as to be deflected away from adjacent public and private property. 
Section 3.14. - Modular office units. 
Modular office units will be permitted only in the C-3 and I districts with the following restrictions: 
A.  All modular office units will be placed on a permanent foundation. 
B.  All modular office units will be oriented to parallel the public street on which the office fronts. 
C.  All modular office units are required to meet or exceed the standards of the International Building Code. 
*Mobile homes may not be used as offices. A manufactured home may only be used as an office for the sale of manufactured housing. 
Section 3.15. - Protective screening. 
All planting plans shall be first submitted to the Planning Commission for approval as to suitability of planting materials and arrangements thereof in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. If, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the green belt would serve no good purpose, the Commission may waive such requirements. 
A.  Residential buffers. In order to provide adequate protective screening for residential areas adjacent to or near non-residential areas, the following regulations shall apply: 
Adjacent Residential Property. Where Manufacturing or Commercial Districts abut directly upon a residentially zoned district, a landscaped greenbelt, not less than twenty (20) feet wide, shall be provided and maintained along its entire length, including alleys, by the residentially zoned districts. Such greenbelt shall be planted with deciduous trees, evergreens, flowering trees or ornamental trees set no closer than six (6) feet to the fence or wall. The buffer shall be designed to provide a visual screen at the boundaries of conflicting land uses. The remainder of the landscaped area which is not planted with the aforementioned stock shall be in well-kept lawn. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition. 
B.  Junk yard buffers. 
a.  No junk yard shall be permitted closer than three hundred (300) feet to any R-1, R-2, or R-PUD district; and, 
b.  All junk yards must be completely screened by an eight (8) foot fence, and eight (8) foot buffer strips, as defined herein, meeting acceptable standards designated by the Planning Commission, and providing an adequate visual shield, shall be erected along all road frontages and all sides. All such fences and buffer strips shall be perpetually maintained in good condition and, except for masonry fences or walls, all fences must be painted; and, 
c.  No operations shall be conducted at a junk yard which may cause a nuisance or endanger the public health; and, 
d.  There shall be no temporary or permanent storage at a junk yard of vehicles or junk outside of the fence or wall required by Section 3.15(b); and, 
e.  All junk yards which are in existence on the effective date of this ordinance, shall be required to meet all the conditions set forth in Subsections of 3.15(b), (c), and (d) above within three (3) years from the effective date of this Ordinance. 
Section 3.16. - Radio, television stations. 
All commercial radio, television and other transmitting or relay stations shall be permitted in any commercial or industrial district. 
Section 3.17. - Satellite receiving dish antenna. 
a.  Satellite Receiving Dish Antenna shall be allowed in all zoning districts. 
b.  However, in all residential zones, the following requirements shall apply to satellite receiving dishes twenty three (23) inches in diameter or larger: 
1.  Antenna will be erected only in a rear yard and the setback requirements from the property line will be the same as those required of an accessory building. 
2.  Location of the antenna must be approved by the Building Inspection Department before installation may begin. 
c.  In all other zoning districts, antenna will be so placed as not to create a hazard to traffic or public utilities. 
d.  A property owner who has in place a non-conforming antenna at the effective date of this Ordinance may continue to maintain the antenna. 
Section 3.18. - Hardship manufactured homes. 
The Planning Commission may recommend to the Mayor and City Council approval of a variance for the use of one (1) hardship manufactured home per lot. The application for such a variance shall follow the general procedures for the rezoning including advertisement and public hearing requirements. The placement of one (1) hardship manufactured home on an occupied residential lot may be allowed if it is established that a genuine hardship exists only by reason of medical disability or age and the following variance criteria are met: 
a.  The subject occupant of the manufactured home is a relative by blood or marriage of the owner of the property; and, 
b.  Documentation of medical disability or age infirmity is required to be certified by a medical doctor's statement. This certification will be valid for one (1) year. If an extension is needed after one year, a new application for a hardship variance shall be submitted along with a new advertising fee; and, 
c.  Said manufactured home shall be removed from the premises within sixty (60) days when the specified disability ceases to exist; and, 
d.  Under no circumstances shall the manufactured home be rented or otherwise occupied by anyone other than the approved applicant, nor shall it be used for storage, or other similar uses; and, 
e.  The Planning Commission may impose reasonable requirements which would affect the interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
Section 3.19. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
The Colquitt Planning Commission shall make a study of any property proposed for annexing into the City of Colquitt and forward its zoning recommendations to the Mayor and City Council for their review and action. 
To help insure that all land within the City of Colquitt is always under the City's Zoning Powers, an appropriate Zoning Classification will be executed and made a part of the property annexation process. If the annexation is requested by anyone other than the City of Colquitt, the applicant will pay the appropriate fees for a zoning petition. In any case however, the zoning of all annexed properties will follow the same zoning policies and procedures as outlined in this Ordinance. 
1.  Zoning of property to be annexed may begin after the jurisdiction currently governing the property is notified in writing of the proposed annexation. 
a.  A Zoning public hearing must be conducted prior to the annexation of the subject property into the City. 
b.  A notice of the zoning public hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation and a sign shall also be placed on the property to be annexed and zoned in accordance to Article XVIII Section 18.07 and 18.08. 
2.  The zoning classification approved by the City following the required public hearing shall become effective on the later of the following dates: 
a.  The date the zoning is approved by the City; or 
b.  The date the annexation becomes effective pursuant to Code Section 36-36-2. 
Section 3.20. - Home occupations. 
1.  One (1) non-illuminated sign, which is not more than two (2) square feet, may be attached to a building which shall contain the name and occupation of the resident of the premises. No other display shall be used. 
2.  No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building may be permitted. 
3.  Barber shops, beauty salons, tanning bed salons, nursing or convalescent homes, child care centers, boarding houses, massage studios, restaurants and other similar uses as interpreted by the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council shall not be deemed as home occupations. 
4.  No mechanical equipment shall be used for a home occupation except that which is normally used for domestic or agricultural purposes. 
5.  The maximum number of employees other than immediate family members shall be limited to two (2). 
6.  Any violations of aforementioned regulations shall be cause for revocation of home occupation permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a hearing. 
Section 3.21. - Property divided by a zoning district. 
Where a zoning district divides a lot, tract or parcel of land at the time such district boundary is established, the use classification of the less-restricted district may be extended to the property line, but shall not be extended more than a distance of one hundred (100) feet without the permission of the Planning Commission. 
Section 3.22. - Development of regional impact threshold review. 
Developments of Regional Impact are large development projects that are likely to create impacts in other local jurisdictions. The City of Colquitt will comply with State intergovernmental review procedures relating to new developments proposed within the City which meet or exceed the minimum thresholds identified in the Department of Community Affairs' Procedures and Guidelines for the Review of Development of Regional Impact (DRI). A copy of the Procedures and Guidelines for the Review of DRIs can be found in the appendix. 
Section 3.23. - Storm water control. 
The Planning Commission shall review and approve an architectural storm water drainage plan for all classes of construction and property development prior to permits being issued by the building inspector. This plan must show retention of surface waters, controlled release into the Colquitt storm water drainage system, and diversion of any existing drainage pattern that may affect adjoining properties. Watershed into the drainage system cannot exceed predevelopment flow rates. The developer must bear the costs of controlling their storm water. Whenever possible, water will be channeled into underground storm sewers. 
Section 3.24. - Telecommunication antennas and towers. 
The purpose of this section is to establish standards and regulations for the siting of antennas and towers. 
a.  Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall be required to submit site plans first to the Planning Commission and approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
b.  Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the City limits of Colquitt or within one-quarter (¼) mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each antenna and/or tower. 
c.  The following shall govern the location of all towers and the installation of all antennas. If, in the opinion of the Planning Commission and approval by Mayor and City Council, these requirements would serve no good purpose, the Commission may waive such requirements. 
(1)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment shall be a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(4)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
d.  Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the governing authority may, in the manner provided in Sections 41-2-8 through 41-2-17 of the Official Code of Georgia, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
ARTICLE IV - LIST OF ZONING DISTRICTS 

Section 4.01. - Districts. 
The City of Colquitt is hereby divided into ten (10) classes of zoning districts known as follows: 
R-1 Single-Family Residential District 
R-2 Single-Family, Two-Family and Multiple-Family Residential District 
R-PUD Residential Planned Unit Development District 
R-OI Restricted Office-Institutional District 
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District 
C-2 Central Business District 
C-3 Highway Commercial District 
C-PUD Commercial Planned Unit Development District 
I Industrial District 
AG Agricultural District 
Section 4.02. - Limited use (L.U.) provision. 
The City of Colquitt establishes the "Limited Use" Provision for the purpose of allowing an applicant to request that a certain property be classified as a limited use. In some areas of the City, a particular land use activity selected out of a general zoning classification may have less community impact than some of the other uses within that classification. For this reason, an applicant may request a rezoning petition to limit the use of a proposed property to a specified use only (i.e., C1-L.U.). To wit: Neighborhood Business District limited to a "Beauty Salon." The limited use must be among the uses permitted in the zone district for which the limited use is taken. In the event that the conditions for which the limited use zoning was granted is violated, the property would revert to the prior zoning classification. 
Section 4.03. - Official zoning map. 
The boundaries of these districts are shown on the map which is designated as the Official Zoning Map of the City of Colquitt. The official Zoning Map is on file in the office of the City Clerk and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this Ordinance and have the same force and effects as if said Zoning Map and all such notations, references and other information shown there were fully set forth or described herein. 
Except where reference on said Zoning Map to a street or other designated line is made by dimensions shown on said Map, the district boundary lines follow lot lines of the center lines of the streets or alleys, or such lines extended and the corporate limits of the City of Colquitt as they existed at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any zoning district as shown on the Zoning Map, the City Council shall rule on such boundaries. 
ARTICLE V - R-1, SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 5.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The R-1 Single Family Residential District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for low density single family dwelling units. For the R-1 single family residential district, in promoting the general purpose of these regulations, the specific intent of this section is: 
a.  To encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land for low density single family residential development within the City. 
b.  To discourage land uses which would generate traffic on minor or local streets, other than normal traffic to serve the residences on those streets. 
Section 5.02. - Permitted uses. 
a.  Single family detached dwellings, except manufactured and mobile homes. 
b.  Industrialized homes (modular units). 
c.  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, when located on the same lot and not involving any business, profession, trade or occupation. 
d.  Home swimming pool, provided the location is not in the front yard and/or closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
Section 5.03. - Conditional uses. 
a.  Churches and their attendant educational and recreational facilities, and public schools, provided that: 
1.  Adequate ingress and egress to a major street is assured. 
2.  They are provided with adequate, paved off-street parking areas. 
3.  The buildings are placed not less than thirty (30) feet from street lines and not less than twenty five (25) feet from property lines and that the proposed site is not less than one (1) acre. 
4.  Adequate provisions are made for maintaining a planted buffer strip along adjoining property lines. 
b.  Cemeteries, provided that a complete site development sketch is submitted with the application. 
c.  Clubs and lodges not operating for profit provided that: 
1.  The buildings are not placed closer than fifty (50) feet to any property lines; and 
2.  There is a planted buffer strip at least ten (10) feet wide along the side and rear lot lines. 
d.  Public buildings, structures or other public land uses. 
e.  Home Occupations - Home occupations as limited and defined in Article II. 
f.  Family Day care homes (Family day care homes as limited and defined in Article II) provided that no play equipment be located in the front yard and that signage be compatible to the neighborhood and not larger than regulated for home occupations. All state licensing requirements and regulations will also apply. 
g.  Family personal care homes—as limited and defined in Article II. 
h.  Bed and breakfasts—as limited and defined in Article II. 
i.  All radio, cellular phone or similar transmission/receiving antennas. 
j.  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood as interpreted by the Planning Commission and approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
Section 5.04. - Area and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, Article XVII). 
ARTICLE VI - R-2, SINGLE FAMILY, TWO-FAMILY AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 6.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The intent of the R-2 Residential District is to provide for medium to high density residential development; to provide for variety in the City's housing stock, to encourage neighborhood maintenance and preservation by allowing the conversion of large and older single-family homes to two-family and apartment use; and to provide suitable areas for new multi-family development. 
Section 6.02. - Permitted uses. 
a.  Any use permitted in the R-1 Single Family residential district. 
b.  Two-family (Duplex) dwellings. 
c.  Multi-family (apartments and condominiums)* dwellings. 
d.  Manufactured homes (Reference Manufactured Homes Article). 
Section 6.03. - Conditional uses. 
a.  Any use listed under Section 5.03 of the R-1 zoning district. 
b.  Boarding homes. 
c.  Group homes and half-way houses. 
d.  Manufactured home parks (Reference Manufactured Homes Article). 
e.  Group personal care homes—as limited and defined in Article II. 
f.  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the Planning Commission and approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
Section 6.04. - Area and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, Article XVII). 
*For development of apartment units of only one apartment building on a given site. The R-PUD development standards Article VII, will apply to apartments of more than one building on a given parcel or lot. 
ARTICLE VII - R-PUD, RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Section 7.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The intent of the Planned Unit Development District is to provide areas of sufficient size and allowing reasonable flexibility in design and orientation for the establishment of a group of structures, which includes multiple dwellings designed in a planned unit development of more than one building on a given development site. 
Therefore, the Zoning Ordinance regulations relative to area, bulk and placement may, in the Planned Unit Development District, be modified by the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council, in the case of a plan for a large scale development which, in the judgment of the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council, provides adequate open space and improvements for circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed, provided that in no case may the density of the proposed planned unit development exceed thirteen (13) dwelling units per acre and provided further than the minimum site size for the residential planned unit development is two (2) acres. 
Section 7.02. - General procedures for PUD (R-PUD) approval. 
Any proposed property for PUD development must first be zoned to the R-PUD zoning classification. The PUD zoning procedure will generally follow the same procedures as other zoning requests. However, the applicant for PUD zoning shall submit a preliminary site development plan of the proposed development at the same time a petition for PUD zoning is made. 
No rezoning for PUD will be granted to a petitioner until the preliminary site plan is reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the Mayor and City Council, respecting other property rezoning criteria established by the City of Colquitt. All plans must also be approved by the Health Department. 
Section 7.03. - Permitted uses. 
In all R-PUD Districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, shall be erected or used except for one or more of the following specified uses: 
a.  Single family detached dwellings, except manufactured and mobile homes. 
b.  Duplexes. 
c.  Townhouses. 
d.  Multi-family dwellings. 
e.  Condominiums. 
Section 7.04. - Conditional uses. 
Any use listed under Section 6.03 of R-2 District. 
Compatible commercial intended primarily to serve the surrounding neighborhood. 
Section 7.05. - Preliminary review. 
Preliminary review is recommended as an aid to both the developer and to the City. Under this procedure, a developer provides the information which is described below and the Planning Commission then acts on the information provided. This review is intended to serve as a guide for the immediate inspection of the Planning Commission, subject to a thorough study and analysis. Changes and additions which may have to be made before a mutual agreement is reached can be made at such time without excessive engineering or other costs to the developer. 
Section 7.06. - Procedure for preliminary approval. 
An application shall be submitted to the Planning Commission by the owner or his/her authorized representative for approval of a preliminary site plan of any proposed development anticipated under the Residential Planned Unit Development district provision of this Ordinance. Appropriate copies of the Preliminary Plan at a scale not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, showing the following, shall be submitted with the application. 
a.  The title under which the proposed development is to be recorded and the name of the present owner. 
b.  Names of owners of adjacent property. 
c.  A topographic map showing the general location of existing property lines, streets, alleys, buildings, easements, swamps, water courses, and other physical site features which relate to the development. 
d.  The proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal and storm drainage (In some cases, permits from Environmental Protection Division may be required). 
e.  All proposed uses of the property to be developed shall be appropriately indicated on the plan. 
f.  Date, north arrow and graphic scale. 
g.  Other information required by the Planning Commission to insure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
The developer shall furnish to the Planning Commission a statement indicating the proposed use to which the development will be put, along with a description of the type of residential building and number of units contemplated. Upon receiving approval of the Preliminary Plan, the developer may proceed to develop the Final Plan. No building permit shall be issued until approval of the Final Plan is given. 
Section 7.07. - Procedure for final plan approval. 
An application in writing shall be submitted to the Planning Commission by the owner or his/her authorized representative for approval of the Final Plan for any proposed development anticipated under the Residential Planned Unit Development District of this Ordinance. Copies of the Final Plan, at a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, showing the following information shall be submitted with the application. 
a.  The title under which the proposed development is to be recorded, the legal description of the land to be developed, the name of the present owner, and the name and address of the technical author of the plan. 
b.  Names and owners of adjacent property and general information as to boundaries thereof as well as the existing zoning on such tracts. 
c.  A map showing the location of existing property lines, the adjoining streets, alleys, buildings, drains, easements, water courses, and other physical site features which relate to the development. 
d.  The proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal and storm drains, and other engineering data required by the Planning Commission to clearly indicate the general design of said utility services. It shall be mandatory that the development uses the City water services and that all streets in the development be paved in accordance with City standards. 
e.  The size and capacity of existing sewer, water, storm drains, and thoroughfares in the area. 
f.  The location and dimensions to the nearest foot of lots, building lines, alleys, easements, parks, and other public properties on the property to be developed. All lots in a preliminary plan shall be designated by consecutive numbers beginning with number one (1). 
g.  All proposed uses of the property to be developed shall be indicated on the plan. 
h.  Date, north arrow and graphic scale. 
i.  Proposed development restrictions and/or protective covenants to be imposed upon the property after development. 
j.  Bearings and distances of all courses of the exterior boundary of the proposed development and its area in acres to the third decimal place. 
k.  The developer shall furnish to the Planning Commission a statement indicating the proposed use to which the development will be put, along with a description of the type of residential buildings and number of units contemplated, so as to reveal the affect of the development on traffic, fire hazards or congestion of population. 
Section 7.08. - Area and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, Article XVII.) 
ARTICLE VIII - R-OI, RESTRICTED OFFICE-INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT 

Section 8.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The intent of this District is to encourage and provide suitable areas within the City for offices, businesses, institutional and related activities with a minimum of interference from excess traffic and conflicting land uses. 
Section 8.02. - Permitted uses. 
a.  Professional offices, hospitals, clinics (other than veterinary) and clinic laboratories, nursing rest homes, group homes, and personal care homes. 
b.  Pharmacies, florist shops, mortuaries. 
c.  Day Care Facilities provided that no play equipment is located in the front yard and that signage be compatible to the neighborhood and not larger than regulated for home occupations. All State licensing requirements and regulations will also apply. 
d.  Adult Care Facilities. 
e.  Financial institutions. 
Section 8.03. - Conditional uses. 
a.  Beauty and/or barber shops and similar personal service establishments. 
b.  Churches. (See Section 5.03a) 
c.  Public buildings, structures and other public land uses. 
d.  Retail sales of goods and services. 
e.  Boarding houses. 
f.  Home Occupations—Home occupations as limited and defined in Article II. 
g.  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood as interpreted by the Planning Commission and approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
h.  Nursing homes. 
i.  Bed and breakfasts 
Section 8.04. - Area and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, Article XXII). 
ARTICLE IX - C-1, NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Section 9.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The Neighborhood Commercial District is intended to permit retail business and service uses which are needed to serve nearby residential areas. In order to promote such business development uses are prohibited which would create hazards, offensive and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare, heavy truck traffic, or late hours of operation. The intent of this district is also to encourage the concentration of local business areas in locations which poses the mutual advantages of both the consumers and merchants, and thereby promotes the best use of land at certain strategic locations. 
Section 9.02. - Permitted uses. 
a.  Antique stores. 
b.  Barber shops/beauty salons and other personal service establishments. 
c.  Clubs and lodges. (See Section 5.03c.) 
d.  Day care centers (Day care centers as limited and defined in Article II) provided that no play equipment is located in the front yard and that signage is compatible to the neighborhood and not larger than regulated for home occupations. All state licensing requirements and regulations shall also apply. 
e.  Laundry or dry cleaning establishments. 
f.  Professional offices. 
g.  Repairs, electrical or other household appliances, locks, radios, television and the like. 
h.  Restaurants, in existing structures with no more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor space devoted to such use. 
i.  Small retail businesses selling convenience goods and serving the adjacent residential neighborhoods such as drug, food, bakery and tailor shops. 
j.  Thrift stores. 
k.  Bed and Breakfasts. 
l.  Video stores. 
[m].  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the Planning Commission and approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
Section 9.03. - Conditional uses. 
a.  Churches, or other religious institutions. (See Section 5.03a). 
b.  Service stations. 
c.  Convenience stores. 
d.  Antique malls. 
e.  Adult care facilities. 
f.  Congregate personal care homes—as limited and defined in Article II. 
g.  All radio, cellular phone, or similar transmission/receiving antennas. 
h.  Funeral homes. 
i.  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood as interpreted by the Planning Commission and approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
Section 9.04. - Protective screening. 
Protective screening for C-1 Districts adjacent to residential districts shall be in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section 3.15 of this Ordinance. 
Section 9.05. - Area and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, Article XXII). 
ARTICLE X - C-2, CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Section 10.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The C-2 Central Business District is intended to protect and promote suitable areas for business and commercial uses which benefit from proximity to each other, to encourage the eventual elimination of uses inappropriate to a central business area, and to encourage the intensive development of a centralized business center for the City of Colquitt. 
Section 10.02. - Permitted uses. 
a.  Any use listed under Section 9.02 of the C-1 zoning district. 
b.  Retail business and service establishments. 
c.  Financial institutions. 
d.  Commercial Planned Unit Developments in accordance with provisions of Article XV. 
e.  Hotels/motels. 
f.  Restaurants (no size limits). 
g.  Museums. 
h.  Theaters. 
i.  Loft dwellings. See Section 10.03 below for details. 
j.  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the Planning Commission and approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
Section 10.03. - Permitted residences in the central business district (CBD). 
Loft dwellings are permitted in existing multi-story commercial buildings so long as their plans are submitted and approved by the City of Colquitt Planning Commission and Mayor and City Council. The following minimum requirements shall be met prior to approval: 
1.  Minimum Floor Space Requirements and Maximum Number of Occupants shall comply with the Building Codes. 
2.  Building Codes: All loft dwelling residential renovations shall have fire walls, and shall comply with all existing Commercial Building Codes and Fire Codes. 
3.  Restrictions: 
a.  All window treatments shall be an off-white color with no signs, drawings or photographs incorporated therein. Nothing shall hang from the outside of the windows. 
b.  No outside mailboxes shall be permitted; inside mail boxes or mail slots shall be used. 
c.  No outside television or radio antennas or satellite reception dishes shall be permitted unless they are less than thirty six (36) inches in diameter and are located on roofs or installed in such a way as not to be visible from streets. Cable connections shall be permitted and located at the rear of establishments. 
d.  No daily or weekly boarding rooms shall be permitted, only complete dwelling units as defined herein. 
e.  Outside building address numbers shall not exceed six (6) inches in height. 
f.  No drying of clothes shall be permitted outside buildings. 
g.  Entry to the unit or to a hallway serving one (1) or more units shall be provided by a stairway opening directly to the outside at street level. All stairways shall be enclosed. No unit shall occupy street level frontage. 
h.  All window air-conditioning units shall not be visible from any public street. 
i.  No washing or waxing of vehicles shall be permitted. 
j.  No sales of the type commonly known as garage sales, yard sales, or estate sales shall be allowed. 
4.  Parking: 
a.  Each residential unit shall have its own off-street parking space with direct access to a public alley or street between the hours of 8 a.m. - 6 p.m. (Monday through Friday). Public parking may only be used to meet this requirement with prior approval of the Mayor and City Council. 
Section 10.04. - Conditional uses. 
a.  Churches and other religious institutions. (See Section 5.03a). 
b.  Clinics and nursing homes. 
c.  Public buildings, structures or other public land uses. 
d.  Multiple family residential dwellings, boarding or rooming houses. 
e.  All new radio, cellular phone, or similar transmission/receiving antennas not requiring a new tower. 
f.  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood as interpreted by the Planning Commission and approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
Section 10.05. - Protective screening. 
Protective screening for requirements of C-2 District adjacent to or near residential districts shall be in compliance with the Regulations set forth in Section 3.15. 
Section 10.06. - Area and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, Article XXII). 
ARTICLE XI - C-3, HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Section 11.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of the Highway Commercial District is to provide for and encourage appropriate development along the City's major streets which will include a variety of sales and service establishments that will accommodate the needs of the City and the traveling public. Adequate off-street parking, adequate building setbacks and reduction of traffic hazards are prime City objectives for business development along the City's major streets. 
Section 11.02. - Permitted uses. 
a.  All permitted uses in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts. 
b.  Automobile sales and auto service. 
c.  Service stations. 
d.  Agricultural implement sales and service. 
e.  Wholesale stores, storage buildings, warehouses, mini-warehouses, distributing plants, freezers and lockers. 
f.  Small fabrication and manufacturing shops, when employing not more than ten (10) employees in the office and manufacturing operations. 
g.  Monument and statuary sales. 
h.  Manufactured housing sales. 
i.  Outdoor furniture and equipment. 
j.  Tent and canopy sales. 
k.  Swimming pools and hot tub sales. 
l.  Trade shops including sheet metal, roofing, upholstering, electrical plumbing, venetian blind, cabinet making and carpentry, rug and carpet cleaners and sales, and sign painting. 
m.  Shopping centers. 
n.  Museums. 
o.  Animal hospital/clinic. 
p.  Dance schools. 
q.  Kennels. 
r.  Modular office units. 
Section 11.03. - Conditional uses. 
a.  All conditional uses in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts. 
b.  Cemeteries. (See Section 5.03b). 
c.  Churches and other religious institutions. (See Section 5.03a). 
d.  Hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, and personal care homes. 
e.  Public buildings, structures or other public land uses. 
f.  Open air business—as limited and defined in Article II. 
g.  Flea Markets (a planted natural buffer strip of at least ten (10) feet wide along the side and rear lot lines is required). 
h.  Junk yards provided that protective screenings are provided. (See Section 3.16, Protective Screenings). 
i.  Schools. 
j.  Stockyards. 
k.  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood as interpreted by the Planning Commission and approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
Section 11.04. - Protective screening. 
Protective screening requirements of C-3 Districts adjacent to or near residential districts shall be in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section 3.16. All outdoor sales areas are subjected to establishing a planted and maintained natural buffer strip of at least ten (10) feet in width and four (4) feet in height on side and rear lot lines. 
Section 11.05. - Area and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, Article XXII). 
Section 11.06. - Procedures for project approval. 
In connection with all of the above uses, a site plan of the proposed development shall be furnished to the Planning Commission showing the location of buildings, roads, parking areas, open areas, sidewalks, landscaping, buffers, lighting, etc. All plans shall be submitted two (2) weeks prior to the regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting. 
ARTICLE XII - C-PUD, COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Section 12.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of the Commercial Planned Unit Development District is to provide areas of sufficient size and reasonable flexibility in design and orientation for the establishment of a structure or group of structures which include one (1) or more retail sales, service and office enterprises on a single parcel of land. 
Within the Commercial Planned Unit Development Districts, the following regulations shall apply: 
Section 12.02. - Permitted uses. 
a.  Any use permitted in non-residential zoning districts. 
Section 12.03. - Conditional uses. 
a.  Churches and other religious institutions. (See Section 5.03a). 
b.  Medical facilities, nursing homes, group homes and personal care homes. 
c.  Public buildings, structures or other public land uses. 
Section 12.04. - Procedure for project approval. 
In connection with all the above uses, the following requirements shall be complied with before any building permit is issued. The developer shall furnish the Building Inspector with appropriate copies of the Letter of Intent and the Development Plans for any use permitted in the Commercial Planned Unit Development District, drawn to scale, showing the general location of all buildings, roads, parking area, open areas, sidewalks and street lighting. Typical elevations of all four (4) sides of the proposed building, and the proposed number of units by type and floor space, shall be submitted (e.g., furniture sales, 800 square feet). 
Section 12.05. - Procedure for preliminary and final approval. 
(Shall be in compliance with Article VII, Section 7.03 General Procedures for Planned Unit Development Approval). 
Section 12.06. - Area and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the attached schedule of regulations, Article XXII). 
ARTICLE XIII - I, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Section 13.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The intent of the Industrial District is to provide suitable areas for wholesaling, warehousing, storage, manufacturing, processing, repair services and sale lots in addition to other retail and service establishments; to expand or extend districts only where there is adequate and direct access to appropriate transportation facilities and where there is minimum conflict with residential districts. 
Section 13.02. - Permitted uses.* 
a.  Any use permitted in the commercial zoning districts, except loft dwellings. 
b.  Manufacturing. 
c.  Warehousing, wholesaling, shipping and receiving. 
d.  Modular office units. 
e.  Public buildings, structures or other public land uses. 
Section 13.03. - Conditional uses. 
a.  Petroleum bulk plants, petroleum refining and storage. 
b.  Junkyards, automobile salvage yards or scrap metal processors (Site plan approval, including protective screenings—See Section 3.15). 
c.  Asphalt plants. 
d.  Cement, line gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacturing. 
e.  Fat rendering and fertilizer manufacturing. 
f.  Paper and pulp manufacturing. 
g.  Corrosive acid and alkali manufacturing. 
h.  Agricultural processing plants. 
i.  Tire reclamation facilities. 
j.  Cemeteries, provided that a complete site development sketch is submitted with the application. 
k.  Chemical plants. 
l.  Churches. See Section 5.03a. 
m.  Solid waste collection, treatment, disposal, incineration and recycling facilities. 
n.  Armories. 
o.  Extraction, or removal of sand, gravel, topsoil or other natural resources. 
p.  Grain elevators. 
q.  Hazardous waste facilities. 
r.  Pulp yards and sawmills. 
s.  Septic tank cleaning services. 
t.  Rifle, pistol and skeet ranges. 
u.  All radio, cellular phone, or similar transmission/receiving antennas and/or towers. 
v.  Kennels 
w.  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the Planning Commission and approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
Section 13.04. - Area and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, Article XVII.) 
*Within any Industrial Zoning District, the following special regulations will apply to all permitted uses: 
1.  All open portions of any lot shall be suitable graded and, except when paved or similarly improved, they shall as a minimum, be seeded and maintained in grass. Preferably, such open spaces may be further landscaped with trees, shrubs and ground cover. 
2.  All service drives and access roads and parking areas shall be paved. 
3.  All storage operations shall be fully enclosed. 
4.  Provisions shall be made for the adequate lighting of all parking areas and service drives. 
5.  Satisfactory provisions shall be made for storm drainage, sanitary sewerage and water supply. As much as possible, all power and telephone lines shall be provided for by easements along rear and side lot lines. 
ARTICLE XIV - AG, AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 

Section 14.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of the Agricultural District within the City of Colquitt is to provide for continuing agricultural related development where the present application of non-agricultural related zoning controls would be unreasonable or premature. 
Section 14.02. - Permitted uses. 
a.  Agriculture related activities excluding commercial animal husbandry operations. 
b.  Single family detached dwellings including manufactured homes. 
c.  Industrialized buildings (modular homes/units). 
Section 14.03. - Conditional uses. 
a.  Animal hospitals and kennels. 
b.  Animal husbandry operations. 
c.  Churches. (See Section 5.03a) 
d.  Cemeteries. (See Section 5.03b) 
e.  Public buildings, structures or other public land uses. 
f.  Home occupations (as limited and defined in Article II). 
g.  Rodeos, cattle shows, horse shows, animal exhibitions. 
h.  All radio, cellular phone, or similar transmission/receiving antennas and/or towers. 
i.  Open air business. 
j.  Caretaker residence. 
k.  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the Planning Commission and approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
Section 14.04. - Area and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule or Regulations, Article XXII.) 
ARTICLE XV - MANUFACTURED HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS REGULATIONS 

Section 15.01. - Statement of purpose. 
These regulations shall govern the location and occupancy of manufactured homes within the City of Colquitt. All manufactured homes located within and outside of manufactured home parks and all travel trailer parks shall be governed by the regulations within this Ordinance. 
Section 15.02. - Location of manufactured homes, manufactured home parks and travel trailer parks. 
Manufactured homes shall be located in R-2 or AG districts as permitted uses; manufactured home parks and travel trailer parks within the City shall be located only in the R-2 zoning district as a conditional use. 
Section 15.03. - Travel trailers: general requirements. 
Any travel trailer located within the City of Colquitt shall meet the following general requirements: 
A.  Occupancy. For sites specifically designed for travel trailers within travel trailer parks, the residential occupancy of a travel trailer shall be limited to short term occupancy of one hundred eighty (180) days. 
B.  Storage. Travel trailers, when stored on a residential lot, shall be located at least ten (10) feet from adjoining property lines and at least ten (10) feet from any residence unless stored within a portion of the dwelling or accessory structure. No plumbing facilities (both water and sewerage) in such trailers may be connected while they are stored. Storage of same on public rights-of-way is hereby prohibited. When a travel trailer is stored on a lot in any residential district it shall not be utilized as a residence or occupied by household members, their guests, or as a rental unit. 
C.  Density. A maximum of eight (8) travel trailer stands per acre is allowed at rental facilities. 
D.  Walks. 
1.  General Requirements: All travel trailer park developments shall be provided with safe and convenient, pedestrian accesses of adequate width for their intended use and same shall be durable and convenient to maintain. 
2.  Common Walk System: A common walk system shall be provided and maintained between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such common walks shall have a minimum width of three and one-half (3½) feet. 
3.  Individual Walks: All travel trailer stands shall be connected to common walks, or to streets, or to driveways, or to parking spaces. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of two (2) feet. 
E.  Travel Trailer Parks. Each travel trailer park development shall be required to be provided with the following minimum accommodations: 
1.  Interior Street Access: Each stand shall be provided with access frontage of at least twenty (20) feet. 
2.  Electric Power Supply: Each stand shall be provided with a properly grounded, waterproof electrical receptacle. A properly rated over-current device shall be installed for each power outlet. Said fixtures shall meet the standards established by applicable city codes. 
3.  Stand Identification: A property and street number designation or other appropriate numbering device properly identifying each travel trailer stand shall be placed at the interior side lot line at a point ten (10) to fifteen (15) feet from the interior road system of the park. Such device shall be clearly visible from the street and shall be embossed with reflecting glaze for the numbers. Such numbers shall be a minimum of three (3) inches in height. 
F.  Travel Trailers Visitation on Residential Lots. For the purposes of visitation, a travel trailer may be connected to the electrical power supply of a residence, and visitors may reside in the travel trailer for a maximum of thirty (30) days. An absence of thirty (30) days shall be required prior to another visitation by the same or another travel trailer. 
Section 15.04. - Travel trailer parks: accessory uses permitted. 
The following commercial establishments may be permitted as customary accessory uses in a travel trailer park, provided such uses do not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the area of the park, are located a minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet from any adjoining property line or street or highway right-of-way, and are primarily intended for the convenience of and service to the occupants of the park: 
a.  Coin-operated laundry. 
b.  Coin-operated vending machines of types allowed under applicable Codes of the City of Colquitt, provided they are located within a structure and are not visible from the street or from adjoining property lines. 
c.  Signs identifying the name of the travel trailer park and the services provided therein; signs regulating traffic or signs provided for the convenience and welfare of park residents. 
Section 15.05. - Manufactured home parks: general requirements. 
All manufactured home parks located within the City of Colquitt shall meet the following general requirements: 
A.  Establishment of Manufactured Home Parks. 
1.  From the time of and after the adoption of this Ordinance, each proposed manufactured home park development shall be presented in site development plan form by the developer to the Planning Commission/Mayor and City Council for review and approval. The site development plan shall conform to the minimum design and improvement standards required herein. Site development plans of the proposed manufactured home park shall include at least the following items: 
a.  A site plan at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch equal to fifty (50) feet. 
b.  The title under which the development is to be recorded, the legal description of the land to be developed, the name of the present owner and the name and address of the technical author of the plan. 
c.  All property lines and dimensions; the location and dimensions of each building and unit. 
d.  The layout and location of off-street parking, total number of spaces, ingress and egress lanes, pedestrian ways, sidewalks and curb lines. 
e.  The proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal and storm drainage and other data as may be required to clearly indicate the general design of said utility services. 
f.  All proposed uses of property and buildings to be developed shall be indicated on the plan. 
2.  No private construction or public improvements shall commence on any land to be used as a manufactured home park prior to the approval and certification of the required development plans. 
3.  A person, firm or corporation desiring to develop a manufactured home park within the City of Colquitt shall provide appropriate copies of a sketch plan of a proposed layout which shall conform to the minimum requirements stated herein and shall file said copies of said sketch plan with the Planning Commission for review. 
B.  Expansions of Manufactured Home Parks. A person, firm or corporation desiring to expand a manufactured home park to include more manufactured homes or manufactured home sites, shall submit plans and specifications for such improvements to the Planning Commission for review prior to initiating construction and improvements. 
C.  Design. The design of a manufactured home park shall conform to the following design requirements: 
a.  Setback—The manufactured home park shall be so designed that manufactured homes (and travel trailers) and their accessory structures shall be a minimum distance of twenty-five (25) feet from adjoining property lines, ten (10) feet from internal park streets and at least twenty-five (25) feet from any publicly dedicated street. Manufactured home stands shall be designed so as to provide a distance of at least thirty (30) feet between manufactured homes. 
b.  Access. The manufactured home park shall front upon a public street. Each manufactured home site and its parking area shall have direct access to the internal street system of the park. 
c.  Streets. Streets within a manufactured home park shall be privately owned, privately constructed and privately maintained. Such private streets shall be well drained and provided with a hard surface treatment with a minimum surface width of ten (10) feet for one-way streets and twenty (20) feet for two-way streets. 
d.  Parking. Each manufactured home stand shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces. Parking on interior streets within a park is hereby prohibited. The required front yard may be used for the minimum parking. 
e.  Minimum Area of Tract. A manufactured home park shall have a minimum size of five (5) acres. 
f.  Length of Residential Occupancy. No space within a manufactured home park shall be rented for residential use of a manufactured home for periods of less than thirty (30) days. 
g.  Manufactured Home Inspections. It shall be the initial responsibility of each manufactured home or trailer park operator to notify the Building Official to inspect manufactured homes being placed within the confines of any park under this jurisdiction, control or supervision, for compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, prior to the placement of any such manufactured home on its stand and within such park and to the connection of utility services to and occupancy of the manufactured home. 
h.  Issuance of Permit. At least once each year, the Building Official at his/her convenience shall inspect each manufactured home park and the manufactured home units within said parks to determine that same are in full compliance with the Codes of the City of Colquitt. The Building Official shall issue a permit for such use for each manufactured home park and each manufactured home unit which in the course of each such inspection he/she finds to be in full compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance, and such permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of its issue. Fees shall be set by the Mayor and Council. 
Section 15.06. - Manufactured home parks: improvements. 
Manufactured home parks constructed or reconstructed within the City of Colquitt shall be provided by the developer with the following minimum improvements: 
a.  Sanitary Sewage. The manufactured home park shall be provided with an approved sanitary sewage collection system. 
b.  Water. A potable water supply shall be provided by the park operator. If city water is available at the proposed site, water service shall be connected to the systems and fire hydrants shall be placed within five hundred (500) feet of each manufactured home stand. If the proposed park is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public system, the owner or developer shall promptly enter into negotiations to receive service and shall take all steps necessary to promptly obtain same. 
c.  Easement. Public dedicated easements of proper size for their respective intended purpose shall be provided within the park if individual manufactured home stands and accessory park uses are to be serviced by a public utility system. 
d.  Utility Placement. All water, sewer or gas lines shall be buried a minimum of eighteen (18) inches below the finished ground surface of the manufactured home park. They shall be provided with adequate valve systems to allow the cutoff of utility service to a manufactured home space at the manufactured home space and at the entrance of the utility service from the space to the trunk line of the utility system. If overhead service lines are provided within the park, such lines shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet above the grade of interior streets. No wires shall extend over a manufactured home space. 
e.  Lighting. All recreation areas, park entrances, park streets and pedestrian easements shall be illuminated to provide at least three tenths (3/10) foot candles of illumination. 
f.  Garbage and Refuse. Garbage and refuse service shall conform with all City ordinances. 
Section 15.07. - Non-conforming manufactured home parks. 
Any non-conforming manufactured home park in the City of Colquitt which becomes vacant and remains unoccupied due to abandonment or discontinuance for a period of six (6) months shall not begin new operations until the park is brought into compliance with these regulations. 
Section 15.08. - Area, placement and development requirements. 
(In accordance with Schedule of Regulations, Article XXII). 
Section 15.09. - Other manufactured home requirements. 
Manufactured homes located outside of a manufactured home park shall comply with the following general requirements prior to occupancy: 
1.  Any additions to a manufactured home or accessory buildings constructed on a lot shall comply with the requirements of the International Building, Electrical, Plumbing and Gas Codes. 
2.  The undercarriage (wheels, axles and tongue) shall be removed from each manufactured home occupying a residential lot prior to occupancy. 
3.  Each manufactured home shall be attached to a permanent foundation constructed of block and footers that comply with the International Building Codes. 
4.  The entire perimeter area between the bottom of the structure and the ground of each manufactured home shall be skirted or underpinned with brick, masonry, finished concrete or siding (of like or similar character to the manufactured home) that completely encloses the perimeter of the undercarriage except for proper ventilation and access openings. 
5.  Each manufactured home shall have permanent steps at doorways. 
6.  Before a certificate of occupancy is issued, the required permits and inspections must be obtained from the Building Department. 
7.  All manufactured homes must be oriented on the private lots so that its long axis is parallel with the street. 
8.  All manufactured homes must comply with the Architectural Compatibility Standards, Article XXII. 
ARTICLE XVI - NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 
Any lawful use of the land or buildings existing at the date of passage of this Ordinance and located in a district in which it would not be permitted as a new use under the regulations of this Ordinance is hereby declared to be a "non-conforming use" and not in violation of this Ordinance at the date of adoption of this Ordinance; provided, however, that a non-conforming use shall be subject to, and the owner shall comply with, the following regulations: 

Section 16.01. - Non-conforming use, continuation of use. 
The non-conforming use of land, which exists when this Ordinance becomes effective, may be continued provided that: 
a.  No such non-conforming use shall in any way be expanded or extended. 
b.  If such non-conforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued for twenty four (24) months or changed, any future use of such use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Section 16.02. - Restoration. 
No building which houses a non-conforming use which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or by public enemy to the extent of one hundred (100) percent of its market value - exclusive of the foundation at the time such damage occurred - shall not be rebuilt or repaired unless it is made to conform with the provisions of this Ordinance. If such damage is less than one hundred (100) percent of its market value before said damage occurred, exclusive of the foundation, then such structure may be restored to the same non-conforming use as existed before such damage, provided, however, that a building permit to initiate restoration must be obtained within six (6) months of the occurrence of damage: otherwise the provisions of Section 16.03 will apply. 
Section 16.03. - Continuance of a non-conforming use. 
Any use or structure existing at the time of enactment or subsequent amendment of this Ordinance, but not in conformity with its provisions, may be continued with the following limitations. Any use or building which does not conform to this Ordinance may not be: 
a.  Changed to another non-conforming use. 
b.  Re-established after discontinuance for twelve (12) months. 
c.  Extended except when in conformity with these regulations. 
d.  Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the building immediately prior to damage, if more than six (6) months passes between the damage and application for a building permit. 
Section 16.04. - Discontinuance or abandonment. 
Any non-conforming use of land or building which has become vacant or remains unoccupied owing to abandonment or discontinuance for a period of twelve (12) months shall thereafter conform to the provision of this Ordinance. 
Section 16.05. - Change of tenancy or ownership. 
There may be a change in tenancy, ownership, or management of an existing non-conforming use, provided there is no change in the nature or character of such non-conforming use. 
Section 16.06. - Change of use. 
A non-conforming use shall not be changed to another non-conforming use. 
ARTICLE XVII - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

Section 17.01. - Scope of provisions. 
Except as provided in this Section, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvements, or use, a plot showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. The Central Business District (CBD) is exempt from off-street parking requirements. 
Section 17.02. - Parking spaces may not be reduced. 
Off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum required number for the use or facility to which they are assigned. 
Section 17.03. - Drainage, construction and maintenance. 
All off-street parking areas shall be constructed of concrete or asphalt. All such areas shall be at all times maintained at the expense of the owners thereof, in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition. 
Section 17.04. - Separation from walkways, sidewalks and streets. 
All off-street parking, loading and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks and streets by curbing or other suitable protective device. Curbing and other protection devices must be set back a minimum of three feet to prevent vehicle overhang. 
Section 17.05. - Parking area design. 
Parking stalls shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet and length of eighteen (18) feet. There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. Interior driveways shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet wide where used with ninety (90) degree angle parking, at least eighteen (18) feet wide where used with sixty (60) degree angle parking, at least thirteen (13) feet wide where used with forty-five (45) degree parking, and at least twelve (12) feet wide where used with parallel parking. Where there is no parking, interior driveways shall be at least ten (10) feet wide for one-way traffic movement and at least twenty (20) feet wide for two-way traffic movement. 
Section 17.06. - Joint parking facilities. 
Two (2) or more neighboring uses, of the same or different types may provide joint facilities provided the number of off-street parking spaces is not less than the sum of the individual requirements. 
Section 17.07. - Pavement markings and signs. 
Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, and pavement directional arrows or signs shall be provided in each travel way wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their maximum efficiency. 
Section 17.08. - Number of parking spaces. 
In order to assure a proper and uniform development of public parking areas throughout the area of jurisdiction of this Ordinance, to relieve traffic congestion on the streets, and to minimize any detrimental effects on adjacent properties, off-street parking space shall be provided and maintained as called for in the following schedule. For any use or class of use not mentioned in this schedule, the requirements shall be the same as a similar use as mentioned herein. Parking requirements for additions to existing uses shall be based only upon the new addition even if the existing use is deficient. 
Section 17.09. - Street parking requirements. 
In all zoning districts with the exception of the Central Business District (CBD), off-street parking spaces for the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, or enlarged after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be provided as herein prescribed. 
Required parking spaces shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon so long as said main building or structure remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this Ordinance. The owner or owners of a building, structure or other land use requiring off-street parking spaces must show, to the satisfaction of the City Clerk, that he/she is the record title holder of the property devoted to said principal land use and of the property proposed for off-street parking use, or that he/she is the lessee of such property. 
Section 17.10. - Location of parking space for other land uses. 
The off-street parking facilities required for all other uses shall be located on the lot or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the permitted use requiring such off-street parking, such distance to be measured along lines of public access to the property between the nearest point of the parking facility to the building to be served. 
Section 17.11. - Off-street parking standards. 

 
Section 17.12. - Off-street loading requirements. 
On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, goods display, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot of adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets and alleys. 
Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be an area ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet, with fifteen (15) foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the following schedule: 

 
Section 17.13. - Minimum number of loading spaces required. 
Industrial, wholesale and rental operations shall provide space as follows: 
1.  Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as appropriate to the functions and scope of operation of individual or groups of buildings and uses. 
2.  Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering to park and depart from within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces shall be provided so as not to interfere with the free, normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public right-of-way. 
Section 17.14. - Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) general parking standards. 
1.  The City encourages the placement of handicap parking spaces at each off-street parking lot and at selected on street parking locations. Any business shall install the appropriate sign(s) and painted spaces. 
2.  Each parking space reserved for the disabled shall be painted and have a sign as per the requirements set out in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices." 
3.  For all buildings considered "public", at least one accessible walk having no steps or abrupt changes in level, and complying with all criteria specified within this ordinance, shall be provided from the parking spaces for disabled people into each accessible primary building entrance. Accessible walks shall also be provided between buildings on a common site. Doors swinging onto or away from walks shall have level areas. Walk surfaces shall be stable, firm, and of suitable texture to resist slippage. 
Section 17.15. - Parking spaces and passenger loading zones for disabled persons. 
1.  A safe place, located either on or off the street, shall be designated for handicapped passengers to get into and out of cars. It shall be: 
a.  As near as possible to the building entrance provided for the handicapped. 
b.  Zoned to prohibit parking. 
c.  Provided with a ramp to the sidewalk level, if located at a curbside. 
Parking Spaces and Passenger Loading Zones for Handicapped 

 
Section 17.16. - Reserved. 
Section 17.17. - Disabled parking for places of assembly. 
Disabled Parking for Places of Assembly 

 
Spaces shall be: 
1.  As near as possible to the building entrance provided for the handicapped with a maximum travel distance of two-hundred (200) feet. 
2.  Identified (wheelchair symbol) and controlled for use by individuals with physical disabilities. 
3.  A minimum of nine (9) feet in width, with a four (4) foot wide pedestrian access aisle on one side of the space. 
4.  Spaces shall be substantially level ( 1/8 inch per foot slope for drainage), suitable for wheeling and walking, and accessible to the building by a clear, level or ramped path of travel. 
(Note: Spaces parallel to a curb (4 inches high maximum) on the building side of the parking area are desirable. If perpendicular parking is necessary, four (4) foot wide access aisles between every other bay will be required.) 
ARTICLE XVIII - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Section 18.01. - Signs shall meet the requirements of this section. 
All signs within Colquitt shall be erected, constructed, or maintained in accordance with the provision of the sections below and applicable sections of the Colquitt Building Code and only those signs that are permitted by these Regulations shall be erected within the City. 
Section 18.02. - No signs shall hamper traffic safety. 
No sign shall be erected or continued that: 
1.  Obstructs the sign distance along a public right-of-way. 
2.  Would tend by its location, color or nature, to be confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signs or signals, or to be confused with a flashing light of an emergency vehicle. 
3.  Would by its nature or moving parts tend to confuse motorists or create any potential hazard to motorists. 
4.  Uses admonitions such as "stop", "go", "slow", "danger", etc., which might be confused with traffic directional signals. 
Section 18.03. - Locations prohibited. 
No sign shall be attached to or painted on any utility pole or light pole,, or any tree, rock or other natural object. No signs other than those signs erected by public governmental agencies or signs required by law, shall be placed so as to overhang any portion of public right-of-ways or other public properties by more than six (6) inches. 
Section 18.04. - Illumination not to be a nuisance. 
Illumination devices such as, but not limited to, flood or spot lights shall be so placed and so shielded as to prevent the rays or beams of illumination from being cast into neighboring dwellings and/or approaching vehicles. 
Section 18.05. - Signs not requiring a permit. 
The following signs shall not require a permit. 
1.  Signs to regulate traffic. 
2.  Signs required by law. 
3.  Warning signs and no trespassing signs. 
4.  Signs established by governmental agencies. 
5.  Signs not exceeding ten (10) square feet giving information concerning the location of accessory off-street parking facilities or loading and unloading facilities. 
6.  Temporary real estate signs on residentially zoned property shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) square feet and temporary real estate signs in any zones other than residential shall be a maximum of thirty two (32) square feet. 
7.  Any sign not exceeding ten (10) square feet other than advertising, separate use, or signs requiring electrical wiring. 
8.  Temporary signs on private land or religious, charitable, civic, fraternal, political, or similar organizations. 
9.  A temporary sign for a non-conforming business shall not exceed a maximum of thirty two (32) square feet. 
10.  Construction signs and temporary subdivision signs should not exceed a maximum of fifty (50) square feet. 
Section 18.06. - Maximum area of signs. 
The maximum area of a point of business sign, an incidental use sign, a bulletin board sign or an identification sign shall be one hundred fifty (150) square feet. All signs except identification signs and non permitted signs as identified in Section 18.05 shall be no larger than ten (10) square feet and shall not be illuminated directly or indirectly. 
Section 18.07. - Off-site advertising signs (billboards). 
An off-site advertising sign advertises goods, services, facilities or directs persons to premises other than the premises on which the sign is located. Off-site signs includes, but is not limited to billboards, off-site directional signs and signs which generally advertise consumer goods such as brands of cigarettes, etc. The following regulations govern off-site signs: 
1.  Billboards. 
a.  Billboard Location. Billboards shall be permitted on designated federal and state highways. All billboard structures erected abutting or so as to be visible from the right-of-way of a federal or state highway shall conform with O.C.G.A Section 32-6-7 et seq., and the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Code as amended from time to time. All billboards so located shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit from the Georgia department of Transportation under said code. In instances where the sign regulations of this Ordinance are more stringent, this Ordinance shall apply. 
b.  Billboard Sign Surface Area. Billboards shall have a maximum of four hundred (400) square feet per face. 
c.  Billboards shall have a maximum height of forty (40) feet. 
d.  Maximum Number of Signs. Billboards may have one (1) sign per structure which may be single or double faced. Only one (1) sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back to back or "V" formation, but prohibits two (2) side by side signs facing the same location. 
e.  Minimum spacing. Billboards shall be spaced no fewer than 2,000 feet from another billboard on the same side of the road.. 
f.  No flashing billboard shall be permitted and all billboard lighting shall be indirect. 
2.  General Off-Premises Signs - Shall be no larger than forty (40) square feet and shall be allowed on all City streets and State highways. General off premises signs may not be illuminated except by indirect lighting. 
3.  Priority of Off-Premises Signs. Where the location of two (2) or more off-site advertising signs conflicts under the requirements of this ordinance, the sign meeting the requirements of this Ordinance, and having the earliest dated permit for its erection shall have priority over other signs in conflict herewith. 
Section 18.08. - General standards for point of business signs, incidental use signs, bulletin boards and identification signs. 
1.  Do not utilize the colors red, green, blue and yellow in any way which might be confused with traffic, safety, or emergency signals. 
2.  No revolving or rotating beam or beacon of light that resembles or simulates any emergency device shall be permitted as part of any sign. Flashing devices shall not be permitted upon a sign; however, illuminated signs which indicate customary public information, such as time, date, temperature, or other similar information shall be permitted. 
3.  External lighting, such as floodlights, thin line and goose neck reflectors, are permitted, provided the light source is directed on the face of the sign and is effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed into any portion of the thoroughfare. 
4.  The illumination of any sign within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zone lot line shall be diffused or indirect to prevent direct rays of light from shining into those adjoining zones. Within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this Ordinance, this provision must be complied with. 
5.  Owners of signs shall be responsible for meeting codes, such as the National Electrical Code, as to placement and/or height when and where there is a conflict or potential conflict with City utilities. 
6.  Signs shall have a maximum height of thirty five (35) feet. 
7.  Non-conforming point of business signs, incidental use signs, and identification signs shall be removed or made to conform within one (1) year of effective date of this Ordinance. 
Section 18.09. - Sign regulations in the C-2 central business district. 
In determining the appropriateness or location of new or replacement signs proposed to be placed within the CBD Zone, the City Clerk may consult with the Southwest Georgia Regional Development Center's Historic Preservation Planner when interpreting the following regulations specified in this Section. Property owners must comply with the provisions of the City of Colquitt Historic Preservation Ordinance. The following regulations apply in the Central Business District: 
1.  Number of Signs Allowed per Building. Each permitted business within the CBD may have two (2) permanent signs. These may be identification signs, window signs, canopy signs, awning signs or a combination thereof, subject to the restrictions described in this Ordinance. CBD structures which are located on corner buildings are allowed one (1) additional sign in addition to the two (2) normally allotted, to be located on the side or rear of the building. The total area of this additional sign shall not exceed seventy (70) percent of the size of the largest sign on the building's front facade and shall cover no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the secondary wall. 
2.  No general advertising signs shall be permitted in the CBD. 
3.  No business identification sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
4.  No projecting sign shall exceed twenty five (25) square feet. 
5.  Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises and shall not compete for attention. 
6.  The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with the building and the site to which it principally relates. The general color scheme shall act to compliment the building's facade. Light lettering on a dark background is considered historically accurate. Lettering should not exceed eighteen (18) inches high. 
7.  No changing signs (such as a time and temperature sign, rotating sentence, etc.) shall be permitted. 
8.  No sign shall be erected or painted on the roof of any building. 
9.  No sign shall be closer than twenty-four (24) inches to the adjacent property lines to avoid sign messages from running together. 
10.  Signs that advertise an activity, business product or service no longer being conducted or available on the premises on which the sign is located must be removed upon the order of the City Clerk. 
11.  The size, scale and design of the sign shall be compatible with the size, scale and design of the property, building or site upon which it is to be located. 
12.  Sign materials shall be compatible with the period and style of the property building or site. 
13.  The location of signs shall not obscure any significant architectural features of the building or site. No wall sign shall be designed to obscure a window. 
14.  Sign installation shall not irreparably damage any cornice, ornament, or similar architectural detail and shall be the least damaging method feasible for the property, building or site. 
15.  All addresses shall be placed on business doors or on the transom above the door. Addresses shall be painted or shall be designated brass numbering or other appropriate style and size as required by 911 standards. 
16.  Historically inappropriate signs are not allowed. For instance: "Colonial Era" or "Williamsburg" signage is out of time and context in a late 19th century Southern town. 
17.  Enclosed lamp plastic signs and backlit fluorescent signs are not allowed as they are incompatible with historic properties in the Central Business District. Illumination where permitted shall be allowed with inconspicuous exterior mounted lights where appropriate and having no glare. All lighting for signs shall be concealed. 
Section 18.10. - Sign locations in the CBD. 
Signs shall be located as follows: 
1.  On or in the display windows or upper facade windows. 
2.  On or in the glazing of windows. 
3.  In the area above the transom of the store front and below the second floor windows. A transom is a small window above a door or another window or the horizontal cross piece to which such a window is attached. 
4.  On the valance of the awnings as long as they remain six (6) feet off of the ground. A valance is an ornamental drapery, decorative board or metal strip mounted across the top of a window to conceal structural features. 
5.  Signs may be incorporated in the awning material. 
6.  On the fascia or the top edges of canopies. A fascia is a flat horizontal band or member between moldings, especially in a classical entablature. 
7.  Projecting perpendicularly from the building. 
8.  Freestanding ground signs as allowed in Section 8.11(d). 
Section 18.11 - Types of signs permitted in CBD. 
Signs permitted in the CBD include the following: 
1.  Identification Signs. The maximum area allowed for an on premises point of business sign shall be two (2) square feet. These identifying signs may be painted on windows, hung under canopies or awnings or may be painted on valances or skirts of approved awnings. 
2.  Canopy and Wall Signs. The maximum combined square footage of wall and canopy signs placed on the facade of a building by any business will be one hundred fifty (150) square feet for one (1) and two (2) story buildings, or ten (10) percent of the building facade area, whichever is less. Businesses located on corners will be allowed to exceed this limit as specified in Section 8.09. 
For each business occupying an entire building, the sign area of any wall sign or canopy signs placed on a building facade may not exceed ten (10) percent of the building facade area. The building facade area is calculated by multiplying the height of the facade by the width of the facade and subtracting the window area. 
For any building which houses multiple businesses, the building facade area used to calculate the maximum size of wall and canopy signs allowed for each business will be defined as the individual business's linear frontage (on the primary facade) less the window area , times the height of the building as measured at its highest point above the business's frontage. 
In addition to the size restriction above, no wall or canopy sign on a one (1) or two (2) story building may exceed five (5) feet in vertical dimension. 
Painted murals are allowed in the CBD. 
3.  Window Signs. Fifteen (15) percent of an entire window area parallel to the street may be used as one (1) of the two (2) allowable signs for each ground level business. No one (1) window may be covered in excess of fifty (50) percent. 
Window signs on or above the second floor are prohibited except when a business has no ground floor frontage. Window signs on the second floor will be limited to identification and instructional signs which shall cover no more than fifteen (15) percent of the entire window area above the ground floor and no more than fifty (50) percent of any one window. 
4.  Ground Signs. A ground sign may be used, provided it does not exceed three (3) feet in height and is no bigger than twelve (12) square feet in area measured on one side only. 
In the CBD, ground signs may not be internally illuminated, must be constructed with materials compatible with the building architecture, they may only be used as identifying signs and professional signs. 
5.  Temporary Internal Window Signs. Signs pertaining to special events which refer to particular periods of time such as meetings, sales exhibitions, political campaigns and vacancy announcements shall be permitted on the building interiors provided that such signs shall be removed when no longer applicable in time, or in any case no later than ten (10) days after the advertised event has ended. 
6.  Instructional Signs. Instructional signs (such as upstairs, watch your step, etc.) measuring no more than one (1) square foot in area will be permitted. 
7.  Neon Signs. The use of simple artistic neon graphics or symbols is allowed. Example: ice cream cone at ice cream parlor. 
8.  Marquee Signs. Marquee signs shall only announce existing or future entertainment events, meetings or attractions. 
9.  Logo Signs. Symbols and graphic representations conveying a message representing the principal use of the property are encouraged. These simple, uncluttered signs make for simple yet aesthetic advertising. 
Section 18.12. - Signs not permitted in the CBD. 
1.  Off-premises advertisement signs (billboards). 
2.  Portable signs on wheels or designed for wheels and other apparatuses designed to allow for illumination and the changing of lettering shall not be allowed. 
Section 18.13. - Materials used in sign or awning construction. 
Except for signs applied to an awning, all principal use signs located in the CBD shall be constructed of wood, brass, bronze, painted lettering, crafted metal, glass, wrought iron, carved or sandblasted stone, hand carved or sandblasted wood, gold leaf and screen print on windows and awning materials such as canvas, acrylics and vinyl coated canvas. 
Section 18.14. - Materials not acceptable for use in sign or awning construction. 
Not allowed as sign materials are plastic signs including interior or back lighted signs, plastic, neon or reflective or foam lettering, posters and cardboard. Metal slats, rigid plastic, aluminum canopies, cedar or plastic shakes, glossy or leatherette finished vinyl are not allowable materials for awnings in the CBD. 
Section 18.15. - Colors for signs. 
Colors should contrast enough to allow the message to be read, but should complement, not compete or clash with surroundings. Questions of compatibility may be forwarded to the Southwest Georgia Regional Development Center Historic Preservation Planner for a compatibility recommendation. Approval of the Historic Preservation Commission shall also be required. 
Section 18.16. - Non-conforming signs in the CBD. 
Non-conforming signs which have been abandoned shall be removed within thirty (30) days after a business closes, ceases to operate in that location or after the effective date of this ordinance by the person who obtained the sign permit or the property owner. When the business advertised by a non-conforming sign ceases to operate on the premises where the sign is located, the sign's permit shall be considered null and void and the sign shall not be re-permitted except in compliance with this Ordinance. 
Signs with historic significance shall be exempted from the non-conforming regulations and shall be so allowed until such time that they are determined to be a safety hazard. 
ARTICLE XIX - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 

Section. 19.01. - Schedule of Regulations. 

 
REFERENCES:  *Refer to article VII  **Refer to article XII 
ARTICLE XX - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 20.01. - Enforcement. 
The Zoning Administrator shall enforce this Ordinance, and is hereby given the authority and responsibility to enforce all provisions of this Ordinance under the direction of the City Manager which includes but is not limited to the following duties: 
1.  To serve as a liaison between the Colquitt Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council keeping each body advised of pending actions pertaining to zoning. 
2.  To serve as a non-voting Ex-Officio member of the Colquitt Planning Commission to provide technical assistance in matters relating to zoning requests. 
3.  To maintain in a timely and current manner the Official Zoning Map reflecting thereon any and all rezoning amendments approved by Mayor and Council. Amendments of the Official Zoning Map will be recorded by the Building Inspector within seven (7) calendar days following approval of such action by Mayor and Council. 
4.  To perform any other zoning duties as directed by Mayor and City Council and City Manager. 
Section 20.02. - Permits. 
The following shall apply in the issuance of any permits: 
1.  Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence excavation for, or construction of any building structure, or moving of any existing building without first obtaining a building permit from the Building Inspector. No permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration or remodeling of any building or structure until an application has been submitted in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, showing that the construction proposed is in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and with the Building Codes. 
No plumbing, electrical, drainage or other permit shall be issued until the Building Inspector has determined that the plans and designated use indicate that the structure and premises, if constructed as planned and proposed, will conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Section 20.03. - Certificates of occupancy. 
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any land, building or structure for which a building permit is required, and to use or permit to be used any building or structure hereafter altered, extended, erected, repaired, or moved, until the Building Inspector has issued a Certificate of Occupancy stating that the provisions of this Ordinance have been complied with. 
1.  Certificate Validity. The certificate of Occupancy as required for new construction of, or renovations to existing buildings and structures, in the Building Code, shall also constitute Certificates of Occupancy as required by this Ordinance. 
2.  Certificates for Existing Buildings. Certificates of Occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings, structures or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
3.  Temporary Certificates. Temporary Certificates of Occupancy may be issued for a part of a building or structure prior to the occupation of the entire building or structure, provided that such Temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall not remain in force more than six (6) months, nor more than five (5) days after the building or structure is fully completed and ready for occupancy and, provided further, that such portions of the building or structure are in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
4.  Records of Certificates. A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept in the office of the Building Inspector, and copies of such Certificates of Occupancy shall be furnished upon request to a person or persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
5.  Certificates for Accessory Buildings to Dwellings. Accessory buildings or structures to dwellings shall not require a separate Certificate of Occupancy, but rather may be included in the Certificate of Occupancy for the principal dwelling, building or structure on the same lot when such accessory buildings or structures are completed at the same time as the principal use. 
6.  Application for Certificates. Certificates of Occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of such building shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions and requirements of this Ordinance. If such Certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefore shall be notified of such refusal and the cause thereof within ten (10) days. 
Section 20.04. - Fees. 
Fees for inspections and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be collected by the Building Inspector in advance of the issuance of such permits or certificates. 
The amount of such fees shall be established by the City Council, from time to time, and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from the enforcement of this Ordinance. The fees shall be deposited with the City Clerk. 
Section 20.05. - Amendments. 
The Mayor and City Council of the City of Colquitt may amend, supplement or change the regulations of the district boundaries of this Ordinance as established herein. The procedure for submitting a request for an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance text or district boundaries of the official Zoning Map shall be as follows: 
1.  The applicant shall complete and submit to the City Clerk a rezoning application not less than fifteen (15) days of the next scheduled Planning Commission meeting. 
2.  At the time of application submittal, the applicant shall deposit the appropriate fee amount with the City Clerk to cover the cost of processing the application. 
3.  Within ten (10) days of the next scheduled Planning Commission meeting, the Zoning Administrator shall compile all of the rezoning requests for the next scheduled meeting. This agenda shall be mailed to all Planning Commission members. 
Section 20.06. - Zoning policies and procedures. 
The following policies and procedures are herein established to provide guidelines for the following zoning activities: 
1.  The adoption of a new City Zoning Ordinance. 
2.  The adoption of an Amendment to the Zoning Ordinance which changes the text of the Zoning Ordinance (Text Amendment). 
3.  The adoption of an Amendment to a Zoning Ordinance (Map Amendment) which rezones property from one zoning classification to another. 
4.  The procedural requirements for Zoning Amendments sponsored by the City of Colquitt. 
5.  The procedural requirements for Zoning Amendments sponsored by a private citizen or property owner. 
Section 20.07. - Policies and procedures for city initiated zoning activities: 
1.  In the case of developing an initial zoning plan (map and text), or updating or amending an existing zoning plan, the City of Colquitt Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council will, where appropriate, utilize any new or existing land use studies, land use plans or other relevant documents as a resource for ordinance development or ordinance amendment. 
2.  Upon the completion of a preliminary zoning document(s) by the Planning Commission and after the draft document has been presented to and reviewed by the Mayor and City Council, public hearings will be scheduled by both the Colquitt Planning Commission and the Colquitt Mayor and City Council, respectively. The official public hearing will be held by Mayor and City Council, and public notice will be given no less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty five (45) days prior to the official hearing date. 
3.  Public hearing notices shall be published in the local paper. The public notice will state the time, place, and purposes of the hearing. 
4.  When the boundary lines of an established zoning district are proposed for change, (rezoning) the Mayor and City Council shall have the Colquitt Planning Commission prepare an evaluation of each such proposed rezoning considering each of the following factors: 
a.  Existing uses and zoning of nearby property. 
b.  The extent to which property values are diminished by the present zoning restrictions. 
c.  The extent to which the destruction of property values, resulting from existing zoning of specific parcels promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
d.  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner by the proposed zoning classification. 
e.  The suitability of the subject property for the zoning purposes as proposed. 
f.  The length of time the property has been vacant under the present zoning classification, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property. 
g.  Conformity with or divergence from the City's Land Use Plan. 
5.  The public hearings will be convened at the advertised time and place and will be presided over by the appropriate officials. 
6.  The Presider of each respective public hearing will review for those present, the following operating procedures for the public hearing: 
a.  In order for a person in attendance to speak, the Chair must recognize him/her. The person recognized will identify himself/herself. The Chair may also request that the person furnish a home or business street address, as appropriate. 
b.  A minimum of ten (10) minutes per side (proponents and opponents) will be allowed for discussion. The applicant or an authorized representative of the applicant will be given the option of speaking first at the hearing. 
c.  Additional persons will be recognized per the above procedure for the purpose of addressing additional concerns of the revisions or to make additional points with regard to elements already addressed, but not to rehash points already made. 
d.  Appropriate notes or minutes will be recorded by the Mayor and City Council and the Planning Commission at their respective public hearings. 
7.  The Colquitt Planning Commission shall prepare and submit the necessary minutes, evaluations and or recommendations to the Mayor and City Council prior to the Mayor and City Council's Public Hearing. 
8.  The Mayor and City Council will, at its official public hearing, review the evaluations and recommendations from the Planning Commission and may choose to adopt or reject or modify the Planning Commission's recommendations, or the business may be tabled for additional study to the next regular Council meeting with the consent of the applicant. 
Section 20.08. - Procedures for rezoning request made by a private citizen/ property owner. 
1.  An application for rezoning must be filed with the City Clerk at City Hall on a prescribed form and fees paid as set by the Mayor and City Council. 
2.  All applications for rezoning requests will be accompanied by a plat of the parcel in question or a legal description. If the parcel's boundaries conform to the lot boundaries within an existing subdivision for which a plat is recorded in the land records of the County, then the lot block, and subdivision designation with appropriate plat references and a copy of the deed to the land so described as required above. 
3.  The City Clerk will inform applicant of the Public Hearing dates. Although, the Colquitt Planning Commission will convene a public hearing on each proposal, the official public hearing will be held by the Mayor and City Council and public notice will appear no less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty five (45) days of the official public hearing. 
4.  The Public Hearing notice will name the applicant, the location of property to be affected, the present zoning class, the proposed zoning class and the date, time and place of both the Planning Commission hearing and the Public Hearing held by the Mayor and City Council. 
5.  The City Clerk shall have erected upon the property for which rezoning is to be considered a sign of no less than seventeen (17) inches by twenty four (24) announcing the public hearings, stipulating the dates, times, and places for the two (2) hearings, the present zoning class and the proposed zoning class. The sign shall be clearly visible from a public street. It shall be erected not less than fifteen (15) days before the public hearing date. 
6.  The Public Hearing held by the Planning Commission shall follow essentially the same meeting procedures as that of the Mayor and City Council, as provided for in Section 20.07 (F-H). 
7.  Any application for rezoning of a particular parcel of property which is denied by the Mayor and City Council may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least twelve (12) months following the defeat of the rezoning request. 
Section 20.09. - Conditional uses. 
The Planning Commission shall hear and recommend, after a Public Hearing, conditional uses as authorized. The application to establish a conditional use shall be approved on a finding by the Mayor and City Council that: 
1.  The proposed use will not be contrary to the purpose of this ordinance. 
2.  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood not affect adversely the health and safety of residents and workers. 
3.  The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use such facility, vehicular movement, noise or fumes generation, or type of physical activity. 
4.  The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses; and the proposed use will be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of said use. 
5.  The parking and all development standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may be granted have been met. 
6.  Provided, that the City Council may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood; and provided that wherever the City Council shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations that any term, conditions or restrictions upon which such permit was granted, are not being complied with, said Council shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a hearing. 
Section 20.10. - Variances. 
The Planning Commission shall have the power to authorize upon appeal such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where a literal enforcement of the zoning requirements would result in undue hardship. 
1.  Procedure: Applications for variance shall be filed with the Office of the City Clerk; such applications must be filed thirty (30) days before the date of the following Planning Commission meeting in order that the required public notice may be given before the next scheduled meeting. Each application shall be accompanied by a simple sketch of the site, showing the following: 
a.  General location of the existing structures and property lines; and, 
b.  Location of the proposed buildings and land uses; and 
c.  Setbacks if applicable to the request. 
2.  Public hearing: A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission for the review of an application for a variance. Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Colquitt. 
3.  Fee: Each application for a variance shall be accompanied by an application fee set by the Mayor and City Council to partially defray administrative costs. 
4.  Conditions and limitations: The Planning Commission shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation which may be necessary to protect adjacent properties and to carry out the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 20.11. - Criteria for the consideration of variance requests. 
The following criteria shall be utilized when considering specific cases where the variance from the terms of the Ordinance will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. Such a variance may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon the finding of the Planning Commission that: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question and because of its size, shape or topography; and, 
2.  The application of this Ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an undue hardship; and, 
3.  Such conditions are particular to the particular piece of property involved and not the making of the applicant; and, 
4.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good, or impair the purposes and intent of this Ordinance, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this Ordinance; and, 
5.  The proposed use will be of such location, size, and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the surrounding neighborhood; and, 
6.  The proposed use will be of a nature that will make vehicular and pedestrian traffic no more hazardous than is normal for the district involved; and, 
7.  The location, size, intensity, site layout and periods of operation of any such proposed use will be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance emanating from the use which might be noxious to the occupants of any other nearby permitted uses whether by reason of dust, noises, fumes, vibration, smoke, or lights; and, 
8.  The location and height of buildings or structures and the location, nature and height of walls and fences will be such that the proposed use will not interfere with or discourage appropriate development and the use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect their value. 
Section 20.12. - Appeals. 
An appeal by a person, firm, or corporation, or by any officer department, board or bureau may be taken to the Mayor and City Council where it alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Office of the Clerk or other administrative official in the enforcement and interpretation of this Ordinance. Such appeals shall be made within thirty (30) days of the administrative action by filing with the City of Colquitt City Clerk and the Mayor and City Council a Notice of Appeal specifying the grounds thereof. If the Notice of Appeal is not filed within thirty (30) days, the only recourse shall be a court of record. 
The City Clerk shall then transmit to the Mayor and City Council all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. The appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action, appealed from unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Mayor and City Council that after the Notice of Appeals has been filed, that by reason of the facts stated in the Notice, a stay would in the Zoning Administrator's opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed, other than by a restraining order, which may, be granted by a court of record. 
The Mayor and City Council shall fix a reasonable amount of time for the hearing of an appeal and shall give due notice to the parties concerned including all landowners within three hundred (300) feet of the premises in question. Such notice shall be delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners at the address given on the last assessment roll. The Mayor and City Council shall decide the appeal within a reasonable period of time with regard to the purposes of the Ordinance. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or agent. 
In the event that the petitioner for an appeal remains discontented with the Mayor and City Council's decision on an appeal application, the petitioner shall have thirty (30) days to appeal the action to the superior court system. 
Section 20.13. - Fees. 
Fees for the administration, inspections, submittal of rezoning, variance or conditional use applications and the issuance of permits or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be collected by the City Clerk in advance of the issuance of such permits. 
The fee for a rezoning, variance or conditional use application shall be established by the Mayor and City Council to cover the cost of the administration, inspection, and supervision resulting from the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE XXI - INTERPRETATION, APPLICATION, VIOLATIONS, VALIDITY, CONFLICT AND EFFECTIVE DATE 

Section 21.01. - Interpretation, purpose and conflict. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comforts, prosperity, and general welfare. 
It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with, or abrogate, or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises, and likewise not in conflict with this Ordinance; nor is it intended by this Ordinance to interfere with, or abrogate, or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction or requires larger open spaces, or larger lot areas than are imposed or required by such Ordinance or agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. 
Section 21.02. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by imposition of the appropriate fine or by imprisonment in the discretion of the recorder's court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
Section 21.03. - Validity. 
This Ordinance and the various articles, sections, paragraphs, and clauses thereof, are hereby declared to be severable. If any article, section, paragraph or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected thereby. 
Section 21.04. - Conflicting provisions repealed. 
All other ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance, to the extent of such conflict and not further, are hereby repealed. 
Section 21.05. - Effective date. 
The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, and welfare of the people of the City of Colquitt and are hereby ordered to be given immediate effect from and after the date of its passage. 
ARTICLE XXII - MANUFACTURED HOME COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS 

Section 22.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to ensure that manufactured homes are installed on a site according to applicable federal and manufacturer's requirements. This Article is also intended to ensure architectural compatibility of manufactured homes with adjacent single-family residences and other land uses through the application of architectural compatibility standards. 
Section 22.02. - Definitions regarding architectural compatibility. 
1.  Architectural features: Ornamental or decorative features attached to or protruding from an exterior wall, including cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys, and decorative ornaments. 
2.  Bay window: A window assembly whose maximum horizontal projection is not more than two (2) feet from the vertical plane of an exterior wall and is elevated above the floor level of the home. 
3.  Compatibility: With regard to buildings, compatibility means achieving harmony in appearance of architectural features in the same vicinity. 
4.  Dormer: A window projecting from a roof. 
5.  Eave: The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
Section 22.03. - Type 1 compatibility standards (see Figure 1). 
1.  Applicability. This subsection shall apply in all areas within the City that lie where manufactured homes are permitted that do not fall under the Type 2 or 3 compatibility standards. 
2.  Foundation. The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation. 
3.  Skirting. The entire perimeter area between the bottom of the structure and the ground of each manufactured home shall be skirted or underpinned with brick, masonry, finished concrete or siding (of like or similar character to the manufactured home) that completely encloses the perimeter of the undercarriage except for proper ventilation and access openings. 
4.  Exterior Finish. The exterior siding of the manufactured home shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, or plastic siding material. 
5.  Roof Pitch and Materials. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope of at least two feet in height for each twelve (12) feet in width. Roof materials shall be wood shake, tile, asphalt shingle, coated metal, or similar material. 
Section 22.04. - Type 2 compatibility standards (see Figure 2). 
1.  Applicability. This subsection shall apply to all manufactured homes sited on lots located within five hundred (500) feet of two (2) or more existing site-built single-family residences. 
2.  Foundation. The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation. 
3.  Masonry Skirting. The entire perimeter area between the bottom of the structure of each manufactured home and the ground, including stairways, shall be underpinned with masonry that completely encloses the perimeter of the undercarriage and attached stairways except for proper ventilation and access openings. 
4.  Exterior Finish. The exterior siding of the manufactured home shall consist of wood or hardboard siding material. 
5.  Roof Pitch and Materials. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope of at least four feet in height for each twelve (12) feet in width. Roof materials shall be wood shake, tile, or asphalt shingle material. 
6.  Covered Porch or Deck. A covered porch, deck, or entry area at least ten (10) feet by ten (10) feet shall be added for each entrance to the manufactured home prior to occupancy. 
Section 22.05. - Type 3 compatibility standards (see bottom of Figure 2). 
1.  Applicability. This subsection shall apply to areas where the strictest compatibility standards are necessary to ensure architectural harmony of manufactured homes with adjacent and nearby site-built homes and other land uses. These standards shall apply in addition to the Type 2 Compatibility Standards provided in § 4-4-6. 
2.  Width. The manufactured home shall consist of two fully enclosed parallel sections and a total width of at least 20 feet. 
3.  Covered Porch. A covered porch or deck shall be provided along the entire length of the manufactured home facing the front yard or street prior to occupancy, with a 10-foot minimum depth. 
4.  Additional Architectural Features. The manufactured home shall contain eaves with a minimum projection of six inches, window shutters, and at least one additional architectural feature such as dormers, bay windows, or another architectural feature that will provide equal compatibility with surrounding residences and land uses, as approved by the Land Use Officer. 
Figure 1 
Figure 1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1976 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1976 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1976 Code, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1976 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1976 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since 1976, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 