CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF CHAMBLEE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1993 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: December 10, 1993  Effective: December 10, 1993 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CHAMBLEE, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Johnson W. Brown 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dr. Ronny L. Richardson—District 1 
Don Biles—District 2 
Roger Fitzpatrick—District 3 
Gary King—District 4  Edward Lee Floyd, III—District 5 
City Council 
____________ 
George E. Rodriguez 
City Manager 
____________ 
Joe L. Fowler 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kathy Brannon, C.M.C. 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Chamblee, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code, as supplemented through January 10, 1992, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Connie Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Kathy Brannon, City Clerk, and Mr. Joe L. Fowler, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 387 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Chamblee Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Chamblee, Georgia: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Chamblee, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 94, each inclusive, is adopted except as set forth in this adopting ordinance. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 13, 1993, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 13, 1993, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. The following provisions of the "Code of Ordinances, City of Chamblee, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 94, shall be deleted or revised as set forth below: 
(1)  Section 54-4 "Judge to have authority of justice of the peace; duty of judge in cases of violation of state law" shall be deleted in its entirety. 
(2)  Section 54-7 "Arrest by police officers; right to bail or recognizance" shall be revised by deleting the second sentence of such Code Section which such sentence reads as follows: "Such persons shall be brought before the municipal court or other court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of a commitment hearing following such arrest as soon as practicable, but not later than the next session of the municipal court." 
(3)  Section 6-53 "Alcoholic beverage review board" shall be revised by deleting the "business license administrator" from membership on the alcoholic beverage review board and inserting in lieu thereof the "city manager" as a member of such board. 
(4)  Section 18-73 "Assessment of cost when work done by City" shall be deleted in its entirety. 
(5)  Section 58-5 "Distribution of handbills" shall be revised by deleting the words "mayor or chief of police" and inserting therein the words "city manager." 
(6)  Section 70-12(b)(1) "Award of privilege license for construction of off-premises signs" shall be revised by deleting the words "city clerk" and inserting in lieu thereof the words "building inspector." 
Section 8. This Ordinance shall be effective December 10, 1993. The foregoing was proposed by Councilmember Fitzpatrick with a Motion and the same be adopted. Said Motion was seconded by Councilmember Floyd. Same was then put to a vote and all councilmembers voted in favor of the ordinance and no councilmembers voted against it. Said Motion was thereupon declared passed and duly adopted this 10th day of December, 1993. 

City of Chamblee, Georgia 
Approved this the 14th day of December, 1993. 

City of Chamblee, Georgia 
First reading: 11/12/93 
Second reading: 12/10/93 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Chamblee as set forth in 1935 Ga. Laws, page 976. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citation to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(a), the terms "recorder" and "recorder's court" have been stricken and the terms "municipal court judge" and "municipal court" have been inserted in lieu thereof throughout the Charter and Code of Ordinances without notation. 

[ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL] 

Section 1. - Old acts consolidated; city incorporated; name. 
On and after the passage and approval of this act, the act of 1908, approved August 17, 1908, found in 1908 Ga. Laws, page 542, creating a charter for the Town of Chamblee in DeKalb County, and the act of August 1, 1922, found in 1922 Ga. Laws, pages 631—638, inclusive, amending said charter and creating a new charter for the City of Chamblee, and the act of August 1, 1929, found in 1929 Ga. Laws, pages 943—945, inclusive, and each and all of said acts and each and all the acts amendatory thereof be, and the same are, hereby revised, consolidated, amended and superseded by this act, and a new charter for said City of Chamblee, DeKalb County, Georgia, is hereby created. The corporate name of said municipality to be "City of Chamblee". 
Section 2. - Boundaries. 
The territory embraced within the corporate limits of said City of Chamblee shall be as fixed by the said act of 1908, 1908 Ga. Laws, page 542, and by the act of 1922, 1922 Ga. Laws, pages 631—638, inclusive, and with the additional territory embraced and included in this act. That is to say, by the said act of 1908, aforesaid, the center of the passenger depot of the Southern Railway Company, at Chamblee, Georgia, was declared to be the center of said incorporated municipality and the corporate limits to be located one-half (½) mile distant therefrom in each and every direction. By act of 1922, aforesaid, 1922 Ga. Laws, pages 631—638, inclusive, said limits as previously fixed were confirmed and in addition thereto the following territory was made a part of the incorporated area and territory of said municipality, to wit: Beginning at the line of corporate limits as fixed by act of 1908, aforesaid, near Prospect Church, and running in an easterly direction along the north side of Peachtree Road to Shallowford Road; and thence along the east side of Shallowford Road one (1) mile, more or less, to a point in line with the south side of Eighth Street; thence to and along the south side of Eighth Street to a point in line with westernmost part of the overhead bridge of the Southern Railway at point where Peachtree Road crosses said railway about one (1) mile, more or less, southwesterly from said railway station at Chamblee; thence running past said bridge to northern side of a public road parallel to said railway; and thence running along the northwestern side of said public road to the corporate limits of Chamblee as fixed by said act of 1908. Said annexation as made in 1922 was not clear and definite but was intended to embrace the territory as herein set forth. Said territory as fixed by said act of 1908 and as fixed by said act of 1922, as next above set out, is hereby declared to be the incorporated territory of said municipality, and in addition thereto, the following territory which is hereby made a part of said corporate territory of said municipality, to wit: Beginning at a point on the south side of Eighth Street, at the corporate line of said municipality as it existed prior to this act, said point being at or near the east line of land lot 271 of the 18th district of DeKalb County, and running thence westerly and northwesterly along the south side of Eighth Street or old Nancey's Creek Church Road to the south line of land lot 278; thence continuing west on the south line of land lot 278 to the west line of said land lot 278; thence north along the west line of land lot 278, 3,000 feet, more or less, to the northwest corner of said land lot 278; thence east along the north line of said land lot 278 to the corporate limits of said municipality as existing prior to this act. 
Section 2.1. - Boundary between Cities of Chamblee and Doraville defined. 
(a)  The corporate limit line between the City of Chamblee and the City of Doraville is hereby located and defined as commencing at an iron pipe marker on the original south line of land lot 310 of the 18th land district of DeKalb County where said land lot line intersects the present corporate limit line of the City of Chamblee, and where said land lot line also intersects the southeastern side of a paved public road known as Shallowford Road (also known as Decatur Road), said beginning point being 368 feet west of a United States government corner marker, and thence running northwesterly 1404 feet to an iron pin marker at the point where the northern side of Old Peachtree Road intersects the southeastern right-of-way line of the Southern Railway. 
(b)  The corporate limit line of the City of Chamblee, as it runs along the northern side of Peachtree Road, and as mentioned in said former acts defining the corporate limits of the City of Chamblee, also intersects the southeastern right-of-way line of said Southern Railway at the iron pin marker last above referred to. Said boundary line was surveyed and marked by J. R. Bracewell and Associates, Inc., and a plat showing the location of said line as herein established was made by J. R. Bracewell March 23, 1948. 
(1949 Ga. Laws, page 567) 
Editor's note— The tracts of land described in sections 2.1 through 2.8 further define or add additional territory to the city. These acts are all amendatory to the Charter, but were given no section number designations as enacted. The numbering system used for their inclusion was provided by the codifier to maintain the integrity of the original Charter numbering. 
Section 2.2. - 1949 annexation. 
(a)  The act of August 17, 1908, found in 1908 Ga. Laws, page 542, creating a charter for the Town of Chamblee in DeKalb County, and all acts amendatory thereof, and the act of 1935, approved March 28, 1935, and found in 1935 Ga. Laws, pages 976—994, both inclusive, creating a new charter for the City of Chamblee, and all acts amendatory thereof, and all acts amended by said several acts, be, and the same are hereby amended so as to add to and include within the corporate limits of the City of Chamblee the following described territory, to wit: 
Beginning on the northeastern side of the paved road known as the Chamblee and Dunwoody Public Road at the point where the original circular city limit line of the City of Chamblee (formerly Town of Chamblee), as defined by the act approved August 17, 1908, intersects the northeastern right-of-way line of said paved public road and running thence in a northwestern direction along the northeastern right-of-way line of said public road to a point sufficient in length to extend the original one-half (½) mile radius from the center of the Town of Chamblee as provided in said act of 1908, for an additional length of 1200 feet; thence turning to a southwesterly direction and crossing said Chamblee and Dunwoody Public Road on a curved line, and continuing on a curved line which at all points along its course shall remain a uniform distance of 1200 feet distant from the original circular corporate limit line as aforesaid, or 3840 feet distant from the center of said original Town of Chamblee as prescribed by said act of 1908, until reaching a point 400 feet northerly from the northwestern right-of-way line of the new state highway known as "The Industrial Boulevard" (it being a highway which leaves Peachtree Road at the western limit of the City of Chamblee and traverses the northwestern section of said city, and proceeds in a northeasterly direction to the City of Doraville); thence running southwestwardly and at a uniform distance of 400 feet northwestwardly from the northwestern right-of-way line of said new highway to the north line of land lot 278, said north line of said land lot being a corporate limit line of the City of Chamblee; thence turning east and following a straight east course to the southwestern side of Johnson Ferry Road; thence turning southeastwardly along the southwest side of said Johnson Ferry Road and continuing along the southwest side of the same to point of intersection of said side of said Johnson Ferry Road with the northwestern side of that branch of Peachtree Road which lies northwest of the mainline tracks of the Southern Railway Company, thence continuing in the same course across said branch of Peachtree Road to the southeastern right-of-way line of said branch of Peachtree Road; thence following along the south-eastern right-of-way line of said branch of Peachtree Road, and running in a northeasterly direction, to the southwestern corporate limit line of the Town of Chamblee as set up in circular form by the act of 1908, as aforesaid; thence turning northward and running in a circular course along the original circular limit line of the Town of Chamblee, as established by said act of 1908, and continuing along said original circular limit line of formerly the Town of Chamblee, now the City of Chamblee, to the point of beginning on the northeastern side of said Chamblee and Dunwoody Public Road. All the territory included within the lines set up in this section as defining the area annexed by this act is hereby declared to be a part of the corporate area of the City of Chamblee. 
(b)  The road described in the 26th line of section 2 of the said act of 1935 (Acts of 1935, pages 976—994, both inclusive) in the words "thence running past said bridge to northern side of a public road parallel to said railway" is the same road as described in this act as "that branch of Peachtree Road which lies northwest of the main-line tracks of the Southern Railway Company." 
(1949 Ga. Laws, page 573) 
Section 2.3. - 1950 annexation. 
The act of August 17, 1908, found in 1908 Ga. Laws, page 542, creating a charter for the Town of Chamblee, in DeKalb County, and all acts amendatory thereof, and the act of 1935, approved March 28, 1935, and found in 1935 Ga. Laws, pages 976—994, both inclusive, and all acts amendatory thereof, and all acts amended by said several acts, be and the same are, hereby amended so as to add to and include within the corporate limits of the City of Chamblee the following described territory, to wit: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in land lots numbers 308 and 309 of the 18th district of DeKalb County, Georgia, containing 12 acres, more or less, and more particularly described as beginning at a fixed corner at the southeastern right-of-way line of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard where the same intersects the original east line of land lot 308 of said district (said corner being 612.1 feet south of the original northeast corner of said land lot); running thence southwest along said southeastern right-of-way line of said Peachtree Industrial Boulevard 350 feet, more or less, to the point where said right- of-way line intersects the northern part of the half-mile circular corporate limit line of the City of Chamblee as defined by the previous acts of the General Assembly of Georgia, and set out above; thence running eastwardly and southeastwardly, following said previously defined corporate limit line a distance of 1200 feet, more or less, to the point where said previously fixed corporate limit line intersects the east line of a tract of 18.25 acres shown on a plat of the property of Jesse Lawson, made by C. R. Roberts, civil engineer, dated October 3, 1949, and recorded in plat book 16, page 156 of records of plats in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of DeKalb County, Georgia[;] thence running north along the east line of said 18.25 acre tract a distance of five [hundred] (500) feet, more or less, to an iron pin corner marking a turn in the lines of said tract; thence, after making an interior angle of 90 degrees, four (4) minutes, running in a westerly direction along the line of said 18.25 acre tract a distance of [402.2] feet to a fixed corner marked by an iron pin at a turn in the line of said tract; thence, after making an exterior angle of 269 degrees 58 minutes, running in a northerly direction along the line of said 18.25 acre tract, 340 feet to a fixed corner marked by an iron pin; thence, after making an interior angle of 89 degrees 59 minutes, running in a westerly direction along a line of said 18.25 acre tract a distance of 193.2 feet to an iron pin corner on the southeast side of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard; thence southwest along the southeastern right-of-way line of said Peachtree Industrial Boulevard 381.7 feet to the point of beginning. Said record of said plat is referred to. 
(1950 Ga. Laws, page 2716) 
Editor's note— The bracketed reference to [402.2] above corrects a typographical error in the original act which read: "a distance of four hundred two and two tenths (40.2) feet …." 
Section 2.4. - 1950 additional annexation. 
The act of 1908, approved August 17, 1908, and found in 1908 Ga. Laws, page 542, creating a charter for the Town of Chamblee in DeKalb County, and the act of 1935, approved March 28, 1935, and found in 1935 Ga. Laws, pages 976—994, inclusive, creating a new charter for the City of Chamblee, and all acts amended by said acts, and all acts amendatory of said several acts be, and the same are, hereby amended as in this act provided, to wit: 
The following described territory shall be a part of the corporate territory of said City of Chamblee, said territory being more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the point on the eastern side of the Chamblee and Dunwoody Public Road where the extended corporate limit line of said municipality as extended and defined by the act approved February 15, 1949, (Ga. Laws, Extra Session 1948 and Regular Session 1949, pages 573—577, inclusive) leaves said side of said road and crosses said road, said point being in the northwestern portion of land lot 308 of the 18th land district of DeKalb County, and running thence northeasterly and easterly along a curved line which is located a uniform distance of 1200 feet northerly from the northern portion of the circular corporate limit line as fixed for said municipality by said act of 1908 and referred to in said later acts, and for a distance of approximately 2800 feet and to the east original land lot line of land lot 324 of said district; thence south along the east lines of land lot 324 aforesaid, and along the east line of land lot 308 of said district, a distance of 1000 feet, more or less, to the southeastern right-of-way line of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard; thence southwest along said southeastern right-of-way line of said Peachtree Industrial Boulevard 400 feet, more or less, to the original circular corporate limit line defined by said act of 1908, and the other acts referred to herein; thence running westerly and southwesterly along said previously defined circular corporate limit line 1600 feet, more or less to the eastern right-of-way line of said Chamblee and Dunwoody Public Road; thence northerly and northwesterly along the eastern and northeastern right-of-way line of said Chamblee and Dunwoody Public Road to the point of beginning. 
(1950 Ga. Laws, page 2807) 
Section 2.5. - 1958 annexation. 
The act of August 17, 1908, found in 1908 Ga. Laws, page 542, creating a charter for the Town of Chamblee, in DeKalb County, and all acts amendatory thereof, and the act of 1935, approved March 28, 1935, found in 1935 Ga. Laws, pages 976—994, inclusive, creating a new charter for the City of Chamblee, and all acts amendatory thereof, and all acts amended by said several acts be, and the same are, hereby amended in the following respects: 
By annexing to the corporate limits of the City of Chamblee the following additional territory, to wit: All that tract or parcel of land lying in DeKalb County, Georgia, lying between the present western and northwestern boundary or corporate limit line of the City of Chamblee, the eastern boundary or corporate limit line of the Village of North Atlanta, the northern side of Sexton Road, and the northeastern side of the Chamblee and Dunwoody Public Road, and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning on the northeastern side of said Chamblee and Dunwoody Public Road at the point where the present northwestern corporate limit line of the City of Chamblee intersects the northeastern side of said Chamblee and Dunwoody Public Road, and running thence northwesterly along the northeastern side of said Chamblee and Dunwoody Public Road a distance of 200 feet, more or less, to a point where the northern side of Sexton Road, if extended in a straight course, would intersect the northeastern side of the said Chamblee and Dunwoody Public Road; thence running westwardly along said extended line to the northern side of said Sexton Road, and continuing thence in a westerly, southwesterly, northwesterly and westerly direction along the northern, northeastern, and at times northwestern side of said Sexton Road, and following the curvature thereof, to the point where the northern side of Sexton Road intersects the eastern corporate limit line of the Village of North Atlanta; thence running south along the eastern corporate limit line of said Village of North Atlanta, and also along the west land lot lines of land lots 307, 300, and 278 a distance of 6500 feet, more or less, to the point where the present corporate limit line of the City of Chamblee, as defined by previous act, intersects the north and south line next above described; thence running northeasterly, northerly, and again northeasterly along the western or northwestern corporate limit line of the City of Chamblee, as defined by previous acts, to the point of beginning on the northeastern side of the Chamblee and Dunwoody Public Road. Said beginning point being in the northwestern part of land lot 308 of the 18th land district. 
(1958 Ga. Laws, page 3318) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of 1958 Ga. Laws, page 3318, provided for a referendum to be held on the proposed annexation. 1959 Ga. Laws, page 2642, sec. 9, ratified the annexation of the above tract pursuant to the result of the referendum. Neither of those sections has been included in this codification. 
Section 2.6. - 1967 annexation. 
An act creating a new charter for the City of Chamblee, approved March 28, 1935 (1935 Ga. Laws, pages 944—976), as amended, is hereby amended by annexing to the said corporate limits of said city all of the following described property to wit: 
All that tract of land lying and being in land lot 277 of the 18th land district of DeKalb County, Georgia, described as beginning at the point where the southern right-of-way line of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard intersects the east line of said land lot, at the present corporate limit line of the City of Chamblee, and running south 178.9 feet, more or less, along said land lot line to the northern right-of-way line of the Southern Railway Company; thence running southwesterly along said northern right-of-way line of said Southern Railway Company 1120 feet, more or less, to an iron pin located 83 feet eastwardly along said right-of-way line from the point where said railway right-of-way line intersects the southern right-of-way line of said Peachtree Industrial Boulevard; running thence north 46 degrees one (1) minute west 150 feet, more or less, to the northern right-of-way line of said Peachtree Industrial Boulevard; thence running northeastwardly along the northern right-of-way line of said Peachtree Industrial Boulevard 1250 feet, more or less, to the present corporate limit line of the City of Chamblee; running thence southerly along the present corporate limit line of the City of Chamblee to the point of beginning. Said beginning point being on the line between properties formerly known as the T. A. Hutcheson property on the east thereof and the property formerly known as the B. T. and W. O. Pierce property on the west thereof. 
(1967 Ga. Laws, page 2355) 
Section 2.7. - 1978 annexation. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in the act of 1966 (1966 Ga. Laws, pages 409—413; sections 69-904 through 69-912, Ga. Code Ann. [O.C.G.A. §§ 36-36-22—36-36-29]), the unincorporated tract of land located at the Shallowford Park and near the intersection of Shallowford Road and Shallowford Terrace is hereby annexed to the existing corporate limits of the City of Chamblee, said tract being more particularly described as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in land lots 268 and 281 of the 18th district of DeKalb County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at an iron pin located on the easterly right-of-way line of Shallowford Road 429.60 feet as measured from the northeasterly intersection formed by the southeasterly right-of-way of Shallowford Road and the northeasterly right-of-way of Whispering Hills Drive (Whispering Hills Drive being a 60 foot right-of-way and as measured along the southeasterly and easterly right-of-way line of Shallowford Road; running thence north 22° 13′ 35″ east on a chord line of 80.13 feet (having an arc of 80.15 feet) and along the easterly right-of-way line of Shallowford Road to a one-half inch (½″) reinforced rod; running thence north 10° 36′ 21″ east and along the easterly right-of-way line of Shallowford Road a distance of 52.91 feet to a one-half inch (½″) reinforced rod; running thence north 20° 30′ 20″ east and along the easterly right-of-way line of Shallowford Road a distance of 103.80 feet to a one-half inch (½″) reinforced rod; running thence north 08° 29′ 25″ east and along the easterly right-of-way line of Shallowford Road a distance of 52.09 feet to a one-half inch (½″) reinforced rod; running thence north 09° 39′ 16″ east along a chord of 127.96 feet (having an arc of 128.02 feet) and along the easterly right-of-way line of Shallowford Road to a one-half inch (½″) reinforced rod; running thence north 06° 33′ 43″ east and along the easterly right-of-way line of Shallowford Road a distance of 71.95 feet to an iron pin; running thence south 62° 44′ 57″ east a distance of 672.97 feet to an iron pin; running thence south 26° 34′ 23″ west a distance of 444.55 feet to an iron pin; running thence north 63° 03′ 04″ west a distance of 124.62 feet to a one-half [inch] (½″) reinforced rod; running thence north 66° 16′ 27″ west a distance of 439.22 feet to an iron pin and the point of beginning; said aforedescribed property being in accordance with boundary survey for the City of Chamblee dated August 15, 1977 prepared by Donald W. Harkleroad and Associates, Inc., Engineers and Land Surveyors and consisting of 6.352 acres. 
Also, to include that portion of Shallowford Road bordering between the existing city limits of Chamblee and western boundary line of the 6.352 acre tract, and also to include the eastern half of the right-of-way of Shallowford Road immediately adjacent to the western boundary of the above described 6.352 acre tract (said western boundary running from the above described point of beginning in a northeasterly direction to the iron pin at the northwestern corner of said 6.352 acre tract), said eastern portion of the right-of-way of Shallowford Road varying in width from approximately 40 feet to approximately 50 feet and being approximately the same length as the western boundary of said 6.352 acre tract, said eastern portion of the right-of-way of Shallowford Road further being that area of land between the western boundary of said 6.352 acre tract and the city limits line between the City of Chamblee and DeKalb County as shown by the boundary survey for the City of Chamblee dated August 15, 1977 prepared by Donald W. Harkleroad and Associates, Inc., Engineers and Land Surveyors. 
Said tract of land shall constitute a part of the lands within the corporate limits of the City of Chamblee as completely and fully as if the limits had been marked and defined by special act of the general assembly. 
(Ord. No. 253, 12-8-78) 
Editor's note— The above section describes a tract of land annexed to the city by ordinance. Although the ordinance does not amend the city Charter, its provisions have been included here at the editor's discretion for the user's ease of access when researching various annexations of the city. 
Section 2.8. - 1978 additional annexation. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in the act of 1966 (1966 Ga. Laws, pages 409—413; sections 69-904 through 69-912, Ga. Code Ann. [O.C.G.A. §§ 36-36-22—36-36-29]), the unincorporated tract of land located at the northeast corner of Eighth Street and New Peachtree Road is hereby annexed to the existing corporate limits of the City of Chamblee, said tract being more particularly described as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in land lot 277 of the 18th district, DeKalb County, Georgia, as shown by plat of survey by S.E. Mahan dated June 3, 1978 and revised August 25, 1978 and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection formed by the southern side of Eighth Street, and by the land lot line formed by the eastern side of land lot 277 and the adjacent western side of land lot 278; from said Point of Beginning, thence north 0 degrees 7 minutes west along said land lot line 742.6 feet to a point; thence in a southwesterly direction along the most northern part of the Southern Railway right-of-way 446.1 feet to a point; thence south 47 degrees 22 minutes west along a course (chord) 645.1 feet to a point; thence north 88 degrees, 5 minutes east 339.0 feet to a point; thence north 84 degrees 56 minutes east a distance of 200.8 feet; thence north 87 degrees 06 minutes east a distance of 143 feet; thence south 80 degrees 13 minutes east a distance of 88.3 feet to the Point of Beginning. 
Said tract of land shall constitute a part of the lands within the corporate limits of the City of Chamblee as completely and fully as if the limits had been marked and defined by special act of the general assembly. 
(Ord. No. 254, 12-8-78) 
Editor's note— The above section describes a tract of land annexed to the city by ordinance. Although the ordinance does not amend the city Charter, its provisions have been included here at the editor's discretion for the user's ease of reference when researching various annexations of the city. 
Section 3. - Ad valorem taxes; powers; rate. 
Said City of Chamblee shall have power to levy, assess, and collect ad valorem taxes for all ordinary, current, or otherwise legal expenses of government upon all property within its territorial limits, or taxable by it under provisions of general law, not to exceed eight (8) mills upon each dollar of assess[ed] valuations. Among the ordinary and legal purposes for which such taxes may be levied, collected, and expended by the municipality shall be that of furnishing social security insurance and protection to its employees and other persons eligible for such protection. Said municipality shall likewise have power and authority to expend other general funds for the same purpose whether raised by taxation or otherwise. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2642; 1968 Ga. Laws, page 2715) 
Section 4. - Power to license and tax businesses. 
Said municipality shall have power to fix by ordinance from time to time, and to alter and amend the same, license fees or taxes upon businesses and occupations, except, in such instances as such tax or fee or charge may be forbidden by general law, and to provide by ordinance when, how and in what manner payable. It shall have authority to adopt ordinances for the enforcement of such tax ordinances and shall have authority to adopt ordinances for the purpose of inflicting fines, penalties and punishments for violations of such ordinances. 
Section 5. - Additional powers as to taxation. 
Said municipality shall have power and authority to adopt such objects and classifications of subjects of taxation, and enforce the same, as may be now allowed by general law or may hereafter be allowed by general law. 
Section 6. - Power to contract and incur debt. 
Said City of Chamblee shall have power to contract and be contracted with in its said corporate name, to incur debt by borrowing money, to secure the same by appropriate evidence thereof. All within the limitations and restrictions of general law. 
Section 7. - Expenditure powers. 
Said City of Chamblee shall have power to expend the money of the municipality for all lawful purposes. 
Section 8. - Powers pertaining to property. 
Said City of Chamblee shall have power to own, hold, purchase or receive, improve, sell, lease, mortgage, pledge or dispose of property, real or personal, and any interest or estate therein, within or without the limits of the city when necessary for governmental purposes. 
Section 9. - Condemnation of property; powers. 
Said municipality shall have power to condemn property, real or personal, or any easement, interest, estate or use therein, either within or without the limits of the city, for present or future public use. Such condemnation shall be made and effected upon the same terms and conditions as provided for in the general laws of the State of Georgia with reference to the condemnation of private property for public use, or as may be provided by any future laws, amendments or changes of such laws having reference to the condemnation of private property for public uses. 
Section 10. - Power to issue bonds. 
Said City of Chamblee shall have power to issue and sell interest bearing negotiable bonds of the municipality for the purposes of purchasing lands, buildings, erecting buildings, improving property, purchasing equipment, purchasing improvements, paying for condemned property taken for public use, whenever necessary and authorized by general law and whenever the provisions of the general laws are complied with, and when done for the purpose of properly furnishing said municipality and the citizens and inhabitants thereof with proper health and sanitation facilities, including water, water systems and supplies, sewers and sewer systems, disposal plants, electric and power service, streets and sidewalks, fire protection, firefighting equipment and facilities. Such bonds may be authorized from time to time or issued from time to time, as the necessity may exist; but such bonds shall not be issued in any case except within the restrictions of general law, nor shall any bonds be issued for any purpose except as authorized by general law and the constitution of this state and of this charter or subsequent amendment; and in all cases such bonds to be issued only after compliance with general law and the constitution of this state as to purpose, amount, elections and procedure. 
Section 11. - Power to own and operate cemeteries. 
Said municipality shall have power to own and operate cemeteries for the burial of the dead. It shall have the right to prescribe by ordinance reasonable regulations pertaining to the operation of cemeteries by others, and to grant or refuse, as the public good may require, permission to others to operate such cemeteries within its limits. 
Section 12. - Nuisance abatement powers. 
Said municipality shall have power to abate nuisances in the manner authorized by general law pertaining to the abatement of nuisances by incorporated municipalities, and in the manner and subject to the restrictions of general law as now provided, or as may be hereafter enacted. 
Section 13. - Power to hold property; administer trusts. 
Said municipality shall have power to take and hold property of every kind, either within or without the state upon trust; and to administer trusts for the public benefit. 
Section 14. - Power pertaining to utilities. 
Said municipality shall have power to make contracts with any firm, person or corporation, private or municipal, or with any public service corporation, or with any association, for furnishing or supplying said municipality and its inhabitants with public utility services of all kinds, or to contract in like manner for equipment for supplying such services, including the right to rent, lease, purchase or condemn with reference to such utilities. 
Section 15. - Power over sewers, drains, disposal plants; sanitary tax authorized. 
Said municipality shall have the power to construct, repair, and maintain sewers, drains and disposal plants as shall be necessary for proper sanitation, to collect and dispose of garbage and refuse matter, and contract for, license and regulate the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse matter. Said municipality shall have power to pass all reasonable by-laws, ordinances and resolutions regulating said matters or in any wise appertaining thereto; said municipality shall have authority to levy a sanitary tax against each owner of each parcel of improved real property within its corporate limits which is improved with either a dwelling or a business structure. The mayor and council may vary, change, alter, lower or raise the sanitary tax from year to year. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, page 2447; 1957 Ga. Laws, page 2677; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2701; 1965 Ga. Laws, page 2780; 1968 Ga. Laws, page 2715; Ord. No. 264, 2-12-82) 
Section 15.1. - Levy of sanitary tax. 
It shall be the duty of the governing body of the City of Chamblee to exercise a sound and legal discretion in determining and levying sanitary taxes pursuant to and in conformity with the city charter as amended by this ordinance and in conformity to general laws and the constitution of this state. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2701; 1965 Ga. Laws, page 2780; Ord. No. 264, 2-12-82) 
Editor's note— The text of the above section is derived from Sec. 2 of the 1963 and 1965 Acts. The wording was reenacted by home rule ordinance. 
Section 16. - Power pertaining to hazards on private property. 
The mayor and council shall have authority to provide by ordinance reasonable regulations for requiring owners or occupiers of property, also vacant property, to keep such property free of rubbish and undergrowth, waste or other materials dangerous to health, limb or property, or constituting a fire hazard, also dead or dangerous trees; and in case the owner or person responsible shall fail or refuse, after reasonable notice, to correct such condition, the municipality shall have the right to correct the same and tax the reasonable cost against the owner or person responsible, as the case may be. 
Section 17. - Powers pertaining to streets. 
The maintenance of the public streets, roads, lanes, and highways in said municipality which constitute a part of the public roads, streets, or highways of the State of Georgia, or the county in which said municipality is located, or of the state highway department, shall not devolve upon said municipality until such time as the same may be authorized by a future express legislative enactment, expressly declaring it to be one of the duties of said municipality to maintain such roads, streets, or highways. Said municipality shall have the power and authority however to police and patrol so much of said streets, lanes, roads, and highways as are located within the corporate limits of said municipality, regulate the speed and uses of said streets, roads, lanes, and highways, preserve good order thereon, and protect life, limb and property thereon. Said municipality shall have the power to open, use, and extend its jurisdiction over all lanes, streets, roads and highways therein as are not a part of the public system of roads, streets and highways of the state, state highway department or county as aforesaid and to make all reasonable and necessary rules, ordinances and resolutions respecting the same and their control and uses. The mayor and council shall, however, have authority to grade, regrade, pave, repave, build, rebuild, or otherwise improve sidewalks within the corporate limits of the municipality along the public roads, streets, and thoroughfares therein without being under any duty to repair or maintain or improve any of that portion of such streets, roads, highways, or thoroughfares not occupied by sidewalks but devoted to vehicular traffic. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 17.1. - Sidewalk improvements; notice; protests; petitions. 
Whenever the governing body of said municipality shall deem it necessary to grade, regrade, pave, repave, build, rebuild, or otherwise improve any sidewalk as above provided, and the expense thereof cannot be paid from general current funds of the year, or in the discretion of said body should not be so paid, said governing body may by ordinance or resolution declare such improvement necessary to be done, and publish such resolution once a week for two (2) weeks, consecutively, in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements in the county in which said municipality is located are published, and therein give notice of the intention to assess the costs and expenses of said improvement as herein provided, and if the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the lands abutting on said sidewalk shall not within 15 days after date of publication of the last issue of said newspaper carrying advertisement of said resolution file with either the mayor or the clerk of said municipality their protest in writing, protesting against said improvement, said governing body shall have authority to cause said improvement to be made, and to contract therefor, and to make assessments and fix liens as provided for herein. Provided, however, that if the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the land liable to assessment for such improvements shall petition the governing body, and therein make reference to this provision of this act, and designate by general description the improvement to be undertaken, and designate the roads or streets or highways along which same to be located, and between what points, and designate the side or sides of roads, streets, or highways along which same to be made, it shall then be the duty of the governing body to proceed, as hereinafter provided to cause said improvement to be made in accordance with the prayers of said petition and their own best judgment, and in such cases it shall not be necessary to pass the resolution or ordinance hereinbefore mentioned. The petition shall be lodged with the clerk of the municipality who shall investigate the sufficiency thereof and submit the same to the governing body, and certify the result of his investigation. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Editor's note— Sections 17.1 through 17.13 were enacted by 1946 Ga. Laws, page 422, as amendments to the Charter without designation as to numbering or location. 
Section 17.2. - Same; assessment of costs; basis. 
Each lot or parcel of land abutting upon said sidewalk shall be charged on a basis of lineal foot frontage with an equal rate per foot of frontage with its just pro rata of the entire cost of said improvement; provided however that the cost of said sidewalks shall be charged entirely to the lots or parcels of land abutting upon the sides of the streets, roads, or highways upon which the same are located. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 17.3. - Same; ordinances and resolutions; installation of utilities. 
Whenever the petition provided for in section two (2) of this act [section 17.1 hereof] is presented, or whenever said governing body shall have determined to make any improvement and assess the costs or any part thereof against property, and shall have passed the ordinance or resolution provided for in section two (2) of this act, and if the owners of the required frontage necessary for defeating the plan fail to act within the time required, the said governing body shall then have the power to enact all necessary ordinances and resolutions, and to establish all rules and regulations that may be necessary to require the owners of all the property abutting on the improvement to pay the costs of such improvement, and to cause to be installed and laid under said sidewalks all necessary water, gas, or sewerpipe connections to connect with existing or future water, gas or sewer lines, under or adjacent to the improvement, to the end that future disturbing of sidewalks may be avoided as nearly as possible, and the costs and expenses incident to same taxed against the property to be served thereby, and its owner, and the same shall be included in the assessment for sidewalk improvements chargeable to the owner and the property as aforesaid. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 17.4. - Same; waiver; bond of contractors; bidding procedure. 
After expiration of the time for objection or protest upon the part of the property owners, if no sufficient protests are filed, or upon receipt of a petition for such improvements signed by owners of a majority of the land to be assessed on the frontage basis as aforesaid, if such petition be found to be in proper form and duly executed and signed by the required number of owners of frontage, as aforesaid, the governing body shall adopt a resolution reciting that a protest was not filed by the required and necessary owners of frontage, or the filing of such petition, as the case may be, and express the determination of the governing body to proceed with the said improvement, stating the kind of improvement, and the extent and character of the same, and all other such matters as may be necessary to furnish full and sufficient information to all persons interested. Said resolution or ordinance shall set forth all reasonable terms and conditions as said body shall deem necessary to impose with reference to the letting of the contract and the provisions thereof. It shall be within the discretion of the governing body to require the contractor to execute a bond as provided in the act of August 19, 1916, entitled "Contractors of Public Work Bond," and may require a bond in an amount to be stated in said resolution or ordinance for maintenance in good condition for a period of five (5) years from completion, or both, in the discretion of said body. Said resolution or ordinance shall provide for advertising for sealed proposals for furnishing the labor and materials and performing the work necessary in making said improvements. The notice of such proposals shall be published in at least two (2) consecutive issues of a daily newspaper having a general circulation in the municipality, or in at least two (2) consecutive weekly issues of the newspaper in which sheriff's advertisements in the county wherein said municipality is located are published, or both, in the discretion of said body, and in addition thereto, contractors may, in the discretion of said body, be directly approached and invited to submit bids. It shall be the duty of said governing body to cause specifications and details of the proposed improvements to be made up and kept on file by the time said notice is published, and copies thereof furnished to all prospective bidders who may request them. Said published notice shall state what bond the contractor will be required to furnish, and shall state the time and place when and where said proposals shall be filed, and the time and place when and where the same will be considered. The governing body shall, at the time and place specified, unless prevented for good cause, examine all bids and award the contract to the lowest and best bidder. Said body shall have the right to reject any and all bids, and to readvertise for other bids, as often as may be necessary, whenever bids submitted are not, in the judgment of the governing body, satisfactory. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 17.5. - Same; apportionment of costs; assessments; installment payments; transfer of notes. 
After the contract is let, the governing body shall proceed to ascertain all expenses incurred by the municipality incident to said improvements which are not to be paid by it from general current funds, and shall apportion said expenses among the owners of the properties abutting upon said improvement upon a basis of lineal front footage, and shall include the just pro rata part of said expenses owed by each with the pro rata part of the contract price for the said improvement. When said expenses have been ascertained, the governing body shall designate a regular meeting of their body for hearing any and all complaints or objections they [sic] may be made respecting assessment of expenses and assessment of cost of said improvements. Notice of said meeting may be given personally or by mail, and shall be given at least five (5) days before said designated meeting date, and to persons against whom assessments are made, and their property. Said notices may be given by the clerk, or by the marshal, or by any other officer directed by said body. If mailed, the same may be directed to the last known address of the property owner, and such mailing of notice in the United States mails shall be sufficient. Appearance at said meeting by any owner of property assessed, or owner of any interest therein, personally or by authorized agent or attorney, shall be sufficient to render unnecessary any other or additional notice as to him. The governing body shall at said designated meeting proceed to review and correct said appraisements, apportionments, and assessments, as the facts may require, and to hear and determine all objections. The said body shall by ordinance or resolution fix the assessments in accordance with its actions taken at said meeting, and against the several tracts of land liable therefor. If unable to obtain a quorum at the designated meeting, or to complete and finally determine said matters at such meeting, the body shall be authorized to meet from day to day thereafter, or to remain in session from day to day, or to adjourn from time to time, as may be announced at the time and place of each meeting, until said matters are finally determined. Said body shall have authority to prescribe by said ordinance or resolution the rate of interest assessments shall bear, not exceeding the legal rate of interest, and shall also provide whether the said assessments are to be paid in cash or in installments. Said assessments shall, for the purpose of fixing liability for interest, and for making such initial cash payment as the governing body may require, and for electing to pay a portion in installments, when payment in installments provided for in the resolution or ordinance, become due 30 days from the passage of the final resolution or ordinance herein provided for. The governing body shall, however, have authority to direct that those who desire to pay in installments may within 30 days from the passage of said ordinance or resolution, pay the amount of cash installment required, and the remainder in equal annual installments, with interest. The body shall require the remainder to be paid within four (4) years from the date said election is required to be made. Said body may also provide for the taking of notes for deferred installments, which notes may be made payable either to the municipality or to the contractor, as the body may direct. It shall be lawful to provide in said note or in said ordinance or resolution, that if any installment become due and remain unpaid that the whole remaining balance may, at option of the governing body, if no notes taken, or at option of the holder of the notes, if notes taken become due and payable forthwith. The municipality shall have the right and power to assign or otherwise transfer said notes for the purpose of financing said improvements, but it shall not by reason of any assignment or endorsement of such notes assume any financial responsibility for payment of the debt represented thereby, other than to exercise the authority given by law, and by this act, for the enforcement of said notes and said assessments for the use and benefit of the parties at interest. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 17.6. - Same; lien of assessment; execution. 
Such special assessments and each installment thereof, and the interest thereon, and the expenses incident to collection, are hereby declared to constitute a lien against the lots and tracts of land so assessed, each tract being liable only for its just proportion ascertained as aforesaid, from the date of the resolution or ordinance levying the same, co-equal with the lien of taxes and prior to and superior to all other liens against such lots or tracts. Each such lien shall continue until seven (7) years past due as respects each installment, and in the event an installment shall become seven (7) years past due and no execution issue thereon and be placed upon the general execution docket of the county in which said municipality is located, the lien for the amount of such assessment or assessments as shall be seven (7) years past due, and execution issued and recorded as aforesaid shall be lost, and no execution for the enforcement of such barred installment shall issue or be enforced. All executions which shall issue within seven (7) years from the time the amounts thereby sought to be enforced became due and placed upon the general execution docket of said county within said time shall be kept alive and enforced and revived by the same facts and conditions and circumstances as executions issued upon common law judgments are kept alive and enforced and revived. The liens for said assessments shall be enforced by levy and sale in the same manner as liens due the municipality are enforced. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 17.7. - Same; special fund. 
The assessments provided for herein shall be payable to the City of Chamblee, and the funds derived therefrom shall be kept as a special fund or account for the purposes of defraying the cost and expenses of said improvements. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 17.8. - Same; levy of execution; sales of property; affidavits of illegality. 
Execution may issue and be levied upon the property liable whenever any one (1) installment, or more, is past due and unpaid. If a sale is had for the enforcement of one (1) or more installments, the property shall remain liable for and subject to sale for the enforcement of any remaining unpaid installments of such assessment. All sales for the enforcement of said liens and executions shall be to the highest and best bidder for cash, at public outcry, and such sales shall vest absolute title in the purchasers, subject to remaining unpaid installments, with interest, and costs, and subject to the right of redemption as provided by law in cases of tax sales. Said municipality shall have the right to bid upon said properties, and to purchase the same at such sales, by bidding not exceeding the amount of the execution under which sold, plus costs, interest, and legally charged expenses, if no other equal bid is made by another who is willing and able to purchase the same on bid equal to said sum authorized to be bid by said municipality. The defendant in such execution, or any other person having an interest in the property levied upon, shall have the right to file an affidavit of illegality denying the whole or any part of the amount for which said execution issued is due, and stating what amount he admits to be due, which amount so admitted to be due shall be paid before the affidavit is received, and the affidavit shall be received respecting the amount in dispute. All such affidavits shall set out in detail the reasons why the affiant claims the amount is not due, and, when received by the levying officer, he shall return it, together with the execution, to the superior court of the county in which the municipality is situated, and it shall be there tried and the issues determined as in cases of illegality, subject to all the pains and penalties provided for in other cases of illegality under the Code of Georgia. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 17.9. - Same; judicial action restricted. 
No suit, or action of any kind shall be brought or sustained which has for its purpose the setting aside of any such assessment, or to enjoin the governing body from making or fixing or collecting the same, or for issuing executives, or contesting the validity of any of said acts on any grounds or for any reason other than the failure of the governing body to adopt or publish the preliminary resolution or ordinance provided for in section two (2) of this act [section 17.1 hereof], in cases requiring such resolution and publication thereof, or failure to give notice of the meeting for passing upon said assessments for costs and expenses, as herein provided for, unless such suit be commenced within 30 days after passage of the ordinance or resolution making said assessment final; provided that in the event a special assessment shall be found to be invalid, or insufficient, in whole or in part, for any reason whatsoever, the said governing body may at any time, in the manner provided for making an original assessment, proceed to cause a new assessment to be made which shall have the same force and effect as an original assessment. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 17.10. - Same; payment of costs from general fund. 
Whenever the said municipality desires to pay any portion of the costs of making said improvements, and the expenses incident thereto, and is in position to pay same from current general funds, it shall be lawful to so do, and the remaining part shall be assessed against the abutting property and the owners thereof as hereinbefore provided. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 17.11. - Same; methods not exclusive. 
The provisions made in the foregoing sections of this act shall not be held and construed to provide an exclusive method or methods, but on the contrary shall be held and construed to provide alternative method or methods for doing the work and making the improvements and providing for payment. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 17.12. - Same; additional alternative. 
As a still further alternative method of making the improvements to sidewalks as contemplated by this act, whenever the said municipality has sufficient general current funds which it can legally expend upon such work and improvements, or can pay for some out of current revenues, and can do such work upon sidewalks as the governing body may deem necessary, and without necessity of making an assessment against abutting property, it shall be lawful for said municipality to make such improvements without advertising for competitive bids, and without letting the same upon competitive bid, and it may buy materials and hire labor and perform said work, if in the discretion of the governing body such method is more economical and practicable. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 17.13. - Same; authority under 1937 act. 
For the purposes of grading, regrading, paving, repaving, building, rebuilding, or otherwise improving sidewalks within the corporate limits of said municipality, as specified in section 17 as amended by this act, and set out in section one (1) of this act [section 17 of the charter], and under the restrictions of said section 17 as amended by this act, said municipality shall have authority to adopt the provisions of the act of August 25, 1927, found in the 1927 Ga. Laws, pages 321 and 325, inclusive, by complying with the provisions of said act, and all acts amendatory thereof, and, likewise, as an alternative method, proceed thereunder. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 18. - Street tax. 
Whenever said municipality shall operate general control over the streets and roads of its incorporated territory, it shall have the right and power to levy and collect street taxes against subjects liable for payment thereof to the same extent as DeKalb County is permitted to levy and collect under existing laws from subjects liable for payment of road taxes to DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 746 , 3-20-18) 
Section 19. - Fire protection powers. 
Said municipality shall have authority to establish and maintain a fire fighting force and to provide the same with equipment, or to contract with others for furnishing fire protection to said municipality and its citizens. 
Section 20. - Power to enforce ordinances; penalties. 
Said municipality shall have authority to enforce any and all ordinances by fine or imprisonment, or both. Imprisonment may consist of confinement in jail, or it may consist of work and labor on the public works of the municipality. No fine shall exceed $1,000.00 and actual costs for each offense. Imprisonment shall not exceed six (6) months for each conviction of an offense. Both fine and imprisonment may be inflicted in the discretion of the presiding officer. Separate fines and/or penalties may be inflicted for each violation, and in such case each fine or penalty may be enforced without reference to the fine or penalty imposed in other violations by the same person. Sentences may run concurrently or consecutively, in the discretion of the presiding officer. Fines and sentences may be suspended in whole or in part by the presiding officer in his discretion. Fines may be enforced by execution, levy and sale. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 4238; Ord. No. 436, 4-15-97) 
Section 21. - Ordinance powers. 
Said municipality shall have authority to adopt and enforce any and all reasonable and necessary ordinances for the protection of health, life, limb and property, and the preservation of good morals. All such ordinances to conform to the general laws of the state and the constitution of the state. 
Section 22. - Health officers. 
Said municipality shall have the power to employ or appoint one (1) or more health officers and prescribe their duties, term of office and compensation. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 422) 
Section 23. - Franchises. 
Said municipality shall have the right to grant franchises and prescribe the terms thereof, subject to such restrictions as may be imposed under the general law. 
Section 24. - Personnel powers; generally. 
As provided in this charter, said municipality shall have the power to appoint such agents, employees, and attorneys as shall be necessary and to fix their compensation and terms of their employment. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 102), § 1) 
Section 25. - Street improvements; powers. 
Insofar as said municipality is authorized to work or lay out or improve streets, roads, alleys and other public property under this act; or whenever said municipality shall be charged with the upkeep and maintenance of the same, it shall have authority to adopt the provisions of the act of August 25, 1927, found in the 1927 Ga. Laws, pages 321—335, inclusive, by complying with the provisions of said act, and all acts amendatory thereof, and shall thereupon be authorized to make improvements therein provided for and assess the cost as therein provided. 
Section 26. - Regulation of building activity. 
The mayor and council shall have the right to require all persons desiring to make improvements upon real estate to submit detailed information and make application for permit. It shall have the right to supervise and inspect all such improvements. It shall have the right to adopt a reasonable building code and shall have the power to enforce the same. Said municipality shall take all reasonable precautions to the end that life, limb and property of its citizens and of the public generally are protected before permitting any such work or improvements to proceed. It shall have authority to adopt all reasonable by-laws, ordinances and resolutions in furtherance of the general powers here enumerated. 
Section 27. - Planning and zoning powers. 
Said municipality, acting through its mayor and council, shall have authority to pass zoning and planning laws and ordinances, and to zone and district the territory within said municipality for the purpose of prescribing and regulating the uses that real property within said districts and zones may be devoted to. It shall have the right to prohibit other or different uses of such property within such zones or districts. It shall have the right to regulate plans for development and improvement of real estate within the corporate limits. It shall have authority to enact by ordinances and resolutions the necessary provisions for carrying into effect and enforcing the powers herein conferred, including the infliction of penalties for violations. It shall have the right to alter and amend all such ordinances, resolutions, and regulations from time to time, as might be proper, including the right to re-zone, redistrict, and to change properties from one zone or district or classification to another. 
(1946 Ga. Laws, page 420) 
Editor's note— The wording of the above section and section 27.1, derived from 1946 Ga. Laws, page 420, was ratified and confirmed as Charter amendments by 1959 Ga. Laws, page 2642, sec. 5. 
Section 27.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 548, adopted June 20, 2006, repealed section 27.1 in its entirety. Former section 27.1 pertained to the zoning procedure and derived from 1946 Ga. Laws, page 420; 1959 Ga. Laws, page 2642. 
Section 28. - Condemnation of unsafe buildings and situations; powers. 
The mayor and council shall have the right to condemn and cause to be remedied or removed any building, structure or existing condition within its corporate limits that is dangerous to life, limb or property, by reasons of decay, dilapidation, or unsanitary condition. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to relieve the municipality of any duty to give owners or interested persons reasonable notice and opportunity to remedy the situation. Nor shall anything herein contained be construed as relieving the municipality of liability to any interested person for damages to person or property taken or destroyed in furtherance of this power. This provision shall not be construed as authorizing the doing of any act or thing contrary to the constitution of this state and the policy of the general laws of this state. The municipality shall have authority to adopt reasonable ordinances and resolutions in conformity with this act and for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this act and of this section. 
Section 29. - Schools not to be operated by city. 
Said municipality shall not have authority to operate schools and shall not have authority to levy taxes for educational purposes until such time as this act and section may be amended expressly conferring such authority. 
Section 30. - General powers. 
Said municipality shall have the power to sue in its corporate name and to be sued, to have and use a common seal, to contract and be contracted with in its corporate name, and to do all the usual and necessary things incident to the powers herein contained, together with all the usual, customary and implied powers vested in like municipal corporations. 
Section 31. - Existing laws and rights not affected by charter. 
All valid ordinances that were in effect at the time of passage of this new and revised charter, in said municipality, are declared to be valid and existing ordinances under this act, and subject to repeal, amendment or modification by said municipality as though no change in its charter had been effected. All rights and liabilities previously existing as between said municipality and others shall remain unchanged by this act. All property rights, contracts, tax liens and liabilities, or other rights and liabilities of whatever kind and nature as between said municipality and others shall remain unchanged by the passage of this act. 
Section 32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 411, § I, adopted March 19, 1996, repealed § 32, which pertained to tax assessors/returns and derived from the 1935 Ga. Laws, page 976. 
Section 33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 411, § I, adopted March 19, 1996, repealed § 33, which pertained to tax date/periods of limitations on liens and executions, and derived from the 1935 Ga. Laws, page 976. 
Section 34. - Collection of taxes; generally. 
All taxes due to said municipality which are not barred for any reason, shall be collectible under the provisions of this act and in the manner herein prescribed for the collection and enforcement of taxes due to it. 
Section 35. - Tax executions; levy and sale. 
The mayor and council of said municipality shall have the power to cause executions to issue for the enforcement and collection of all taxes, fines, license fees, forfeitures, assessments or other demands due to it. Such executions shall be signed by the city clerk and bear test in the name of the mayor or mayor pro tem. All such executions shall be returnable to the mayor and council 30 days after date of issue, and shall bear the legal rate of interest. All such executions shall be directed to the marshal of the City of Chamblee and by him levied and sales made by him when levied within said municipality. When necessary to levy such execution upon property not within said municipality the city clerk is hereby authorized to also direct the same to all and singular the sheriffs of the State of Georgia, and their lawful deputies, and to all and singular the constables of said state. All executions may be levied upon any and all of the property of the defendant therein, real or personal, as might be necessary, and wherever found within the State of Georgia. When such executions are levied by a sheriff or constable on property outside the municipality, the same shall be advertised and sales held under the same provisions as govern sales by sheriffs and constables under common law executions. In such cases, executions for less than $100 principal shall be levied and sales held thereunder under the same provisions of law as govern levies and sales under executions issuing from justice's courts, when levied outside the municipality. And executions issuing for sums in excess of $100 principal, shall when levied outside the municipality, be levied and sales held thereunder as provided by law in cases of levy and sales by sheriffs under common law executions. When executions issued by the municipality are levied by the marshal thereof upon personal property he shall advertise the same in the same manner as constables sales are advertised and sell the property levied upon before the place of meetings of council, at public outcry, within the legal hours of sale and on the legal sales day for judicial sales as provided by general laws. When real property is levied upon by the marshal he shall advertise the same in the official organ of the municipality, designated as such by the governing authorities of the municipality, and sell the property before the front door of the meeting place of the city council in said municipality, on general legal sales day, as fixed by general law, after advertising to the same extent and in the same manner (except as to the newspaper in which advertised) as sheriff's sales. Said marshal shall have authority to execute to the purchaser of any property, real or personal, bills of sale and deeds to any property sold by such marshal, and to place purchasers in possession of such properties. All such marshal's sales to be for cash, at public auction, to the highest bidder, and within the legal hours of sale as fixed by general law. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2642) 
Section 36. - Force of executions as liens. 
All executions issued by said municipality shall have such force as liens against the property of the defendants therein as are allowed by general laws. 
Section 37. - Procedure for resisting levy and sale. 
Any person having cause to resist the levy and sale of property under executions issued by said municipality shall do so under provisions of the general law. 
Section 38. - Redemption of property from tax sale. 
All real property sold under execution for taxes due to said municipality, or for other debt or demand, shall be redeemable only under the provisions of general law, and when allowed by general law, and upon payment of premiums and charges allowed by general laws. 
Section 39. - Recitals in deeds. 
All recitals of fact placed in deeds to real or personal property sold by the marshal or other officer authorized to levy and sell, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts recited, but such recitals may be rebutted. 
Section 40. - Taxes payable in installments, delinquent date for taxes. 
All ad valorem taxes on real property due to such municipality shall be payable in installments and such installments shall be considered as delinquent after the fifteenth day of August of the year for which the first installment is levied and after the fifteenth day of November of the year for which the second installment is levied and executions may issue thereafter and shall bear interest at the legal rate from such date. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 3148; Ord. No. 411, § II, 3-19-96) 
Section 41. - Tax books; date for opening. 
The Tax Commissioner of Dekalb County shall open the City tax books for tax returns on the first day of January and close them on the first day of March or as soon thereafter as is possible. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 3148; Ord. No. 411, § III, 3-19-96) 
Section 42. - Additional powers. 
The mayor and council shall have the power to adopt all reasonable and necessary ordinances, resolutions and by-laws for the purpose of giving effect to the rights and powers conferred by this act, or to supply any deficiency in prescribed forms and procedures, not inconsistent with general laws and the provisions of this act. 
Section 43. - Social security coverage. 
The mayor and council of the City of Chamblee shall have authority to enter into all necessary contracts and agreements, bonds and other instruments for the purpose of furnishing social security protection and insurance to its employees and other persons eligible for such protection under existing laws, or under future laws. They shall have authority to expend public money for said purpose, as elsewhere provided in this act. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2642) 
Section 44. - Official organ; designation authority. 
The mayor and council of the City of Chamblee shall have authority to designate any newspaper published in DeKalb County, or having a general circulation in DeKalb County, as the official organ of said municipality, and in which all notices and advertisements required by said charter, as amended, or as may be amended hereafter, or as may be required by general law, shall be published. Said designation shall be made as soon after passage and approval of this act as may be practicable. Such designation shall be recoverable at the will of the council at anytime. 
(1959 Ga. Laws, page 2642) 
ARTICLE 2. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 542, pt. I, adopted Oct. 18, 2005, repealed article 2, sections 1—3, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article 2, sections 1, 2. Former article 2 pertained to similar material and derived from 1985 Ga. Laws, H. B. 44; Ord. No. 329, adopted Nov. 10, 1989. 

Section 1. - Date of general municipal elections. 
All general elections held to fill municipal offices shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November in each odd-numbered year. 
(Ord. No. 542, pt. I, 10-18-05) 
Section 2. - Eligibility for re-election. 
The mayor and council members shall be eligible for re-election regardless of the number of terms each may have been previously elected to serve. 
(Ord. No. 542, pt. I, 10-18-05) 
ARTICLE 3. - BOARD OF MAYOR AND COUNCILMEMBERS 

Section 1. - Composition; qualifications for holding office; election of councilmembers by district. 
The legislative and policy-making functions of said municipality shall be vested in a board of mayor and councilmembers. Said board shall consist of a mayor and five (5) councilmembers, to be elected as provided in article 2 of this act. They shall receive such reasonable compensation for their services as shall be fixed by majority vote of the council members. In order to qualify for election at any election hereafter held, to fill the office of mayor or councilman, or to be qualified to hold either of such offices, the person so offering or undertaking shall be at least 25 years of age, shall be qualified to vote for members of the general assembly in the general election next to be held for said purpose of electing members of the general assembly, shall have been an actual bona fide resident of the City of Chamblee for at least one (1) year before offering for election. In addition, no person shall be qualified to hold either of said offices if in other respects he would be disqualified to hold office as a member of the lower house of the General Assembly of Georgia. All such officers shall be qualified voters in city elections. Removal from the city by any such officer will vacate his office. 
(a)  For purposes of electing members of the city council, the City of Chamblee is divided into three council districts and two at-large districts. One member of the city council shall be elected from each of the three council districts and two members of the city council shall be elected from the city at large. The three council districts shall be and correspond to those three numbered districts described in Section 1.1 of this Article 3. At the time a candidate for the office of councilmember of any of the three election districts described in Section 1.1 of this Article 3 qualifies as a candidate, and at the time he is elected to such office, and throughout such person's term of service as such, such person shall be a bona fide resident of the election district within the city designated by such person when qualifying as a candidate. Candidates for the office of councilmember at large may reside anywhere within the corporate limits of the City of Chamblee. A candidate for the office of councilmember at large shall designate, at the time such person qualifies as a candidate, that such person is qualifying as an at-large candidate. Council districts numbered 1, 2, and 3 as they exist immediately prior to the effective date of this Act shall continue to be designated as Council Districts 1, 2, and 3, respectively, but as newly described under this Act and as set forth in Section 1.1 of this Article 3, and on and after the effective date of this Act, such councilmembers serving from former districts 4 and 5 shall be deemed to be serving as councilmembers at large. 
(b)  Each candidate for office of councilman shall be voted upon by the voters of the municipality, in city-wide elections, in the same manner as heretofore, and elected in the same manner as heretofore, except as changed by this act. 
(c)  Each councilman elected pursuant to these provisions shall have the same city-wide powers, authority, and jurisdiction as was vested in councilmembers prior to this act. 
(d)  In holding elections pursuant to the provisions of this act, written or printed ballots shall be used, and candidates for councilmembers from each separate district shall be grouped or bracketed according to district. Each qualified voter participating in such election shall be entitled to vote for one (1) candidate, and one (1) only, from each district from which a candidate is to be elected. 
(e)  Candidates for the office of mayor, and their qualifications, are not affected by the provisions of this act. 
(f)  This act shall become effective, and shall apply to, the following: Elections held in 1959, prior to the regular December, 1959, elections, for the purpose of filling vacancies on the council; the regular December, 1959 election, held on the first Saturday in December, 1959, for the purpose of electing councilmembers for terms beginning January 1, 1960; the regular December, 1960, election held for the purpose of electing councilmembers for terms beginning January 1, 1961. And the act shall apply to all elections held for electing councilmembers subsequent to the date last named. 
(g)  The office of a councilmember shall become vacant upon such person's removal of such person's residence from the district from which elected or such person's removal of such person's residence from the city. 
(1950 Ga. Laws, page 2807; 1952 Ga. Laws, page 2630; 1959 Ga. Laws, page 2642; Ord. No. 293, 4-12-85; 1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 102), § 3; 2002 Ga. Laws, page 5541) 
Section 1.1. - Election districts. 
The corporate area of the City of Chamblee is divided into three districts for the purpose of electing council members from each such district. For such purposes, said districts are to be known as Election Districts and are to be numbered Election Districts 1, 2 and 3 respectively. Two council members shall be elected from the city at large. 
(1)  Election District 1 shall include the area lying within the following described lines and boundaries: Beginning at the point where the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road would intersect the centerline of Harts Mill Road if the centerline of Harts Mill Road was extended easterly in a straight line; running thence southeasterly along the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road to a point where the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road would intersect the centerline of Pierce Drive if the centerline of Pierce Drive was extended easterly in a straight line; thence running westerly and southwesterly along the centerline of Pierce Drive to the point where the centerline of Pierce Drive intersects the centerline of Peachtree Boulevard; thence running southwesterly along the centerline of Peachtree Boulevard to a point where the centerline of Peachtree Boulevard would intersect the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road if the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road was extended northerly in a straight line; thence running southeasterly along the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road to a point where the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road intersects the centerline of Peachtree Road; thence running northeasterly along the centerline of Peachtree Road to a point where the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road would intersect the centerline of Peachtree Road if Peachtree Road was on the same grade as Chamblee-Dunwoody Road rather than being elevated by a bridge above the Chamblee-Dunwoody roadbed; thence continuing southeasterly from said point of intersection along the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road to a point where the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road intersects the centerline of Shallowford Road; thence running southerly along the centerline of Shallowford Road to a point where the centerline of Shallowford Road intersects the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road; thence running southeasterly along the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road to a point where the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road intersects the northerly right-of-way line of the Northeast Expressway (inclusive of access road) (a/k/a Interstate Highway I-85) in Land Lot 196 of the 18th District of DeKalb County, Georgia; thence following said northerly right-of-way line in a southerly and southwesterly direction to a point where the said northerly right-of-way line of the Northeast Expressway (inclusive of access road) intersects the centerline of Shallowford Road; thence running northerly along the centerline of Shallowford Road to a point where the centerline of Shallowford Road would intersect the centerline of Woodside Way if the centerline of Woodside Way was extended easterly in a straight line; running thence westerly and northwesterly along the centerline of Woodside Way to a point where the centerline of Buford Highway would intersect the centerline of Woodside Way if the centerline of Woodside Way was extended northwesterly in a straight line; thence running northeasterly along the centerline of Buford Highway to a point where the centerline of Buford Highway intersects the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road; running thence westerly along the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road to a point where the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road intersects the centerline of New Peachtree Road; running thence westerly along the centerline of New Peachtree Road to a point where the centerline of New Peachtree Road intersects the centerline of Clairmont Road; thence running northwesterly along the centerline of Clairmont Road to a point where the centerline of Clairmont Road would intersect the centerline of Peachtree Road if Peachtree Road was elevated to the same grade as Clairmont Road; thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Peachtree Road to a point where the centerline of Peachtree Road intersects the west line of Land Lot 278 of the 18 th District of DeKalb County; thence northerly along the west line of said Land Lot 278 and continuing northerly also along the west line of Land Lot 300 of said 18 th District and continuing northerly along the west Land Lot line of Land Lot 307 of said 18 th District to point where the western line of Land Lot 307 intersects the centerline of Harts Mill Road; running thence in a northerly, easterly and northeasterly direction along the centerline of Harts Mill Road following the curvature thereof to a point where the centerline of Harts Mill Road would intersect the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road if the centerline of Harts Mill Road was extended easterly in a straight line, this point being the point of beginning of this Election District 1. 
(2)  Election District 2 shall include the area lying within the following described lines and boundaries: Beginning at the point where the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road would intersect the centerline of Harts Mill Road if the centerline of Harts Mill Road was extended easterly in a straight line; running thence southeasterly along the centerline of Chamblee Dunwoody Road to a point where the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road would intersect the centerline of Pierce Drive if the centerline of Pierce Drive was extended easterly in a straight line; thence running westerly and southwesterly along the centerline of Pierce Drive to the point where the centerline of Pierce Drive intersects the centerline of Peachtree Boulevard; thence running southwesterly along the centerline of Peachtree Boulevard to a point where the centerline of Peachtree Boulevard would intersect the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road if the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road was extended northerly in a straight line; thence running southeasterly along the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road to a point where the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road intersects the centerline of Peachtree Road, thence running northeasterly along the centerline of Peachtree Road to a point where the centerline of Peachtree Road would intersect the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road if the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road was on the same grade as Peachtree Road rather than running beneath a bridge which carries Peachtree Road over the Chamblee-Dunwoody Road roadbed; thence continuing southeasterly from said point of intersection along the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road to a point where the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road intersects the centerline of Shallowford Road; running thence northerly along the centerline of Shallowford Road to a point where the centerline of Shallowford Road intersects the eastern corporate limit line; running thence northerly and northwesterly along the eastern corporate limit line to a point where the eastern corporate limit line intersects the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 285; running thence westerly and northwesterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 285 to a point where the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 285 intersects the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road; running thence southerly and southeasterly along the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road to a point where the centerline of Chamblee-Dunwoody Road would intersect the centerline of Harts Mill Road if the centerline of Harts Mill Road was extended easterly in a straight line, this point being the point of beginning of this Election District 2. 
(3)  Election District 3 shall include the area lying within the following described lines and boundaries: Beginning at the point where the centerline of New Peachtree Road intersects the eastern right-of-way line of Clairmont Road; running thence easterly along the centerline of New Peachtree Road to a point where the centerline of New Peachtree Road intersects the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road; running thence southerly along the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road to a point where the centerline of Chamblee-Tucker Road intersects the centerline of Buford Highway; running thence southwesterly along the centerline of Buford Highway to a point where the centerline of Buford Highway would intersect the centerline of Woodside Way if the centerline of Woodside Way was extended northerly in a straight line; from said point running thence southeasterly along the centerline of Woodside Way to a point where the centerline of Woodside Way would intersect the centerline of Shallowford Road if the centerline of Woodside Way was extended southerly in a straight line; from said point running thence southerly along the centerline of Shallowford Road to a point where the centerline of Shallowford Road intersects the northerly right-of-way line of the Northeast Expressway (inclusive of access road) (a/k/a Interstate Highway I-85) in Land Lot 196 of the 18th District of DeKalb County, Georgia; thence following said northerly right-of-way line in a southerly and southwesterly direction to a point where the said northerly right-of-way line of the Northeast Expressway (inclusive of access roads) intersects the eastern right-of-way line of Clairmont Road; thence running northerly along the eastern right-of-way line of Clairmont Road to a point where the eastern right-of-way line of Clairmont Road would intersect the southern right-of-way line of Eighth Street if the southern right-of-way line of Eighth Street was extended easterly in a straight line; running thence westerly and northerly along the corporate limit line to a point where the corporate limit line intersects the centerline of Peachtree Road; running thence northeasterly along the centerline of Peachtree Road to a point where the centerline of Peachtree Road would intersect the centerline of Clairmont Road if the centerline of Clairmont Road was on the same grade as Peachtree Road rather than being elevated by a bridge above the Peachtree Road roadbed; thence running southerly along the centerline of Clairmont Road to a point at its intersection with the centerline of New Peachtree Road, thence easterly along the centerline of New Peachtree Road to the point where the centerline of New Peachtree Road intersects the eastern right-of-way line of Clairmont Road, this point being the point of beginning of this Election District 3. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1.1, 8-13-93; Ord. No. 401, 4-14-95; 2002 Ga. Laws, page 5541; Ord. No. 637, 6-21-11; Ord. No. 678 , 6-16-15) 
Section 2. - Mayor; powers and duties. 
The mayor shall be the chief elected officer of the municipality. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the mayor and council and approve minutes of the meetings. The mayor shall sign all contracts on behalf of the municipality. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 102), § 4) 
Section 3. - Mayor's vote; quorum; vote required to decide question. 
The mayor shall not have a vote except in case of a tie. The mayor or the mayor pro tem., and four (4) councilmembers shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business; provided, however, in the event there exists at any one time two (2) vacancies on the governing authority, whether such vacancies occur by resignation, removal from residence from the city, death or by operation of law, then the mayor, or the mayor pro tem., and three (3) councilmembers shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The majority of votes shall decide any question pending before them. When the mayor and the mayor pro tem. are both present at a meeting, the mayor pro tem. shall vote as any other member of council. When the mayor is not present, the mayor pro tem. shall not vote except in case of a tie. 
(Ord. No. 463, § I, 10-20-98; Ord. No. 473, § I, 5-18-99) 
Section 4. - Mayor pro tem. 
It shall be the duty of the mayor and council at the first meeting following the first day of each January to elect a mayor pro tem. from among the members of council, he to serve during the year. Said mayor pro tem. shall be vested with all the powers and duties of the mayor in the absence, disability, death, resignation, death [sic] or disqualification of the mayor. 
Section 5. - Special elections to fill vacancies. 
Special elections may be called at any time, after 10 days' notice posted at the council chamber, for the purpose of filling vacancies occurring on the board of mayor and council, such notice to be posted at the direction of a majority of the board declaring the necessity therefor. 
Section 6. - Oath of mayor and councilmembers. 
Before entering upon their duties, the mayor and each member of council shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
"I do swear that I will well and truly demean myself as mayor or councilmember, as the case may be, of the City of Chamblee, during my term of office; and that I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due the State of Georgia or any political subdivision or authority thereof, that I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I may, by the laws of the State of Georgia, be prohibited from holding; that I am otherwise qualified to hold the office to which I have been elected according to the constitution and laws of Georgia; that I will support the constitution of the United States and of the State of Georgia; that I am a resident of the district from which I was elected; and that I will faithfully enforce the Charter and ordinances of the City of Chamblee to the best of my skill and ability, without fear or favor. 
(Ord. No. 464, § I, 11-17-98) 
Section 7. - Meetings. 
The mayor and council shall have the authority to designate by ordinance or resolution a regular date for council meetings, and shall be authorized to adjourn from day to day and from time to time as necessity shall require. Special meeting may be called at any time after three (3) hours' notice to each member of the board. 
ARTICLE 4. - ORDINANCES 

Section 1. - Adoption at regular meeting only. 
Ordinances shall not be adopted except in regular meeting of the mayor and council members of the city. All other business may be transacted at either regular or special meetings, duly called and attended. Ordinances which have been read in open forum at any regular council meeting of the mayor and council members of the city may be considered for passage and approval by the mayor and council members at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the mayor and city council. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the mayor and council, by majority vote, may propose that only the catchlines of the sections of any proposed ordinance be read in open forum; provided, that all catchlines of any proposed ordinance must fairly and accurately indicate the contents of the sections to which such catchlines apply. The mayor and council shall, upon the presentation and reading of said ordinance, be authorized to make any modification, changes and/or alterations of said ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 332, 2-9-90) 
Editor's note— Former section 1 of article 4 of the Charter was repealed and replaced in its entirety by Ord. No. 332, 2-9-90. 
Section 2. - Approval; recording. 
All ordinances shall be approved by the mayor, or mayor pro tem. in proper cases, and shall be filed and recorded by the clerk. 
Section 3. - Proposed; procedures. 
All ordinances or resolutions shall be proposed in writing. The mayor or mayor pro tem. shall be allowed to propose ordinances and resolutions, as may any other member of council. 
Section 4. - Minutes of meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to record and maintain in a safe place the minutes of all meetings of the mayor and council members sufficient to identify and disclose the legality and regularity of all official action taken at meetings and all matters passed upon officially. 
(Ord. No. 691 , 11-17-15) 
ARTICLE 5. - OFFICERS 

Section 1. - City manager. 
(a)  There is created the office of city manager for the City of Chamblee, Georgia. The city council, by a majority vote of its total membership, shall appoint a person to serve as city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the manager's compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications. 
(b)  No member of the city council shall be appointed city manager during the term of office for which he or she is elected or for a period of one year thereafter. 
(c)  By a letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate, subject to approval of the city council, a qualified city officer or employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during the manager's temporary absence or disability. The city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager returns. 
(d)  The city manager shall be the chief executive officer of the city, responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the manager's charge by or under this charter or state law. Specifically, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all officers and employees of the city subject to this charter and applicable personnel policies and procedures, which the mayor and council had been heretofore empowered to appoint and discharge, except the city attorney, the outside auditor, the municipal judge, the assistant judge, and inspectors, who shall be appointed and removed by the mayor and council. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city except as otherwise provided by law or this charter; 
(3)  Attend all city council meetings. The city manager shall have the right to take part in discussion but shall not have the right to vote; 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the manager's direction and supervision are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and the capital budget to the city council; 
(6)  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Make such reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city; 
(9)  Make recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city; and 
(10)  Perform such other duties that are specified by state law or this charter or are required by the city council. 
(e)  Except for the purposes of inquiries and investigations as authorized by a majority vote of the council, the mayor, the city council, and members of the city council shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the manager; and neither the mayor, the city council, nor individual members of the city council shall give orders to any such city officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(f)  The city manager shall not be eligible for election as a member of the city council of Chamblee for a period of one year after termination of service as city manager. 
(g)  The city council may remove the manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the manager, the manager may file with the city council a written request for hearing by the city council. This hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. The manager may file with the council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(3)  If the manager has not requested a hearing within the time specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the manager has requested a hearing, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after the hearing. 
(h)  The manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 102), § 5) 
Section 2. - Hiring of marshal, policemen, city clerk, public works director, planning and development director, parks and recreation director, finance director, community and economic development director, deputy city manager; compensation, removal. 
(a)  There shall be a marshal of the City of Chamblee who shall be hired by the city manager, with the confirmation of employment by the city council, and removed by the city manager. The marshal shall be the chief of police of said municipality and shall be clothed with all the powers of an arresting officer within said municipality and shall be clothed with all the powers usual and incident to such officer. The marshal shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council shall prescribe. The marshal shall serve all papers and summonses and execute all writs and executions directed to him or her by the city manager, perform all the duties prescribed by state law and this Charter, and carry out such other duties as the city manager may lawfully direct. The municipality through its manager shall have the power to appoint assistant marshals and policemen as may be necessary, who shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager and who shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council may prescribe and who shall perform the duties of marshals and policemen of the City of Chamblee. 
(b)  There shall be a city clerk for the City of Chamblee who shall be hired by the city manager, with the confirmation of employment by the city council, and removed by the city manager. The city clerk shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council may fix and shall perform the duties prescribed in this Charter and such other duties as the city manager may lawfully direct. 
(c)  There shall be a public works director for the City of Chamblee who shall be hired by the city manager, with the confirmation of employment by the city council, and removed by the city manager. The public works director shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council may fix and shall perform the duties prescribed in this Charter and such other duties as the city manager may lawfully direct. 
(d)  There shall be a planning and development director for the City of Chamblee who shall be hired by the city manager, with the confirmation of employment by the city council, and removed by the city manager. The planning and development director shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council may fix and shall perform the duties prescribed in this Charter and such other duties as the city manager may also direct. 
(e)  There shall be a parks and recreation director for the City of Chamblee who shall be hired by the city manager, with the confirmation of employment by the city council, and removed by the city manager. The parks and recreation director shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council may fix and shall perform the duties prescribed in this Charter and such other duties as the city manager may also direct. 
(f)  There shall be a finance director for the City of Chamblee who shall be hired by the city manager, with the confirmation of employment by the city council, and removed by the city manager. The finance director shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council may fix and shall perform the duties prescribed in this Charter and such other duties as the city manager may also direct. 
(g)  There shall be a community and economic development director for the City of Chamblee who shall be hired by the city manager, with the confirmation of employment by the city council, and removed by the city manager. The community and economic development director shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council may fix and shall perform the duties prescribed in this Charter and such other duties as the city manager may also direct. 
(h)  There shall be a deputy city manager for the City of Chamblee who shall be hired by the city manager, with the confirmation of employment by the city council and removed by the city manager. The deputy city manager shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council may fix and shall perform the duties prescribed in this Charter and such other duties as the city manager may also direct. 
(i)  If the marshal, the city clerk, the public works director, the planning and development director, the parks and recreation director, the finance director, the community and economic development director or the deputy city manager is removed from office, said officer may appeal such removal to the city council. Only a majority vote of the entire membership of the city council can overturn such a removal action by the city manager. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 102), § 6; Ord. No. 472, § I, 7-20-99; Ord. No. 483, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 598, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 608, 8-18-09; Ord. No. 746 , 3-20-18) 
Section 3. - Faithful performance bonds. 
The mayor and council shall have the right to require such bonds for the faithful performance of officers and agents as they may deem proper, pay the premiums thereon out of the general funds, and in case of breach, the city may recover thereon. 
Section 3.1. - Municipal court judge; appointment; jurisdiction; powers; compensation. 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Chamblee shall have authority to employ a municipal court judge to serve as a trial magistrate in the municipal's court of said City of Chamblee. When such municipal court judge is so employed, his jurisdiction shall be as prescribed by the charter of said municipality and the general laws of the State of Georgia. The mayor and council may from time to time prescribe by resolution how the work and duties of said municipal court judge and others authorized to preside in said municipal court may divide the work and duties among themselves. Such municipal court judge shall at all times hold his office subject to direction and control of the mayor and council, and subject to his term of employment being terminated at the will of the mayor and council. He shall receive such reasonable compensation to be paid monthly from the general funds of the city, as the mayor and council may determine and fix. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, page 2447) 
Editor's note— Sections 3.1 through 3.3 have been numbered for inclusion at the codifier's discretion. They were enacted as unnumbered Charter amendments. Section 3.1 was amended by home rule ordinance to delete references to the mayor and mayor pro tem as judges of the court. 
Section 3.2. - Same; qualifications; oath. 
(a)  To qualify for appointment as a judge of the Municipal Court of the City, a person shall be at least 30 years of age and a member of the State Bar of Georgia actually engaged in the practice of law in the State of Georgia for at least ten (10) years prior to his appointment. To hold office as a judge after such appointment, a person shall continue to possess such qualifications and shall not hold or qualify for any other public office. 
(b)  Before entering upon the duties of office of Municipal Court Judge, each judge shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation before some officer authorized to administer oaths, faithfully to discharge the duties of the office. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, page 2447; Ord. No. 415, 3-19-96) 
Section 3.3. - Same; inquiries prior to appointment. 
It shall be the duty of the mayor and council, before employing any person to act as municipal court judge, to diligently inquire into the fitness and qualifications of all persons under consideration. And they may, if they deem it necessary, refer said matter to an attorney at law of their own selection to make examination of the applicants or persons under consideration, and report his findings and recommendations with respect to qualifications and fitness for the office. 
(1953 Ga. Laws, page 2447) 
Section 3.4. - Officers authorized to serve notice and process. 
Whenever it may become necessary in connection with any matter pending before the mayor and council, or before the Municipal's Court of the City of Chamblee, or before the judge or magistrate of said court for any notice, summons, or subpoena to be served, personal or otherwise, such service may be made or notice given by the marshal of the City of Chamblee, or by any police officer of said municipality; and such officers shall be authorized to make such service not only within the corporate limits, but may make the same anywhere within the state. Due return made by them shall be prima facie evidence of service. The provisions of this section are supplemental to all other authorized methods of service. 
(1950 Ga. Laws, page 2807) 
Editor's note— This section was enacted as a new unnumbered provision by 1950 Ga. Laws, page 2807. 
ARTICLE 6. - SAVING CLAUSE 

Section 1. - Recited. 
In the event any article, section, paragraph, or provision of this act, in whole or in part, or any isolated portion of this act or of any provision herein contained, shall be declared illegal by a court of competent jurisdiction, such shall not have the effect of destroying or impairing the validity of the remaining part, unless expressly so held by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
ARTICLE 7. - REPEALING CLAUSE 

Section 1. - Recited. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1982 Ga. Laws, page 2542 as amended by 1993 Ga. Laws (Res. Act 129) which amends art. 7, sec. 1, par. 4, of the Georgia Constitution. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION 
A homestead of each resident under the age of 65 of the City of Chamblee actually occupied by the owner as a residence and homestead, but only so long as actually occupied by the owner primarily as such, is hereby exempted from City ad valorem taxes, except taxes levied by said City for the payment of interest on and retirement of bonded indebtedness, in an amount of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) of its value. The exemption granted to the homestead within this paragraph shall extend to and shall apply to those properties, the legal title to which is vested in one or more titleholders, if actually occupied by one or more such titleholders as a residence. In such instances, such exemptions shall be granted to such properties, if claimed in the manner required by the City by one or more of the owners actually residing on such property. 
A homestead of each resident who is totally disabled or is 65 years of age or older, of the City of Chamblee, actually occupied by the owner primarily as such, is hereby exempted from all City ad valorem taxes, except taxes levied by said City for the payment of interest on and retirement of bonded indebtedness. 
(Ord. No. 411, § IV, 3-19-96) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws in the basic Charter and any amendments thereto as set out in Subpart A of Part I. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto as set out in Subpart A of Part I. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "Code of Ordinances, City of Chamblee, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Chamblee, Georgia. 
City. The terms "the city" and "this city" mean the City of Chamblee, Georgia. 
City limits. The term "city limits" means the legal boundary of the City of Chamblee, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Chamblee, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted, and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Council. The terms "the council" and "city council" mean the mayor and council of the City of Chamblee, Georgia. 
County. The term "county" means DeKalb County, a political subdivision of the state, or, in appropriate cases, the governing body thereof. 
County board of commissioners. The term "county board of commissioners" means the DeKalb County board of commissioners. 
Days. The term "days" means calendar days unless otherwise provided, and the term "day" means from 12:00 midnight until the following 12:00 midnight. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection, unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males or any other legal entity when applicable under federal or state law. 
Governor. The term "governor" means the governor of the State of Georgia. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the City of Chamblee. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or; and. The word "or" may be read as "and," and the word "and" may be read as "or," if the sense requires it. 
Other officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "city clerk," "chief of police," etc., it shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., of the City of Chamblee, Georgia. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to buildings or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association or organization and any other entity acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding; following. The terms "preceding" and "following" means next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Right-of-way. The term "right-of-way" means land that is dedicated or otherwise legally established for public use. 
Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Shall; may. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city, and shall embrace all parts of thereof constituting the designated rights-of-way. 
Tenant. The term "tenant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who lawfully occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and the present. 
Writing and written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means calendar year. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.c.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, the repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Chamblee, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: (Set out new provisions in full)." 
(c)  When the mayor and council desire to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the mayor and council desire to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language shall be made a part of the ordinance: "Section ____________ . It is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Chamblee, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed may be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 1-5. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-7) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in the Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any or all of these penalties, in the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-8; Ord. No. 600, pt. I, 6-16-09) 
State Law reference— Penalty to be imposed in certain criminal and traffic cases and upon violation of bond, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to confine persons convicted of violating ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; punishments authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(c); limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code; conflicting provisions. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(b)  Where there is apparent conflict in this Code between specific and general provisions, it is the intention of this Code that the specific shall control. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-9. - Applicability of ordinances on city property outside city limits. 
All ordinances which are in force within the limits of the city shall be in force and of full effect on any park or airport or any other property of the city located outside of the city limits, wherever the ordinance is applicable. 
State Law reference— Acquisition, construction and maintenance of airports by municipalities authorized, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20; powers and duties of municipalities as to airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-25. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the mayor and council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement, and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in the catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code, and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ ," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Ordinances, offenses, etc., not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee; 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(8)  Any ordioance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance; 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat; 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city; 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city; 
(16)  Any personnel ordinance; 
(17)  Any ordinance amending the Charter or any special act of the general assembly of the state which was converted to an ordinance; 
nor shall the ordinance adopting this Code be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code. All ordinances listed in this section are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in the Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 30; personnel, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; powers relating to administration of government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Official organ. 
Pursuant to article 1, section 44, of the city Charter, the Champion Newspaper is hereby designated as the official organ for the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-7; Ord. No. 451, § 1, 4-21-98) 
Secs. 2-2—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-26. - Compensation. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive such compensation and expenses as determined from time to time by the council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-1) 
Secs. 2-27—2-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 

Sec. 2-46. - Time and place of regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the mayor and council shall be held on the third Tuesday of each month at 7:30 p.m. at the Chamblee Civic Center, 3540 Broad Street, Chamblee, Georgia. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-11; Ord. No. 406, 10-13-95) 
Sec. 2-47. - Adjourned meetings. 
If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the mayor and council or if for any reason any meeting shall fail to complete transaction of the business before the meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the members present. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-12) 
Sec. 2-48. - Agenda; citizen appearances, agenda for special called meetings. 
(a)  The agenda for regular meetings of the mayor and council shall be prepared on or before 12:00 p.m. on the Thursday immediately preceding the date of the monthly work session of the mayor and council. Persons desiring to bring matters before the council shall notify the city clerk by 12:00 p.m. on said Thursday in order to include such matters on the agenda for consideration by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The agenda for special called meetings of the mayor and council shall be limited to those matters for which the special meeting was originally called and no further matter may be added to the agenda for consideration by the mayor and council unless there is an affirmative vote of two-thirds of those members of the council present at the special called meeting to add a matter not originally contemplated for consideration. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-13; Ord. No. 406, 10-13-95; Ord. No. 535, pt. I, 5-18-04; Ord. No. 547, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 2-49. - Rules of procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the procedures of the mayor and council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-14) 
Secs. 2-50—2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY OFFICIALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— City's power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of all municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2). 

Sec. 2-66. - Contracts or business transactions between city officials and city. 
It shall be unlawful for any city official to enter into any contract or conduct any business transaction with the city or any department or subdivision thereof, except with the express approval of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-5) 
Sec. 2-67. - Duties of city clerk. 
In addition to the duties of the city clerk under the city Charter, the city clerk shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; 
(2)  Preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city and maintain a proper index to all records and documents; 
(3)  Perform any other duties as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-1; Ord. No. 747 , pt. I, 3-20-18) 
Sec. 2-68. - Appointment and duties of city attorney. 
(a)  The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor and council at their first regular meeting of each year. 
(b)  The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in that capacity shall: 
(1)  Prepare ordinances when so requested by the mayor and council; 
(2)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested, and approve, as to form, all ordinances, bonds and city contracts; and 
(3)  Render any other legal services as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-2) 
Secs. 2-69—2-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Records management programs for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99. 

Sec. 2-86. - Administrative responsibilities. 
The mayor or his designee is responsible for the administration of the records management program, and the city clerk or his designee is designated as records management officer. It is the duty of the records committee to review and recommend approval of records retention schedules to the state records committee. Records retention schedules will be based on a review of the administrative, legal, fiscal and historical values of the records. The records management officer shall serve as chairman of the records committee. Retention schedules will be implemented following final approval by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-21) 
Sec. 2-87. - Archival depository. 
The city records storage center will serve as an archival depository for city records determined to have permanent value. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-22) 
Sec. 2-88. - Records center. 
A centralized records center shall be established, and all city records not required for day-to-day office operation shall be transferred to the records center until destroyed in accordance with the approved retention schedule. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-23) 
Sec. 2-89. - Retention schedule. 
The city hereby adopts the records retention schedule for municipal governments as approved by the state records committee. A copy of such schedule is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-24) 
Sec. 2-90. - Compliance with article. 
No city record shall be altered or destroyed except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-25) 
Secs. 2-91—2-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-106. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on January 1 and end on December 31 of each year. 
(Code 1982, § 3-1-1) 
State Law reference— Requirement for governing authority to establish a fiscal year, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-107. - Appointment of auditors. 
The auditors for the city shall be appointed by the mayor and council at their first regular meeting of each year. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-3) 
Sec. 2-108. - Annual budget; appropriations. 
(a)  An annual budget and an appropriations resolution shall be adopted by the mayor and council prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if for good and sufficient reasons the budget cannot be adopted by the first day of the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than 45 days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget and the appropriations resolution are not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, this section automatically authorizes the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the city. The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues, including appropriated unencumbered surplus, equal to appropriated expenditures. 
(b)  The city manager shall administer the budget, being responsible to the council for same, and may authorize the transfer of appropriated funds within and between departments with the approval of council as necessary to achieve the goals of the budget. 
(Code 1982, § 3-1-2; Ord. No. 369, § 3-1-2, 12-11-92; Ord. No. 372, § 3-1-2, 4-9-93) 
Sec. 2-109. - Fee schedule. 
A record of all license fees, business and occupation taxes, fees and service charges established and required by the city for use or purchase of city services and for permits and licenses and any other regulatory or administrative fees or charges imposed by the city shall be kept and maintained by the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-6) 
Sec. 2-110. - Sanitary service fee. 
(a)  Levy. There is hereby levied and assessed on each and every dwelling and business place and on each separate unit occupied as a dwelling or a place of business in the city a sanitary service fee in an amount as established from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Date of payment. The sanitary service fee shall be due and payable on or before November 20 of each year. 
(Code 1982, § 3-1-4; Ord. No. 596, pt. I, 2-17-09) 
Sec. 2-111. - Purchasing. 
Purchases shall conform to all requirements and procedures as established from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 3-1-3(b), (c); Ord. No. 369, § 3-1-3(b), (c), 12-11-92; Ord. No. 632, pt. I, 4-19-11; Ord. No. 747 , pt. II, 3-20-18) 
Sec. 2-112. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The provisions of the 1982 Code identified as subsection 3-1-3(a) on the subject of purchasing are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Sec. 2-113. - Sale or disposition of surplus, obsolete, unused or unserviceable property. 
Whenever the city council shall determine that property of the city has become surplus, obsolete, unused or unserviceable, such property may be sold or otherwise disposed of by order of the city council, and an entry of the same shall be made in the inventory books of the city; and the money received therefrom shall be paid into the general fund of the city. The sale of any such property shall be conducted under the same provisions as set forth in sections 50-24, 50-25 and 50-26. For purposes of this section, property becomes unserviceable where such property cannot be beneficially or advantageously used under all circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 2, 3-17-98) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; law enforcement, ch. 50; offenses, ch. 58; parks and recreation, ch. 62; signs, ch. 70; taxation, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. 3, sec. 9, par. 6; Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; furnishing to, purchase of or possession by persons under 21 years of age, use of false identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine. 
Applicant means the individual who seeks an employee handling permit, the individual who seeks an alcoholic beverage license, or in the case of a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that seeks an alcoholic beverage license, each individual with an influential interest in the establishment applying for an alcoholic beverage license. Primary applicant means the individual who is primarily responsible for alcoholic beverage matters for the establishment applying for an alcoholic beverage license. Additional applicant means any other individual with an influential interest in the establishment. 
Art shop means a retail business located in the TOD, VC, or MU-BC zoning districts devoted exclusively to providing art education that is limited to instruction in painting, sculpture, and similar crafts; or to selling and displaying portraits, paintings, sculptures, and similar art work and crafts. An art shop may sell art supplies in addition to providing art education or to offering artwork for sale. 
Beer and malt beverage mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage revenue from the sale of prepared meals and food and in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed subject to the barrel production limits and regulations under state law. 
Brown bag establishment means any restaurant, music hall, theater or other establishment licensed as a brown bag establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, and in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. 
Craft brewery (also known as micro-brewery) means a building or group of buildings where beer is brewed, bottled, packaged, and distributed for wholesale and/or retail distribution, subject to the limitations imposed by the Chamblee Unified Development Ordinance. 
Craft distillery (also known as micro-distillery) means a building or group of buildings where distilled spirits are manufactured (distilled, rectified or blended), bottled, packaged, and distributed for wholesale and/or retail distribution, subject to the limitations imposed by the Chamblee Unified Development Ordinance. 
Distilled spirits and spirituous liquor mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to all fortified wines. 
Employee means any person who works or engages in activity for pay on the premises of a licensed establishment on a full-time, part-time, temporary, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, lessee, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to brandy. 
Full-service kitchen means a kitchen consisting of a four-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill, permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which has been approved by the DeKalb County Health and Fire Departments. 
Growler means a professionally sanitized reusable container not exceeding 64 ounces in volume used to transport draft beer for off-premises consumption. 
Hearing officer means an attorney, not an employee of the city, who is licensed to practice law in Georgia, and retained to serve as an independent tribunal to conduct hearings under this chapter. 
Influential interest means the actual power to control or influence the operation, management, or policies of an establishment or legal entity which operates the establishment. An individual is deemed to have an "influential interest" if he or she: (1) is the on-site general manager of the establishment, (2) owns a financial interest of ten percent or more of a legal entity operating the establishment, or (3) holds an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the establishment. 
Initial application means any application for an alcoholic beverage license that is filed by a person or entity that is not licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under this chapter at the time of filing. 
Licensee means the individual to whom an alcoholic beverage license is issued, or, in the case of a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that operates an establishment, the legal entity and each individual who has an influential interest in the establishment. 
Liter means the metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; and 
(2)  In the case of any malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Mixed-use development means a commercial development, which contains a mixture of retail, restaurants and residential units, with not less than 15,000 square feet of commercial space and not fewer than 200 residential units, and is located in a CC (Corridor Commercial), VC (Village Commercial), MU-BC (Mixed-Use Business Center), or TOD (Transit Oriented Development) zoning district. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Performing arts facility means an establishment that: 
(1)  Is located in the TOD, VC, or MU-BC zoning district; 
(2)  Is a theater, concert hall, art center, museum, or similar establishment that is primarily devoted to the arts or theatrical performances; 
(3)  Derives less than 33 percent of its total monthly sales from the sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(4)  Limits the sale of alcoholic beverages on its premises to less than five hours per day; and 
(5)  Does not remain open beyond 12:00 midnight. 
Records means all documents, invoices, papers, letters, books, tapes, photographs, computer-based or computer-generated information, files, data, data fields, or similar material generated, prepared, compiled, or maintained by a licensee or an applicant for a license. 
Renewal application means any application for an alcoholic beverage license that is filed by a person or entity that is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under this chapter at the time of filing. 
Retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Wholesaler and wholesale dealer mean any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines and champagnes, and combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
Wine and malt beer specialty shop means a retail establishment: 
(1)  Which shall deal in the sale of malt beverages or table wine, dessert wine, fortified wines, port, sherry or other wine as the term "wine" is defined in section 6-1, in closed packages for consumption off the premises and wine accessories; 
(2)  Which shall not maintain on the premises and offer for sale distilled spirits; 
(3)  Which shall maintain on the premises and offer for sale at all times a variety of wines or malt beverages from not less than 30 manufacturers or importers; and 
(4)  Which shall submit an inventory list of all wines and malt beverages maintained on the premises and offered for sale to the city clerk's office. Such inventory list shall be submitted to the city clerk's office on a quarterly basis by the first day of each of the following months of each year: January, April, July and October. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-2; Ord. No. 631, pt. I, 2-15-11; Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 692 , pt. I, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 703 , pt. I, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 741 , pt. I, 8-15-17; Ord. No. 754 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-26) 
Sec. 6-3. - Inspection of licensed establishments and establishments seeking a license. 
Establishments licensed or seeking a license under this chapter and their employees shall permit the city manager or his or her designee, or the chief of police or officers of the police department, to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the premises of the establishment, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the requirements of state law and the Chamblee Code of Ordinances applicable to the establishment. Such establishments and employees shall permit such inspections on weekdays between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. as well as during those times when the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize only reasonable inspections of the premises pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-8; Ord. No. ; Ord. No. 754 , pt. II, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-4. - Purchase and sales records. 
(a)  Every licensee shall keep and preserve records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold or otherwise dispensed by the licensee. All consumption on the premises licensees shall also keep and preserve records of all purchases, revenue, and sales of the licensed establishment, including records of all cover charges, merchandise, and food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased and sold or otherwise dispensed by them. Such records shall be open for inspection by the city manager or the city manager's designee between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day that the establishment is open for business. These records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years unless the city manager, upon approval by mayor and council, authorizes the disposal of records prior to the expiration of three years. 
(b)  If the city manager or his or her designee intends to inspect or to conduct an audit of the purchase, revenue, and sales records of a licensee, he shall notify the licensee in writing directed to the licensee's most-recent mailing address or email address on file with the office of the city clerk, or posted at the public entrance to the licensee's business location. 
(1)  A written notice may direct the licensee to provide specified records to the city manager or designee not less than ten days after the date of the notice. A written notice may specify the date, time, and place of an audit to be conducted by the city manager or his designee not less than 14 days from the date of the notice. 
(2)  A licensee must produce records as they are kept in the normal course of business or must organize and label them to correspond to categories in the city manager's written notice. If a request does not specify a form for producing electronically stored information, a party must produce it in a form or forms in which it is ordinarily maintained or in a reasonably usable form or forms. 
(3)  The city manager may designate the city's finance director or other person to perform the audit. 
(4)  If the licensee fails to provide the specified records in the manner set forth in the written notice, the city manager shall inform the city clerk, who may issue a written notice of intent to suspend or revoke the licensee's license(s). 
(c)  For the purpose of ensuring compliance with consumption on the premises percentage of sales requirements: 
(1)  The licensee of each such establishment shall furnish at the time of any renewal application an affidavit which reports the percentage of the licensee's total revenue derived from the sale of food prepared and consumed on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises in the licensee's last three completed calendar quarters; and 
(2)  The city manager may require that a licensee furnish an affidavit which reports the percentage of the licensee's quarterly total revenue derived from the sale of food prepared and consumed on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises in the licensee's most recently ended calendar quarter. Such affidavits, when required by the city manager, are due by the 15th day of the month immediately following each calendar quarter; and 
(3)  The city manager may require that a licensee furnish an affidavit from a certified public accountant which certifies any information supplied pursuant to subsections (c)(1) or (c)(2). Such affidavits, when required by the city manager, are due by the last day of the month immediately following the reporting period; and 
(4)  Any licensed establishment that fails to meet the appropriate percentage requirements for two consecutive calendar quarters or annually shall be subject to license revocation proceedings. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-9; Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 658, pt. I, 10-15-13; Ord. No. 754 , pt. III, 10-16-18) 
Note— Formerly entitled "Audits". 
Sec. 6-5. - Collection of delinquent fees and taxes. 
If any person shall fail to pay any sum due under this chapter, the city clerk shall issue an execution against the person so delinquent, and his property, for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-11) 
Sec. 6-6. - Service of notices. 
Alcoholic beverage license applicants and licensees shall provide their current mailing address, email address, telephone number, business location address, and registered agent's contact information in writing to the city clerk with any application submitted under this chapter. Applicants and licensees shall supplement this information in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city clerk within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted inaccurate or incomplete. Applicants and licensees shall configure their email settings to ensure receipt of email messages from the "@chambleega.gov" email domain. For purposes of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered to a recipient when personally served, when posted at the public entrance of the recipient's business location, when transmitted to the recipient's most-recent email address on file with the city clerk, or when deposited in the United States mail with adequate postage addressed to the recipient's most-recent mailing address on file with the city clerk. Notice provided to an applicant's or licensee's registered agent by any of the foregoing means shall be deemed delivered to the applicant or licensee. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-25; Ord. No. 754 , pt. IV, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-7. - Sale generally. 
Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the city, under a license granted by the city, upon the terms and conditions provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-1(a); Ord. No. 754 , pt. V, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-8. - Sale on election days. 
The sale by wholesale or retail dealers of alcoholic beverages shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, nothing in this section shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-19) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 6-9. - Posting of regulations regarding sales. 
(a)  All licensees under this chapter shall post in a prominent location on the licensed premises, in a manner whereby it may be easily viewed by patrons, an approved sign setting forth or summarizing the laws of the city and the state in regard to the sale of alcoholic beverages to underage or intoxicated persons. 
(b)  Each such sign shall be of a size and configuration approved by the police department and shall include either the language of the applicable code sections, or summaries approved by the police department. 
(c)  The police department is authorized to design and have printed approved signs, which shall be made available to licensees at a price to be established by the chief of the department. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-13) 
Sec. 6-10. - Duty of licensee, licensee's employees or agents to require and check identification; sale to underage persons prohibited. 
It shall be a violation for a licensee, employee of a licensee or agent of a licensee not to require and properly check identification to ensure that an underage person is not sold or served or does not have in his possession alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. The term "identification," as used in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person and such person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth and includes but is not limited to a passport, military ID card, driver's license, state department of public safety ID card or any certified identification approved by the chief of police. It shall be a violation to serve, sell, dispense or otherwise provide any alcoholic beverages to a person under 21 years of age. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-20; Ord. No. 446, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 488, pt. I, 9-19-00) 
Sec. 6-11. - Employee age requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, no wholesale dealer or package licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit persons 16 years of age or older from selling or handling alcoholic beverages in grocery stores, supermarkets, or drugstores. For purposes of this subsection, the terms grocery stores and supermarkets shall not include convenience stores or service stations. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-12; Ord. No. 423, 8-20-96; Ord. No. 496, 1-4-01) 
Sec. 6-12. - Advertising. 
No outdoor advertising or signs with respect to the promotion of the sale of alcoholic beverages or the prices of such beverages shall be permitted on the exterior of any retail outlet, or on the windows or elsewhere in the outlet that may be viewed from the outside, except as follows: 
(1)  Each licensee for the retail sale of liquors, except consumption on the premises establishments, shall have printed on a front window or entrance of the licensed premises the name of the licensed establishment, together with the inscription, "City of Chamblee Retail License No. ____________ ," in uniform letters not less than four and not more than eight inches in height. 
(2)  Each retail licensee, except consumption on the premises establishments, shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four copies of a printed price list of the liquors offered for sale, or the licensee may have the price placed on the bottle or on the front of the shelf where liquors are exhibited for sale. No other signs may be used within or without the premises showing prices. 
(3)  Lighted signs advertising beer and wine may be placed on the furthest back wall of the establishment. 
(4)  Consumption on the premises establishments may advertise special days, nights or events in the newspaper or by flyers. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-14) 
State Law reference— Retail dealers' signs, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3. 
Sec. 6-13. - Happy hour promotions; alcohol service restrictions. 
(a)  No licensee under this chapter, or employee or agent of a licensee, shall engage in any of the following conduct in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage; 
(2)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price; 
(3)  Selling, offering to sell, or delivering to any person any alcoholic beverage at a price less than one-half the price customarily charged for such alcoholic beverage; provided that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit reducing the price of a drink by up to one-half the price customarily charged; 
(4)  Requiring or allowing the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed, by any one person; or 
(5)  Increasing the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage. 
(b)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as happy hour. 
(c)  As used in this section, the phrase "customarily charged" means the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. 
(d)  No licensee holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall knowingly or recklessly allow the selling, offering to sell, or delivering to any person or group of persons more than six fluid ounces of distilled spirits, spirituous liquor, or fortified wine, as defined in section 6-1, in one container. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-28; Ord. No. 754 , pt. VI, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-14. - Prohibited conduct on licensed premises. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to regulate establishments licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcoholic beverages in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of various forms of nudity and physical contact in such establishments between patrons and employees of the establishment. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials or performances, including sexually oriented materials or performances. Neither is it the purpose nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution or presentation of obscene material or conduct. 
(b)  Findings and rationale. Based on evidence of adverse secondary effects associated with certain conduct in alcoholic beverage establishments, which effects have been presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in numerous cases, including, but not limited to, City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. , 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc. , 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M. , 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. , 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres , 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc. , 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); Sewell v. Georgia, 435 U.S. 982 (1978); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); City of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 19 (1989); and 
Maxim Cabaret, Inc. v. City of Sandy Springs, 816 S.E.2d 31 (Ga. 2018); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. City of Doraville, 297 Ga. 513 (2015); Trop, Inc. v. City of Brookhaven, 296 Ga. 85 (2014); Flanigan's Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County, 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010); Peek-a-Boo Lounge v. Manatee County, 630 F.3d 1346 (11th Cir. 2011); Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); Jacksonville Property Rights Ass'n, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 635 F.3d 1266 (11th Cir. 2011); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 331 F.3d 1196 (11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306 (11th Cir. 2000); Williams v. A.G. of Alabama, 378 F.3d 1232 (11th Cir. 2004); Gary v. City of Warner Robins, 311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange, 217 F.3d 1350 (11th Cir. 2002); Boss Capital, Inc. v. City of Casselberry, 187 F.3d 1251 (11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, 200 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker, 670 F.2d 943 (11th Cir. 1982); International Food & Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale, 794 F.2d 1520 (11th Cir. 1986); 5634 E. Hillsborough Ave., Inc. v. Hillsborough County, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 4, 2007), aff'd , 2008 WL 4276370 (11th Cir. Sept. 18, 2008) (per curiam); Fairfax MK, Inc. v. City of Clarkston, 274 Ga. 520 (2001); Morrison v. State, 272 Ga. 129 (2000); Goldrush II v. City of Marietta, 267 Ga. 683 (1997); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan, 601 S.E.2d 106 (Ga. Ct. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County, 272 Ga. 887 (2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee, 270 Ga. 33 (1998); World Famous Dudley's Food & Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park, 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson, 242 Ga. 214 (1978); Entm't Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 721 F.3d 729 (6th Cir. 2013); Lund v. City of Fall River, 714 F.3d 65 (1st Cir. 2013); Imaginary Images, Inc. v. Evans, 612 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 2010); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Ocello v. Koster, 354 S.W.3d 187 (Mo. 2011); 84 Video/Newsstand, Inc. v. Sartini, 2011 WL 3904097 (6th Cir. Sept. 7, 2011); Plaza Group Properties, LLC v. Spencer County Plan Commission, 877 N.E.2d 877 (Ind. Ct. App. 2007); Flanigan's Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County, 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010); East Brooks Books, Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 360 (6th Cir. 2009); Entm't Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 372 (6th Cir. 2009); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir. 2008); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); Heideman v. South Salt Lake City, 348 F.3d 1182 (10th Cir. 2003); H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); Fantasy Ranch, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 459 F.3d 546 (5th Cir. 2006); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall, 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir. 2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph, 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Knox County, 555 F.3d 512 (6th Cir. 2009); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales, Inc. v. Montgomery County, 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols, 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); DCR, Inc. v. Pierce County, 964 P.2d 380 (Wash. Ct. App. 1998); City of New York v. Hommes, 724 N.E.2d 368 (N.Y. 1999); Taylor v. State, No. 01-01-00505-CR, 2002 WL 1722154 (Tex. App. July 25, 2002); Fantasyland Video, Inc. v. County of San Diego, 505 F.3d 996 (9th Cir. 2007); U.S. v. Baston, 818 F.3d 651 (11th Cir. 2016); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. v. City of Littleton, Civil Action No. 99-N-1696, Memorandum Decision and Order (D. Colo. March 31, 2001); People ex rel. Deters v. The Lion's Den, Inc., Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order (Ill. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale, No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); 
and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around adult establishments, including, but not limited to, "Correlates of Current Transactional Sex among a Sample of Female Exotic Dancers in Baltimore, MD," Journal of Urban Health (2011); "Does the Presence of Sexually Oriented Businesses Relate to Increased Levels of Crime?" Crime & Delinquency (2012) (Louisville, KY); Metropolis, Illinois - 2011-12; Manatee County, Florida - 2007; Hillsborough County, Florida - 2006; Clarksville, Indiana - 2009; El Paso, Texas - 2008; Memphis, Tennessee - 2006; New Albany, Indiana - 2009; Louisville, Kentucky - 2004; Fulton County, GA - 2001; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Jackson County, Missouri - 2008; Ft. Worth, Texas - 2004; Kennedale, Texas - 2005; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Houston, Texas - 1997, 1983; Phoenix, Arizona - 1995-98, 1979; Tucson, Arizona - 1990; Spokane, Washington - 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; New York, New York Times Square - 1994; the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); Dallas, Texas - 2007; "Rural Hotspots: The Case of Adult Businesses," 19 Criminal Justice Policy Review 153 (2008); "Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence," by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota; "Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View," by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000; Sex Store Statistics and Articles; Law Enforcement and Private Investigator Affidavits (Adult Cabarets in Forest Park, GA and Sandy Springs, GA); DeKalb County Testimony and Reports - 2014; and Strip Club-Trafficking Documents, 
the city council finds: 
(1)  Nudity, partial nudity, conduct by bikini-clad persons, and/or sexual conduct coupled with alcohol in public places begets negative secondary effects, including sexual, lewd, lascivious, and salacious conduct among patrons and employees resulting in violation of laws and in dangers to the health, safety and welfare of the public; 
(2)  Physical contact between employees of alcoholic beverage establishments, including "bed" dances, "couch" dances, and "lap" dances as they are commonly called, are associated with and can lead to illicit sexual activities, including masturbation, lewdness, and prostitution, as well as other negative effects, including sexual assault; 
(3)  The city finds that the foregoing conduct, even when said employees are technically not nude or semi-nude as defined in other portions of the Chamblee Code of Ordinances, is substantially similar to and presents similar concerns as conduct by nude and semi-nude performers in adult establishments; 
(4)  Each of the negative effects targeted by this section constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing such negative effects, which is the city's rationale for this section, exists independent of any comparative analysis between the regulated establishments and other, non-regulated establishments. The city finds that the cases and secondary effects documentation relied on in this section are reasonably believed to be relevant to the city's interest in preventing illicit sexual behavior. 
The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings and legislative record related to adverse secondary effects, including the judicial opinions and reports related to such secondary effects. 
(c)  On-premises conduct. No licensee, as defined in this chapter, shall knowingly violate the following regulations or knowingly or recklessly allow an employee or any other person to violate the following regulations: 
(1)  No person shall engage in masturbation, sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, sodomy, bestiality, or flagellation on the licensed premises. 
(2)  No employee shall knowingly touch, engage in physical contact with, caress, or fondle the breast, buttocks, lap, pubic region, or genitals of a patron, whether directly or through clothing or other covering, on the licensed premises. 
(3)  No patron shall knowingly touch, engage in physical contact with, caress, or fondle the breast, buttocks, lap, pubic region, or genitals of an employee, whether directly or through clothing or other covering, on the licensed premises. 
(4)  No person shall expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anus, vulva, or the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point (except that the exposure of the cleavage of the female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel is not prohibited) to a patron on the licensed premises. This subsection (c)(4) does not apply to conduct in a performing arts facility as defined in this chapter. 
(d)  No licensee shall knowingly or recklessly allow the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or allow persons who are noticeably intoxicated to congregate on the licensed premises. 
(e)  No licensee shall knowingly or recklessly allow any gambling, betting, lottery, or other device for the hazarding of any money or other thing of value on the licensed premises, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a properly licensed bingo game. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-16; Ord. No. 380, 10-8-93; Ord. No. 496, 1-4-01; Ord. No. 754 , pt. VII, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-15. - Retailers to purchase from licensed wholesalers; sales by wholesalers. 
No retailer licensed under this chapter shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-21) 
Sec. 6-16. - Handling permit required. 
(a)  An employee handling permit shall be required for: 
(1)  Any employee of a package licensee whose primary business is the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Any employee of a package licensee who sells alcoholic beverages in a convenience store or service station. 
(3)  Any employee of a consumption on the premises licensee who serves or works in the serving area, including bar or lounge area of the licensed premises, and sells, serves, takes orders for, or handles alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No licensee shall employ any person required to have a handling permit until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the chief of police and a permit issued indicating that such person is eligible for this employment. 
(c)  Qualifications. An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in this chapter for the licensee except for the residency requirements. The term "moral turpitude" as defined is conduct that is considered contrary to community standards of justice, honesty or good morals. Crimes involving moral turpitude have an inherent quality of baseness, vileness or depravity with respect to a person's duty to another or to society in general. No permit will be issued while any outstanding warrant exists on which service has not been perfected. 
(d)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a regulated premises, he shall file an application to obtain a work permit from the police department. The city shall have 15 days to investigate the information required of the employee. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the permitting officer shall grant approval for employment. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the regulated premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of such denial, apply to the chief of police for a hearing. The decision of the chief of police after hearing may be appealed within ten days thereafter to city council who shall issue such order as is required. The decision of the city council may thereafter be appealed, within 30 days, to DeKalb Superior Court. An investigation fee in an amount set by the city council shall accompany the application. 
(e)  Access to criminal history records information "CHRI". This Code section 6-16 "Handler permit required" requires a state and national criminal back check of persons engaged in handling alcoholic beverages as defined in this Code. This section is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35 to regulate the issuance of permits of the employment of those engaged in handling alcoholic beverages. An applicant, employee, or volunteer seeking to engage in the handling of alcoholic beverages shall submit, if required, two sets of his/her fingerprints taken by the Chamblee Police Department as set out in subsection (f). 
(f)  Application. An application for a permit shall include the applicant's legal name, all of the applicant's aliases and/or any other name by which the applicant has ever been known, address, business name and address, date of birth with the written proof thereof, and prior arrest record of the applicant. The police department shall make a complete search relative to any police record of the applicant. A complete set of fingerprints of each applicant shall be required. Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the police department will transmit both sets of fingerprints and appropriate fees (unless a satisfactory billing arrangement has been entered into between the police department and GCIC and/or FBI) to GCIC. GCIC will compare the subject's fingerprints against its criminal file and submit the fingerprints to the FBI for comparison with nation-wide records, unless submission to the FBI is automatic pursuant to the use of live-scan. The results of the FBI check will be returned to the police department if submissions are manually sent to GCIC, or electronically from both the GBI and FBI where submissions are made electronically to GCIC. 
(g)  Fitness determination. In rendering a fitness determination, the police department will decide whether the record applicant has been convicted of, or is under pending indictment for enumerated disqualifiers, as set forth in subsection (h) below. 
(h)  Disqualifiers. 
(1)  Any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, within ten years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within ten years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(i)  Right to a copy of criminal history. A record applicant may request and receive a copy of his/her criminal history record information from the police department. Should the record applicant seek to amend or correct his/her record, he/she must contact GCIC as to state records and/or the FBI for records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. 
(j)  The chief of police shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this article, the chief of police shall issue a handling permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. 
(k)  A new search may be conducted on any person issued an employee handling permit if the police department receives information which warrants such a new search. If the new search reveals evidence that warrants revocation of the permit, the permit may be revoked following notice and a hearing. 
(l)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation may be terminated by the chief of police. The chief of police may also revoke an employee's handling permit and demand its return where the employee violated the provisions of this chapter or becomes one who adversely affects the public health, safety or welfare. 
(m)  Only one handling permit per individual will be issued and said permit shall be valid for employment at any package licensee or consumption on the premises licensee within the city. The permit shall be valid for a period of one year and may be renewed on or before its expiration. The fee for a handling permit shall be set by the city council. 
(1)  An adult entertainment permit embossed with "alcohol" issued under section 22-109 shall meet the requirements as set out in subsection (a). 
(n)  Any conviction for a violation of the provisions of section 6-10 of this chapter shall result in the automatic suspension of the handling permit. 
(1)  Upon the first offense, a server or handler providing alcoholic beverage to an individual under 21 years of age may have such individual's handling permit suspended for six months. 
(2)  A second offense within two years may result in a suspension of the handling permit for one year. 
(3)  A third offense within two years shall result in the forfeiture of the right to sell or serve alcoholic beverages in a licensed establishment in the city. 
(o)  All permits issued under this section remain the property of the city, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer of the police department. It shall be unlawful for an employee whose handling permit has been revoked and upon whom demand for return of the card has been made to refuse to return the card or to alter, conceal, deface or destroy the card. 
(p)  An employee shall provide his employer with a legible copy of his permit, which copy shall be maintained by the employer as part of its business records. 
(Ord. No. 496, 1-4-01; Ord. No. 727 , pt. I, 11-15-16; Ord. No. 735 , pt. I, 2-21-17; Ord. No. 754 , pt. VIII, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-17. - Handling not to include bagging and carrying out. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the bagging or carrying out of wine or malt beverages in the original package in the course of employment by a grocery store, convenience store, or similar establishment shall not constitute the handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 496, 1-4-01) 
Sec. 6-18. - Licensee to report disciplinary action. 
Any licensee who has any disciplinary action taken against him or any of his employees who sell, take orders for, deliver, or handle alcoholic beverages by any governmental authority (municipal, county, state, or federal) shall notify the chief of police of such action within five days of such action. The following shall be considered to be a disciplinary action: any conviction, including the acceptance of a plea of nolo contendere; any penalty imposed by any regulatory agency; and any other written charge or reprimand against the licensee or any of his employees. The provisions of this section shall not apply with respect to traffic offenses. 
(Ord. No. 496, 1-4-01) 
Secs. 6-19—6-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 6-41. - License required; sale or delivery off of licensed premises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage where the person does not have a license from the city to sell or possess for sale these alcoholic beverages, or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. Violations of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-3) 
Sec. 6-42. - Separate license required for each location. 
A separate application must be made under this article for each location, and a separate license must be issued. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-5) 
Sec. 6-43. - License a privilege. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this Code and state law. 
(b)  All licenses issued under this article shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled, and is subject to any future ordinances which may be enacted." 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-1(b), (c)) 
Sec. 6-44. - Application for license. 
(a)  Access to criminal history records information "CHRI". This Code section 6-44 "Application for license" requires a state and national criminal background check of persons engaged in operating an alcoholic beverage establishment as regulated in this Code. This section is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35 to regulate the issuance of licenses to sell alcoholic beverages. The primary applicant and each additional applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall submit two sets of his/her fingerprints taken by the Chamblee Police Department. Applicants must submit their fingerprints and pay the required fee to the police department prior to, but not more than 60 days before, the filing of a completed application form. 
(b)  All persons desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the city clerk. 
(c)  The application shall include but shall not be limited to the name, address, and completed personnel statement of the primary applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; the name and address of the business establishment; the names, addresses, and completed personnel statements of all other individuals with an influential interest in the establishment (additional applicants); and the name and address of the agent for service of process. An applicant shall supplement the information provided in its application in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city clerk within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted inaccurate or incomplete. 
(d)  The application shall include signed and sworn affidavit(s) verifying each applicant's lawful presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. 
(e)  The application shall include a signed and sworn affidavit attesting that the establishment either uses the federal work authorization program in accordance with federal regulations or that the applicant employs fewer than 11 people or otherwise does not fall within the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6. 
(f)  To ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, all applicants shall furnish such data, information, and records as required by the city clerk on an application form supplied by the city clerk, or any supplemental written request by the clerk. Failure to furnish such data shall serve as a ground to deny the application. 
(g)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(h)  Fitness determination. The police department will consider whether the applicant has been convicted of, or is under pending indictment for, enumerated disqualifiers, as set forth in subsections 6-45(d), (e) below. The police department shall advise the city clerk of its fitness determination for each applicant within 15 days of the filing of a completed application form. 
(i)  Right to a copy of criminal history. An applicant may request and receive a copy of his/her criminal history record information from the police department. Should the record applicant seek to amend or correct his/her record, he/she must contact GCIC as to state records and/or the FBI for records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. 
(j)  Within 30 days of the filing of a completed application for a license, the city clerk shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. 
(k)  The city clerk shall provide written notice to any primary applicant whose application is denied under the provisions of this article. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial, and shall advise the primary applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. 
(l)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this article, the applicants listed in the application may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-7; Ord. No. 497, pt. I, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 754 , pt. IX, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-45. - Licensing qualifications. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(b)  No retailer's or consumption on the premises license for the sale of distilled spirits will be granted where the applicant is not a resident of a county or municipality within the state where the sale of distilled spirits is authorized. 
(c)  Where the establishment applying for an alcoholic beverage license is a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity, the provisions of this section shall apply to each individual with an influential interest in the establishment. If the requirements for a license are satisfied, the license will be issued to the entity and to the applicants listed in the application. 
(d)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within ten years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(e)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, within ten years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any city employee of a department regulating alcoholic beverages, or his spouse or minor children, to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(g)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the city previously revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(h)  If the city requests an inspection of the premises and an applicant refuses to permit an inspection within five days following the request, the city clerk may deny the applicant's initial alcoholic beverage license application. 
(i)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the city a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city clerk, in such form as he may prescribe. 
(j)  No adult establishment, as defined in chapter 22, article VI of this Code, is eligible for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or to allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises. No license under this chapter shall be granted or renewed for any adult establishment. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-10; Ord. No. 754 , pt. X, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-46. - Distance of premises from schools, churches, etc. 
(a)  An initial alcoholic beverage license application shall be denied if the applicant seeks to sell: 
(1)  Any wine, malt beverages or distilled spirits by the package within 200 yards of the grounds of any educational building, including those located in churches, public and private school grounds or college campus. 
(2)  Any wine, malt beverages or distilled spirits by the package within 100 yards of any church building or any parcel of land located in a residential zoning district. 
(3)  Any wine, malt beverages or distilled spirits by the package or for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(b)  The reference in this section to a school building or educational building on a college campus shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state. The term "campus," as used in this section, shall be defined as buildings used for educational purposes and the space adjoining such buildings necessary and convenient and habitually used for educational purposes. 
(c)  The reference in this section to a residential zoning district shall apply to all parcels of land that hold the NR-1, NR-2 or NR-3 zoning classification. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest part of any structure occupied by the alcoholic beverage establishment to the closest point on a property line of a parcel occupied by a land use identified in subsection (a) above. Where a use identified in subsection (a) is located in a multi-tenant development, the distance shall be measured to the closest part of the tenant space occupied by that use rather than the property line of the entire development. Every initial alcoholic beverage license application shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance of the uses described in this section, and a certificate of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer stating that the location complies with the distance requirements of this section. The drawing and certificate must be not more than six months old when the application is filed. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-15; Ord. No. 493, pt. 1, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 546, pt. I, 4-18-06; Ord. No. 692 , pt. VI, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 696 , pt. I, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 741 , pt. II, 8-15-17; Ord. No. 751 , pt. I, 9-18-18; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XI, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-47. - Compliance with applicable regulations; payment of license fee; license denial. 
Before any license shall be granted under this article, the applicant therefor shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the mayor and city council regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, and each applicant for a license shall pay a license fee in an amount as established by action of the city council. A copy of the license fees as established from time to time by action of the city council is on file in the office of the city clerk. If the applicant does not satisfy the standards to obtain the license that the applicant seeks, the city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to deny the license. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-18; Ord. No. 543, pt. I, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XII, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-48. - Display of license. 
The city license issued under this article shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view at the place of business of the licensee. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-4; Ord. No. 543, pt. I, 12-20-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 543, pt. I, adopted Dec. 20, 2005, repealed § 6-48 in its entirety and renumbered former §§ 6-49—6-56 as §§ 6-48—6-55. Former § 6-48 pertained to a schedule of license fees and derived from: Code of 1982, § 9-2-191; and Ord. No. 521, pt. 1, adopted Oct. 15, 2002. 
Sec. 6-49. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of the licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 30 days from the date of death, or until expiration of the license, or until approval of a new license, whichever occurs first, provided however that the city must be notified of the licensee's death within ten days of the death or the license shall automatically terminate on the 11th day following the death of the licensee. 
(c)  If a license is surrendered, or a licensee severs the association with the licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 30 days from the date of surrender, or from the date determined to be the date of severance, provided however that the city must be notified of the change within ten days of the severance or the license shall automatically terminate on the eleventh day following the date of the severance. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more of the partners in the partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate owner at the time of issuance of the license; nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing stock holdings to a total of ten or more percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in the entity. 
(e)  Should a transfer of location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(f)  Except as provided above, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license issued under this division automatically, without the necessity of a hearing. 
(g)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used, and the new ownership and the old ownership shall be punishable as provided in section 1-6. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the city for one year from the date of the violation. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-6; Ord. No. 543, pt. I, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 737 , pt. I, 4-18-17) 
Editor's note— See Editor's note following § 6-48. 
Sec. 6-50. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to obtain a license for the ensuing year shall file a completed renewal application, with the requisite fee provided for in this article, with the city clerk or the clerk's designee on or before November 30 of each year; otherwise, investigative and administrative costs, penalties and interest will be assessed. 
(b)  All licenses granted under this article shall be for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. License fees shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. License fees are not refundable. 
(c)  Any licensee that files a completed renewal application on December 1 through December 31 shall, in addition to the annual fee, pay a late charge of 20 percent, and shall also pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-17; Ord. No. 543, pt. I, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XIII, 10-16-18) 
Editor's note— See Editor's note following § 6-48. 
Sec. 6-51. - Revocation, suspension or other penalties. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an alcoholic beverage license or impose other penalties upon the licensee under the conditions set forth in this section. However, no revocation, suspension or other penalty shall be imposed without first providing a licensee the notice, hearing and appeal rights as more specifically provided in section 6-53. 
(b)  Sufficient grounds for the suspension or revocation of a license, or the imposition of other penalties include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  A licensee has failed to open for business within six months after approval of the license. 
(2)  A licensee has ceased to operate the business for a period of three consecutive months. 
(3)  A licensee's state license or permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages has been revoked. 
(4)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has sold alcoholic beverages during a period of suspension. 
(5)  A licensee gave false, misleading, or incomplete information in the initial application or in the renewal application. 
(6)  A licensee has failed to pay any fee, license fee, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this chapter or any other licensing ordinance of the city. 
(7)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person that the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known to be under the age of 21 years. For purposes of this section, it shall be prima-facie evidence that a licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to a person that the licensee or licensee's employee or agent should have known to be under the age of 21 years if the licensee, or the licensee's employee or agent fails to require and check identification as set forth in section 6-10. 
(8)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has served or sold any alcoholic beverage to any person that the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication. 
(9)  A licensee has failed to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license as set forth in section 6-45. 
(10)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent has allowed or required a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverages in violation of section 6-11. 
(11)  A licensee has violated any other law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or which are reasonably related to the operation of such establishments. 
(12)  A licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any other provision of this alcoholic beverage ordinance. 
(c)  Subject to the notice, hearing and appeal rights of a licensee as provided in section 6-53, the city clerk is authorized, but not required to, revoke the license of any licensee found to be in violation of this chapter. In lieu of revocation, the clerk is also authorized to suspend the license of a licensee violating any provisions of this chapter. In the event that the clerk elects to suspend a license, such license shall be suspended for three days for the first violation, which shall be scheduled to include a Friday and Saturday, and 30 days for a second violation occurring within any consecutive 24-month period. For a third violation occurring within any consecutive 24-month period, the license shall be revoked. In lieu of revocation or suspension, the city clerk is also authorized, but not required, to accept a voluntary offer of a civil monetary penalty from the licensee, not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. No licensee or any other applicant may apply for a license for the same premises during any period of suspension or revocation. In determining the severity of any sanction imposed under this section, the city clerk may take into consideration any documented evidence that the licensee has, on prior occasions, undertaken proactive efforts to promote compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including the provisions of this chapter prohibiting the sale or serving of alcohol to minors. Documented evidence of such activities shall include, but shall not be limited to, written evidence that the licensee has promptly reported violations or attempted violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-22; Ord. No. 446, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 474, § I, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 543, pt. I, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 592, pt. I, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XIV, 10-16-18) 
Editor's note— See Editor's note following § 6-48. 
Sec. 6-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 754 , pt. XV, adopted Oct. 16, 2018, deleted § 6-52 entitled "Alcoholic beverage review board," which derived from: Code 1982, § 9-2-23; Ord. No. 387, § 7(3), adopted Dec. 10, 1993; and Ord. No. 543, pt. I, adopted Dec. 20, 2005. 
Sec. 6-53. - Hearing procedures; appeal. 
(a)  When the city clerk issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the city clerk shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this chapter for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by a method set forth in section 6-6 of this chapter. The notice shall also set forth the following: The respondent shall have ten days after the delivery of the written notice to submit, at the office of the city clerk, a written request for a hearing. If the respondent does not request a hearing within said ten days, the city clerk's written notice shall become a final denial, suspension, or revocation, as the case may be, on the 30th day after it is issued. 
(b)  If the respondent does make a written request for a hearing within said ten days, then the city clerk shall, within ten days after the submission of the request, send a notice to the respondent indicating the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted not less than ten days nor more than 60 days after the date that the hearing notice is issued. The city shall provide for the hearing to be transcribed. 
(c)  At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all relevant arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the city clerk's witnesses. The city clerk shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer may receive, consider, and adopt proposed written decisions tendered by the city clerk and/or the respondent within five business days after the hearing. The hearing officer shall issue a final written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this chapter, to the respondent within 15 business days after the hearing. 
(d)  If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall advise the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction, and the decision shall not become effective until the 30th day after it is rendered. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, direct the city clerk to withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by first class priority mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the city clerk shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-24; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 543, pt. I, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 592, pt. I, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XVI, 10-16-18) 
Editor's note— See Editor's note following § 6-48. 
Sec. 6-54. - Nonprofit civic organization temporary permit. 
(a)  To be eligible to apply for a temporary permit to sell alcoholic beverages at an authorized event, a bona fide nonprofit organization must be the applicant; a nonprofit authorization letter (Federal Form 501-C) must be produced; any required event permits must be obtained; and the authorized event for which the event permit is issued must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. 
(b)  Pursuant to state law, a temporary permit shall authorize the organization to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises for a period not to exceed three days, subject to all laws and ordinances regulating the time for selling such beverages; the temporary permit shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit; and no more than six such permits may be issued to the applicant organization in any one calendar year. 
(c)  Each application for such a temporary permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-101; Ord. No. 543, pt. I, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 604, pt. I, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 737 , pt. II, 4-18-17) 
Editor's note— See Editor's note following § 6-48. 
Sec. 6-55. - Temporary permit for business establishments serving alcoholic beverages free of charge. 
(a)  Eligibility. An establishment which maintains a valid city business license may be issued a temporary permit for a period not to exceed one day, which permit shall authorize the establishment to serve alcoholic beverages to patrons of the establishment; provided, however, that such establishment shall not charge any sum of money or other medium of exchange for the beverages served, nor shall any admission fee or other charge be made to gain entrance to the establishment during the period in which alcoholic beverages are served at such establishment. The number of temporary permits issued to an establishment as set forth in this section shall not exceed four in any one calendar year. 
(b)  Compliance with applicable regulations. Establishments governed under the provisions of this section shall be required to comply with all the general ordinances and the licensing requirements and regulations for a consumption on the premises establishment, except that such establishment shall not be required to have a full-service kitchen, shall not be required to pay the annual license fee charged for a consumption on the premises establishment, shall not be required to pay any investigative or administrative costs, shall not be subject to fingerprinting requirements, and shall not be subject to identification requirements for employees. 
(c)  Exemption from regulations regarding drinking in public place. Persons consuming alcoholic beverages within any establishment governed under the provisions of this section which at the time of such consumption holds a valid temporary permit for serving alcoholic beverages under this section shall not be in violation of section 58-2 relating to the drinking of alcoholic beverages in public places. 
(d)  A fee as set by the council shall be charged for each permit issued to any establishment governed under the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1982, §§ 9-2-201—9-2-204; Ord. No. 543, pt. I, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 692 , pt. IX, 11-17-15) 
Editor's note— See Editor's note following § 6-48. 
Sec. 6-56. - Sales and consumption on public property. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, or otherwise dispense any alcoholic beverage in a street, alley, or parking lot commonly used by the public or in any other public place or on public property. 
(b)  Private parties and organizations may secure a permit from the city manager to serve, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages on property owned or leased by the city. 
(c)  An outdoor festival host holding a special event permit may allow or prohibit alcohol consumption at the outdoor festival and shall have the right to require that alcohol consumed at the outdoor festival be purchased or obtained from an official outdoor festival vendor. Such authorization and/or limitations shall be set forth on the application for the special event permit. 
(Ord. No. 737 , pt. III, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 6-57—6-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WHOLESALERS 

Sec. 6-76. - Licensing. 
(a)  Any person desiring to sell, at wholesale, any alcoholic beverages in the city shall make application to the city clerk for a license to do so, which application shall be in writing on the prescribed forms, and pay any license fee set by the mayor and council. 
(b)  No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale distilled spirits license. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-181(a), (b)) 
Sec. 6-77. - Sales to retailers. 
(a)  No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any distilled spirits to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-181(c), (d)) 
Sec. 6-78. - Collection of excise tax; bond. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed an excise tax upon all alcoholic beverages purchased by persons holding a retail package license or a consumption on the premises license, at a rate set by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The excise tax shall be collected by all wholesale dealers selling alcoholic beverages to persons holding retail licenses, and shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the city clerk by the tenth of each month, based upon the units of alcohol sold during the previous month. Interest shall accrue on late payments at the rate of ten percent per annum. The wholesale dealer shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments. The monthly remittance shall be accompanied by a sworn statement showing, but not limited to, the type and volume of alcoholic beverages sold to each retail licensee, on a form or in a format approved by the city clerk. 
(c)  Each wholesale dealer, prior to commencement of business operation in the city, shall post a performance bond with the city clerk equal to 1½ times the estimated highest monthly payment made in a calendar year of the excise tax based on sales collected by the wholesale dealer from the retailers, to secure the payment of the tax imposed in this section. These bonds shall be secured by cash, which shall bear no interest, or a surety bond executed by a surety company licensed to do business in this state and approved by the mayor and council. 
(d)  A wholesaler may be excused from posting the performance bond as provided in this section after demonstrating full and satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this section for a period of 12 months subsequent to the commencement of business operations within the city. Continued exemption from the requirement of posting the performance bond shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with the terms of this article and the payment of all sums required by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-182) 
Sec. 6-79. - Audits. 
The city manager shall have the right to audit each wholesale dealer licensed to do business in the city. The city manager may designate the city's finance director or other person to perform the audit. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-183; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XVII, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-80. - Hours of sale. 
Wholesalers shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-184) 
Secs. 6-81—6-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Sec. 6-96. - Permitted locations. 
(a)  No distilled spirits by the package shall be sold at retail except in: 
(1)  Retail establishments devoted exclusively to the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package; 
(2)  Retail establishments in which space has been set aside devoted exclusively to the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package, with ingress and egress provided directly to and only to the exterior of the building in which the facility is located and not to any other enclosed part of the building in which the facility is located, except as provided in subsection (3) of this subsection; or 
(3)  Hotels, motels and high-rise office buildings where every public entrance to this use shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion of the primary use structure. 
(b)  The requirements set out in this section shall apply to retail liquor stores accessory to these uses, even when located in a CC, CVC or I zoning district. All retail liquor stores shall be located only in CC, CVC or I zoning districts. 
(c)  The reference in this section to a residential zoning district shall apply to all parcels of land that hold the NR-1, NR-2 or NR-3 zoning classification. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (c), above, no new retail package liquor licensed place of business nor the relocation of an existing retail package liquor licensed place of business engaged in the retail package sales of distilled spirits shall be allowed within 500 yards of any other business licensed to sell package liquor at retail, as measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground; provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply to any hotel licensed under this chapter. The restriction provided for in this subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license was issued prior to July 1, 1997, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall the restrictions of this subsection apply to any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of distilled spirits is lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-141; Ord. No. 441, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 546, pt. I, 4-18-06; Ord. No. 673 , pt. XVI, 1-20-15; Ord. No. 692 , pt. VII, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 6-97. - Investigative and administrative fee. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in an amount as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, but the investigative and administrative fees shall be retained. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-145; Ord. No. 692 , pt. VIII, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 6-98. - Statement regarding ownership interest in other retail stores. 
(a)  All applications for a package liquor license, both initial applications and renewal applications, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement, under oath, of information relative to any and all interest in retail liquor stores. This shall include names and addresses of all persons possessing a legal ownership in the subject establishment, together with any interest each person or any immediate relative has in any other retail liquor store located in the city or any other place; the ownership of the land and building where this retail business is operated; the amount of rental paid for this land and building, and to whom and at what intervals the rental is paid; the names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sublessor of this land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other legal interest in and to the land and building on and in which this retail liquor store is located; and any other information called for by the city clerk to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Information regarding any change in such relationship must be filed with the city clerk when the change is made. Failure to so file within a period of ten days after this change is made shall be grounds for the city clerk to revoke the license. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-146; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XVIII, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-99. - Coin-operated or amusement machines prohibited; exception. 
No retail dealer in liquors shall permit on his premises any slot machines of any kind or character or any coin-operated machines or any machine operated for amusement purposes. However, cigarette vending machines may be permitted. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-142) 
Sec. 6-100. - Hours of sale. 
Retailers shall not engage in the sale of spirituous liquors except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on Monday through Saturday and on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. The hours within which this business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of the sale. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-143; Ord. No. 640, pt. I, 12-20-11) 
Secs. 6-101—6-120. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 496, adopted Jan. 4, 2001, repealed § 6-101 in its entirety. Former § 6-101 pertained to employees and derived from the Code of 1982, § 9-2-144. 
ARTICLE V. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF WINE AND MALT BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-121. - Permitted locations. 
No beer or wine shall be sold at retail except in establishments maintaining 80 percent of the floorspace and storage area in a manner which is devoted principally to the retail sale of other products and located in zoning districts in which these establishments are permitted as a conforming use or in districts where an existing establishment exists as a nonconforming use, or in a facility duly licensed by the city to sell liquor by the package. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-161) 
Sec. 6-122. - Investigative and administrative fee. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in an amount as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, but the investigative and administrative fees shall be retained. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-164; Ord. No. 692 , pt. VIII, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 6-123. - Hours of sale. 
Retail package licensees may engage in the sale of beer and wine between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. Monday through Saturday and on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. The hours within which this business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of the sale. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-162; Ord. No. 442, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 640, pt. I, 12-20-11) 
Sec. 6-124. - Marking of prices. 
Retailers shall indicate plainly, by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the prices of all beer and wine exposed or offered for sale. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-163) 
Secs. 6-125—6-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RETAIL SALES OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 641, pt. I, adopted Apr. 17, 2012, amended art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VI, §§ 6-141—6-147, was entitled "Retail Sales of Distilled Spirits for Consumption On The Premises", and derived from: Code 1982, §§ 9-2-41—9-2-47; Ord. No. 365, § I, adopted July 10, 1992; Ord. No. 423, adopted Aug. 20, 1996; Ord. No. 452, adopted May 19, 1998; and Ord. No. 496, adopted Jan. 4, 2001. 

Sec. 6-141. - Eligibility for license. 
A consumption on the premises license may be granted only to the establishments described in this article and subject to the specified conditions. 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12) 
Sec. 6-142. - Restaurant. 
(a)  To be eligible for, and to operate under, a consumption on the premises license as a restaurant, an establishment must: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals are regularly served to the public for adequate pay; 
(2)  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with tables and seating that occupy (at all times that the establishment is occupied by patrons) at least 70 percent of the floor area in the establishment that is accessible to patrons, and have full-service kitchen facilities and adequate staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(3)  Serve at least one meal per day at least five days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration; 
(4)  Serve prepared meals described on its menu every hour it is open; and 
(5)  Derive at least 50 percent of total revenue from the sale of food prepared and consumed on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises. For purposes of this subsection, if an establishment requires customers to pay a minimum charge to enter or remain on the premises, the amount so charged shall not be counted toward the 50 percent requirement. 
(b)  An applicant that seeks a consumption on the premises license as a restaurant must provide the following information with its license or renewal application: 
(1)  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor area occupied by the establishment, a statement of floor area accessible to patrons, and a statement of the floor area devoted to tables and seating for patron dining. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city clerk may waive the requirements of this subsection for a renewal application if the applicant adopts a sketch or diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  A statement of the establishment's days and hours of operation, a statement of whether the establishment serves the prepared meals described on its menu every hour that it is open and, if not, which hours it serves such meals. 
(3)  A statement of whether the establishment desires to remain open to the public after 12:30 a.m. subject to the closing times set forth in subsection 6-152(a), and if so, the applicant must additionally provide the following: 
a.  A safety plan that contains the information required by section 6-155. The city clerk may waive the requirement to submit a safety plan for a renewal application if the applicant adopts a safety plan that the applicant previously submitted and certifies that the adopted safety plan is complete and accurate. 
b.  A copy of any print advertisements placed by the establishment during the previous 12 months, or a verified statement that the establishment did not advertise using print media during that period. 
c.  A list of social media platforms that the establishment uses to promote its business, and the name(s) used by the establishment on each social media platform. 
d.  A sworn statement from a certified public accountant that states the percentage of the establishment's total revenue derived from the sale of food prepared and consumed on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises during the establishment's most recently ended calendar quarter and during the 12-month period that concluded with that quarter. The statement must identify the business records used to prepare the statement and set forth the dollar figures and sales categories that produce the percentages stated for the three-month and 12-month periods in the statement. 
(c)  When located in a mixed-use development a restaurant may sell and serve alcoholic beverages within approved areas, included but not limited to, any common areas, patios or open areas, regardless of seating capacity, which shall be included as part of the restaurant premises. 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 643, pt. I, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 741 , pt. III, 8-15-17; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XIX, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-143. - Hotel and hotel room service. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a hotel must: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where food is served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered to guests for adequate pay; 
(2)  Contain 50 or more rooms used for the sleeping accommodations of guests; and 
(3)  Contain one or more public dining rooms with adequate and sanitary full-service kitchen facilities. 
(b)  A hotel may consist of a single building or may consist of two or more buildings located on the same premises and used in connection with the hotel operation. 
(c)  A facility which is styled as a motel, motor lodge, inn, or other similar appellation may be licensed as a hotel if it meets the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article to the contrary, any hotel (as the term "hotel" is commonly used and without regard to the requirements of this section), inn, or other establishment which offers overnight accommodations to the public for value, may provide "in-room service" of alcoholic beverages if such establishment: 
(1)  Holds a valid city package license or a valid city consumption on the premises license or both; and 
(2)  Has been authorized to provide in-room service by the state. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, the term "in-room service" consists of: 
(1)  The delivery of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages by an employee of the hotel to a registered guest's room when such alcoholic beverages have been ordered by the guest and when the guest shall be billed for the cost of such alcoholic beverages at the time of delivery and when the sale of such alcoholic beverages is completed at the time of delivery; or 
(2)  The provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel's guest room which contains alcoholic beverages and which is provided upon request of the guest and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of alcoholic beverages contained therein is final at the time requested except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, in-room service of alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations in this chapter relative to the sale of alcoholic beverages. In-room service sales shall be authorized only on such days and only during such hours as the sale of alcoholic beverages is otherwise authorized. 
(g)  Distilled spirits sold pursuant to this section shall not be sold in packages containing less than 50 milliliters each. 
(h)  All alcoholic beverages sold pursuant to this section shall be purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer and shall be subject to all taxes imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12) 
Sec. 6-144. - Lounge. 
(a)  A lounge is a separate room which is: 
(1)  Connected with, a part of, and adjacent to a restaurant; or 
(2)  Located in a hotel. 
(b)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a lounge must be arranged and maintained such that all booths, stools, and tables are open and unobstructed to the view of other customers in the lounge. 
(c)  A lounge which is operated on a different floor, or in a separate building from, or which is not connected or adjacent to, another licensed facility shall be considered a separate establishment from such other licensed facility and shall pay a separate annual license fee. 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12) 
Sec. 6-145. - Private clubs. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a private club must be a nonprofit association which is organized under the laws of this state and which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a)(4) of this section, the term "fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. Tips or gratuities added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Veterans' organizations, fraternal organizations, and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the state income tax law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food; provided, however, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises establishments. 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12) 
Sec. 6-146. - Physical requirements of premises. 
All lounge and restaurant areas, including all tables, booths and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. The sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room that is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Private parties which have been scheduled in advance; 
(2)  Sales to hotel guests in their hotel rooms; 
(3)  Private clubs; or 
(4)  Sales within a mixed-use development. 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 741 , pt. IV, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-147. - Live music and dancing. 
Bands or orchestras and patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for consumption on the premises sales only where: 
(1)  Adequate space exists; 
(2)  All fire and safety regulations are met; and 
(3)  Prior approval of the chief of police and the fire chief has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12) 
Sec. 6-148. - Package sales prohibited. 
Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell liquor by the package or bottle. A licensee violates this section if the licensee or the licensee's agent sells more than 85% of the entire contents of a package or bottle of distilled spirits and delivers same into a single container for a customer, even if the licensee or the licensee's agent retains the package or bottle. 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XX, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-149. - Carry-out of alcoholic beverage unlawful. 
(a)  Except for beer or malt beverages in a growler sealed by the licensee such that it shall be apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, or as permitted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4, all alcoholic beverages sold or otherwise dispensed by consumption on the premises licensees shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. Subject to the above exception, it shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises, and it shall be unlawful for the licensee to permit any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises. The licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person so removes any alcoholic beverages from the premises in any type of container, except as permitted by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person purchasing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to leave the premises without paying for such alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Carry-out of alcoholic beverages shall be lawful solely within the premises of any mixed-use development defined under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 692 , pt. II, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 741 , pt. V, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-150. - Bottle clubs. 
It is prohibited for any person to bring his own spirituous liquor into any licensed retail establishment. For purposes of this section, the term "retail establishment" shall not include a private hotel room or other similar guest room or a private club. 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12) 
Sec. 6-151. - Investigative and administrative fee. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in an amount as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, but the investigative and administrative fees shall be retained. 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 692 , pt. VIII, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 6-152. - Hours of sale generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, alcoholic beverages shall be sold and delivered to the customer for consumption on the premises only during the following hours: 
(1)  Monday through Saturday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the following day. 
(2)  Sunday hours are from 12:30 p.m. until 11:59 p.m. as permitted by section 6-153. 
(3)  Sales and deliveries during all other hours are prohibited. There shall be no consumption on the premises after prohibited hours have been in effect for 30 minutes. All licensed establishments must close their premises to the public and clear their premises of patrons by 2:30 a.m. Tuesday through Sunday and by 12:30 a.m. Monday. These times and rules also apply to the section or area of a grocery store in which sales for consumption on-premises occur. 
(4)  Sunday sales - extended hours. Permitted hours of sale and operation for consumption on the premises locations shall be extended to match Monday through Saturday hours for establishments eligible for Sunday sales when the following days or events occur on a Sunday: New Year's Day; NFL's Super Bowl; March 17 (St. Patrick's Day); May 5 (Cinco de Mayo); the Sunday before Memorial Day holiday; July 4 (Independence Day); the Sunday before Labor Day holiday; and December 31 (New Year's Eve). This section does not allow Sunday sales at establishments unless they hold a Sunday sales license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an establishment that is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to remain open to the public after 12:30 a.m. on any day that doing so is otherwise permitted under subsection (a), unless the establishment has filed a complete written safety plan that contains the information required by section 6-155. 
(c)  When an establishment has filed a complete written safety plan, the city clerk shall include the following notation on the license: "This establishment has filed a complete written safety plan that contains the information required by section 6-155 of the Chamblee Code." 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 643, pt. I, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 669 , pt. I, 8-19-14; Ord. No. 745 , pt. I, 2-20-18; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XXI, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-153. - Sunday sales. 
(a)  Licensed establishments deriving a minimum of 50 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, or licensed establishments deriving at least 50 percent of their total annual income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, are authorized to apply for a Sunday sales permit to sell and serve alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine by the drink. 
(b)  Applicants for a Sunday sales permit shall complete a form and affidavit furnished by the city clerk. An audit may be required at any time to ensure compliance. 
(c)  All applications for annual permit renewal shall be filed with the city clerk not later than November 30 of the year preceding the license year for which the permit is to be issued. All persons applying for renewal are subject to audit prior to renewal to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Sunday sales permits are granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. The permit fee shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. Fees are not refundable and permits shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 643, pt. I, 6-19-12) 
Sec. 6-154. - Use of open areas, patios or decks. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) or (c) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages outside the licensed premises structure. 
(b)  The premises of a consumption licensee shall include any patio, deck, open or outside area that is located immediately adjacent to the main licensed facility and located on property owned, leased or controlled by such licensee. Such area shall be approved by the city subject to review to ensure the safe and orderly operation of the premises, including but not limited to, maximum capacity, ingress, egress, and the provisions of appendix A - Unified Development Ordinance, title 2, chapter 240, article 3, subsection 240-13(c)(1), if applicable. 
(c)  A consumption licensee may be issued a temporary permit by the city manager or designee authorizing the licensee to sell, serve or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages in a patio/open area type environment as allowed in subsection (b) of this section while exempting the licensee from complying with subsections (b)(4) and (b)(6)—(b)(8) of this section. To be considered for approval, the following requirements must be met: 
(1)  A person seeking issuance of a temporary permit shall file in writing an application with the office of the city manager on forms provided by the city. Such application shall be filed not less than 14 days, nor more than nine months before the date on which the proposed special event is to be conducted; 
(2)  Licensee is limited to one one-day temporary permit during any six-month period; 
(3)  A temporary permit fee shall be set by the mayor and council and be based upon the number of attendees predicted to attend the event; 
(4)  The licensee shall comply with all permit directions and conditions; 
(5)  If the patio/open area includes any parking area the licensee must provide documentation that alternate parking arrangements have been made; 
(6)  The patio/open area must be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress through the licensed premises main structure and/or other openings in the enclosure structure authorized by the permit. 
(d)  The city manager shall use the following criteria when evaluating approval of a temporary permit pursuant to this section: 
(1)  The impact and cost of the event on the public health, welfare and safety; 
(2)  The impact and cost of the event on city support services; 
(3)  The impact of the event on the environment; 
(4)  The proximity in time to the same or similar event(s); 
(5)  The impact on the surrounding businesses or residences. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a hotel or motel or restaurant within a mixed-use development with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas, provided such functions are catered in connection with a meeting, conference, convention, or similar type gathering at such hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 641, pt. I, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 679 , pt. I, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 741 , pt. VI, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 6-155. - Safety plan contents. 
A safety plan shall be considered complete when it sets forth the following: 
(1)  The business name, location, mailing address, and phone number of the establishment, and the name, title, and mailing address of the individual responsible for communicating with the city in connection with the safety plan; 
(2)  A statement whether the establishment will employ personnel that exercise security functions, and if so, the number of security personnel and whether all security personnel will be licensed by the State of Georgia and bonded; 
(3)  Affirmation that no alcohol consumption of any kind will be permitted in the parking lots under the control of the establishment, along with a copy of any policy that the establishment has to encourage compliance; and 
(4)  A copy of the establishment's policies, if any, that address the following: 
a.  Patron weapon search procedures; 
b.  Control of ingress and egress into the building; 
c.  Control of parking lots, including behavior and litter in parking lots and any valet parking services; 
d.  Complying with noise standards in the Unified Development Ordinance and responding to noise complaints; 
e.  Procedures for handling violent incidents and emergencies; 
f.  Crowd control, interior and exterior lighting, and preventing over capacity; and 
g.  Locations of security cameras and recording equipment, retention and custody of recordings generated from security cameras, and affording law enforcement officers access to such recordings. 
(Ord. No. 754 , pt. XXII, 10-16-18) 
Secs. 6-156—6-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ART SHOP ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 6-166. - Art shop businesses. 
For the purposes of this article, an art shop is defined in section 6-1 of this chapter. Art shops that allow consumption of alcohol on the premises are subject to the provisions of this article. Such establishments may not hold a license to sell and may not sell or serve any alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pt. III, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XXIII, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-167. - License required; compliance with applicable regulations. 
It shall be unlawful to operate an establishment governed under the provisions of this article without first obtaining a license from the city clerk and paying such fees and taxes as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pt. III, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 6-168. - Licensed art shop hours of alcohol consumption; required closing time. 
(a)  Alcohol may be consumed on the premises of a licensed art shop only during the following hours: 
(1)  Monday through Saturday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 11:59 p.m. 
(2)  Sunday hours are from 12:30 p.m. until 11:59 p.m. 
(b)  Licensed art shops must close their premises to the public and clear their premises of patrons by 12:30 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pt. III, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XXIV, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-169. - Art shop activities. 
(a)  An art shop licensed under this section may allow customers to bring in a bottle or bottles of wine and beer to be consumed on the premises. The customer must remove any unconsumed wine or beer from the premises. 
(b)  An art shop shall not store, keep, or handle any wine or beer belonging to the customer, and no owner, employee or agent of the art shop shall pour or have any contact with the wine or beer. 
(c)  No customer of an art shop shall consume more than two, six ounce servings of wine or two, 12 ounce servings of beer during a three-hour period or four, six ounce servings of wine or four, 12 ounce servings of beer within a single business day. 
(d)  The brown-bagging of wine and/or beer in an art shop shall be subject to this Code and to state law, and no one who is under 21 years of age or intoxicated may consume wine or beer in an art shop. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit an art shop from serving food provided it meets all of the requirements provided in this City Code and is properly permitted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pt. III, 11-17-15) 
Secs. 6-170—6-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PRIVATE CLUBS 

Sec. 6-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club, and shall not include a commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires or leases building space within a building for the reasonable use of its members with: 
a.  Suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.  A sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-81) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-192. - Compliance with applicable regulations. 
Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city governing the sale of such beverages and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-82) 
Sec. 6-193. - Exemptions from requirement for food service facilities. 
Veterans' organizations, fraternal organizations and other nonprofit organizations regulated by this article currently having tax-exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the state income tax law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food. However, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises establishments. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-83) 
Sec. 6-194. - Investigative and administrative fee. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in an amount as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, but the investigative and administrative fees shall be retained. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-84; Ord. No. 692 , pt. VIII, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 6-195. - Hours of sale generally. 
The sale and delivery of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at a private club shall be subject to the hours of sale regulations in section 6-152. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-85; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XXV, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-196. - Sunday sales. 
(a)  Licensed private clubs deriving a minimum of 50 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food are authorized to apply for a Sunday sales permit to sell and serve alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine by the drink. 
(b)  Applicants for a Sunday sales permit shall complete a form and affidavit furnished by the city clerk. An audit may be required at any time to ensure compliance. 
(c)  All applications for annual permit renewal shall be filed with the city clerk not later than November 30 of the year preceding the license year for which the permit is to be issued. All persons applying for renewal are subject to audit prior to renewal to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Sunday sales permits are granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. The permit fee shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. Fees are not refundable, and permits shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-87; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XXVI, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-197. - Employees. 
The following regulations shall apply to all private clubs holding a license for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in this chapter for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. 
(2)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license under this article until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the chief of police and a permit issued indicating that such person is eligible for this employment. 
(3)  The permit issued to a person under this section shall be either of the following: 
a.  An alcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued only to a person who is 18 years of age or older and who sells, serves or dispenses alcoholic beverages; 
b.  A nonalcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued to a person whose employment includes but is not limited to host, hostess, doorman or bouncer. 
(4)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the police department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include but shall not be limited to the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(5)  The chief of police shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this article, the chief of police shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the chief of police shall notify the employer that this person is not eligible for employment. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the chief of police the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers. 
(7)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation may be terminated by the chief of police or the city clerk. 
(8)  This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy, cook or dishwasher. 
(9)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. 
(10)  If any permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the police department. 
(11)  All permits issued under this section remain the property of the city, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer of the police department. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-86; Ord. No. 423, 8-20-96) 
Sec. 6-198. - Use of open areas, patios or decks. 
Consumption or sale of beer, wine or distilled spirits in open areas or on decks or patios is not permitted unless a private club holding a license for consumption of beer, wine or distilled spirits on the premises complies with the following regulations: 
(1)  The open area, patio or deck must be enclosed in a manner that directs ingress and egress by the public through a single entrance, which entrance shall be under the control of the licensee. 
(2)  The open area, patio or deck shall be enclosed by a structure at least 42 inches in height as measured from the floor of the open area, patio or deck. Such structure must meet all building code requirements of the city. 
(3)  Any license holder desiring to obtain approval for open area, patio or deck sales must submit to the city building inspector a complete set of plans before approval for such sales may be granted. All plans and final construction pursuant to such plans shall meet the requirements of this chapter, the health code, the fire code and any other codes applicable to such structures. A written approval from the city building inspector, city clerk, county health department and county fire department must be provided to the city before approval of any open area, patio or deck sales. 
(4)  Any structure or area set aside for open area, patio or deck sales shall not contain a number of square feet that represents an amount greater than 40 percent of the existing seating area of the establishment. 
(5)  Loudspeakers or other amplifiers of sound shall not be permitted on open areas, patios or decks. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-88; Ord. No. 365, § III, 7-10-92) 
Secs. 6-199—6-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - BROWN BAG ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 6-216. - Permitted locations. 
A bring-your-own-bottle establishment or brown bag establishment must have a full-service kitchen and be prepared to serve food prepared on the premises every hour it is open. Except for restaurants and hotels, an establishment that seeks to be a brown bag establishment may not hold a license to sell and may not sell or serve any alcoholic beverages. It must be in a zoning district that allows a restaurant as a conforming use. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-121; Ord. No. 741 , pt. VII, 8-15-17; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XXVII, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-217. - License required; compliance with applicable regulations. 
It shall be unlawful to operate an establishment governed under the provisions of this article without first obtaining a license from the city clerk and paying such fees and taxes as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. A bring-your-own-bottle or brown bag establishment shall be subject to all the general licensing requirements and regulations as well as the licensing requirements and regulations for consumption on the premises establishments. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-122) 
Secs. 6-218—6-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 6-236. - Distilled spirits. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed an excise tax upon all distilled spirits purchased by persons holding retail distilled spirits licenses at the rate of $0.22 per liter, and a proportionate tax at a like rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  The excise tax shall be collected by all wholesale dealers selling distilled spirits to persons holding retail licenses, and shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the city clerk by the tenth of each month, based upon the liters of distilled spirits sold during the previous month. Interest shall accrue on late payments at the rate of nine percent per annum. The wholesale dealers shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments. The monthly remittance shall be accompanied by a sworn statement showing the type, volume and price of distilled spirits sold to each retail licensee. 
(Code 1982, § 3-4-1) 
State Law reference— Levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80. 
Sec. 6-237. - Malt beverages. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed on the sale of malt beverages in the city an excise tax in the sum of $0.05 per 12 ounces, and in a similar proportion for bottles, cans and containers of various sizes. The excise tax on draft beer shall be $6.00 for each container containing not more than 15½ gallons, and a like rate for fractional parts, where the beverage is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, such beverage being commonly known as tap or draft beer. 
(b)  The malt beverage excise tax is levied against and shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 3-4-2(a), (b)) 
State Law reference— Excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 
Sec. 6-238. - Wine. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed on the sale of wine in the city an excise tax at the rate of $0.22 per liter, and a proportional tax at like rates on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  The wine excise tax is levied against and shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in wine in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 3-4-2(c), (d)) 
State Law reference— Excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 6-239. - Payment; records of wholesalers; bond. 
(a)  The excise taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the city clerk by the tenth of each month based upon the units of malt beverages and wine sold during the previous month. Interest shall accrue on late payments at the rate of nine percent per annum. 
(b)  The wholesale dealers shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments, and shall render a sworn statement of the sales and shipments accompanying the monthly report to the city clerk. 
(c)  Wholesalers shall post a performance bond with the city clerk equal to 1½ times the estimated highest monthly payment made in a calendar year of the prorated license fees based on sales collected by wholesalers from the retailers, to secure payment for the taxes imposed in this article. The bond provided for in this section shall be secured by cash, which shall bear no interest, or a surety bond executed by a surety company licensed to do business in this state and approved by the mayor or city clerk. 
(d)  Each wholesale dealer licensed to do business in the city shall submit his books and records for such audit thereof as may be requested by the mayor or city clerk at any reasonable time during business hours. 
(Code 1982, § 3-4-2(e)—(h)) 
Sec. 6-240. - Excise tax on liquor by the drink. 
(a)  Definitions. 
City. The City of Chamblee and all the incorporated territory of the city wherein the City of Chamblee is empowered to impose an excise tax pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
Drink. Any alcoholic beverage served for consumption on the premises which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
Due date. The 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the excise tax is to be computed. 
Licensee. Any person who holds a license or permit from the City of Chamblee to dispense liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
Liquor or distilled spirits. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Monthly period. The calendar months of the year. 
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, nonprofit corporation, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the excise tax herein provided. 
Purchase price. The consideration received for the sale of liquor or distilled spirits by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchase, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Purchaser. Any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any liquor or distilled spirits dispensed by the drink. 
Return. Any return filed or required to be filed by this section. 
Tax. Any tax imposed by this section. 
(b)  Rate of tax imposed. There is hereby imposed, and there shall be paid, a tax of three percent on the sale of liquor by the drink in the city. 
(c)  Collection of excise tax. Every licensee holding a license to dispense liquor or distilled spirits for consumption on the premises is authorized and required to collect the tax imposed under this article from the purchasers of liquor sold by the drink within the licensee's premises. 
(d)  Determination of excise tax; returns, payment of tax. 
(1)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes collected by the licensee shall be due and payable to the City Clerk of the City of Chamblee on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(2)  Return; persons required to file; contents. The remittance of the taxes collected under this article shall be made and a return shall be filed by every licensee with the city clerk showing the gross sales of liquor by the drink and the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, along with such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(3)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deduction from state sales and use tax as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, the Georgia Retailers and Consumers Sales and Use Tax Act. 
(4)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A penalty of 15 percent is imposed for failure to timely pay any amount of the tax when due and payable to the city. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid in full. 
(e)  Deficiency determinations. 
(1)  Re-computation of tax; authority to make; basis of re-computation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, the city clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the city clerk's possession or that may come into the clerk's possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(3)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the licensee written notice of the clerk's determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If notice is served by mail such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his business address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when it is mailed, with adequate postage thereon, by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever shall last expire. 
(f)  Determination if no return made. 
(1)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee from the sale of liquor by the drink, or as the case may be, of the amount of total such receipts in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods during which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection (e)(3) above. 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be applied to the estimated taxes due in the manner prescribed in subsection (e)(2) above. 
(g)  Collection of unpaid tax. 
(1)  Alcohol license to dispense by the drink conditional upon payment and remittance of tax. As a condition of holding a valid license to dispense liquor by the drink, a licensee must comply with this article and collect and remit the tax imposed in the manner prescribed. Failure to comply will subject the licensee to suspension of alcohol dispensing privileges as provided in section 6-51 of this Code. 
(2)  Action for delinquent tax. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees and other legal fees incurred incident thereto. 
(3)  Duty of successors or assignees of licensee to withhold tax from purchase price. If any licensee liable for any amount due under this section transfers ownership of the business, then any successor or assignee shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to pay the amount of excise tax due and such amount shall be withheld until such time as the former licensee produces a receipt issued by the city clerk reflecting payment in full of the amount due or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(4)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a licensed business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required above, the purchaser shall become personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld, but in no event shall such purchaser be liable for an amount greater than the purchase price of the business. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from such purchaser for a certificate, the city clerk shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at the purchaser's address as it appears on the records of the city of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall begin at the time the former operator sells the business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever shall later occur. 
(h)  Credits for overpayments. If it is determined that a licensee has overpaid the tax imposed under this article, has overpaid penalties or interest, or has paid the tax more than once, the city clerk may, upon filing of a claim by the licensee and audit of the claim, authorize credit of the overpayment toward the current amount of tax due and payable from the licensee. All claims for overpayments must be made by the licensee, his administrators or executors and must be made in writing within three years from the date of payment stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is based. 
(i)  Administration generally; record keeping. 
(1)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk or designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax herein imposed. The city clerk shall have the authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and State of Georgia for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes provided herein. 
(2)  Records required. Every licensee for the sale of liquor by the drink in the city shall retain, for a minimum of three years, all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers as the city clerk may require and in such form as the city clerk may request. 
(3)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or designee may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, inventory, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the excise tax for the purpose of verification of the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(4)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administering the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the sale of liquor by the drink. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required and shall set forth the gross sales from the sale of liquor by the drink, the amount of tax collected thereon, or such other information as the city clerk may require. 
( Ord. No. 667 , pt. I, 6-17-14) 
Secs. 6-241—6-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - LICENSED CATERERS 

Sec. 6-251. - Exception for licensed caterers. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer, as that term is defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-114(2), as amended, who possesses a valid license from the City of Chamblee or another city or county in Georgia and possesses a valid license from the State of Georgia to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink and/or by the package at a fixed location, may be issued by the city a caterered event permit authorizing such sales off-premises and in connection with a duly authorized catered event or function. 
(Ord. No. 603, pt. I, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 737 , pt. IV, 4-18-17) 
Sec 6-252. - Catered event permit and application. 
(a)  All licensed alcoholic beverage caterers desiring to engage in activities permitted by this section, shall make written application to the city clerk for the appropriate off-premises permit on forms prescribed by the city clerk. The application shall include the name, address and telephone number of the applicant, the date, address and times of the proposed catered event and the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's state license number. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(b)  The catered event permit fee shall be $50.00 per catered event for those caterers located outside the City of Chamblee; the event permit fee shall be waived for those caterers located inside the City of Chamblee. 
(c)  If such off-premises permit is granted by the city clerk, it shall be good only for the specific event at the specified address and times set forth in the application. 
(d)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an application for an off-premises permit shall be cause for the denial or revocation thereof. 
(e)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may only sell that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may only sell malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(f)  The original catered event permit for the specific event shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function, and shall be available for inspection at the catered event or function during the duration of such event or function. 
(g)  It is unlawful for any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to engage in, carry on or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained a permit, as provided herein. 
(h)  Except as set forth above in this section, an off-premises permit holder must comply with all other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 603, pt. I, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 737 , pt. V, 4-18-17) 
ARTICLE XII. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF WINE OR BEER IN SPECIALTY SHOPS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 692 , pt. V, adopted Nov. 17, 2015, amended art. XII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. XII, §§ 6-253—6-257, was entitled "Retail Package Sales of Wine in Wine Specialty Shops", and derived from Ord. No. 631, pt. I, adopted Feb. 15, 2011. 

Sec. 6-253. - Permitted locations. 
No wine or malt beverages shall be sold at retail pursuant to this article except in establishments whose total interior floor area, inclusive of storage area, shall not exceed 3,500 square feet and are located in zoning districts in which these establishments are permitted as a conforming use. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pt. V, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 6-254. - License required; compliance with applicable regulations. 
It shall be unlawful to operate an establishment governed under the provisions of this article without first obtaining a license from the city clerk and paying such fees and taxes as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pt. V, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 6-255. - Investigative and administrative fee. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in an amount as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, but the investigative and administrative fees shall be retained. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pts. V, VIII, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 6-256. - Hours of sale. 
Retail package licensees may engage in the sale of wine and beer between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m., Monday through Saturday and on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. The hours within which business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pt. V, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 6-257. - Marking of prices. 
Retailers shall indicate plainly, by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the prices of all wine and beer exposed or offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pt. V, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 6-258. - Wine and malt beverage tasting. 
(a)  The holder of a package wine license, with or without a package malt beverage license, but in no event with a package distilled spirits license, shall be allowed to provide samples of wine offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. 
(b)  The holder of a package malt beverage license, with or without a package wine license, but in no event with a package distilled spirits license, shall be allowed to provide samples of draft malt beverages offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. 
(c)  Wine and malt beverage sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a wine or malt beverage offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with wine or malt beverage education classes and sampling designed to promote wine or malt beverage appreciation and education. 
(d)  Wine or malt beverage tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(e)  Samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than 12 ounces in any two-hour period. 
(f)  Only the licensee or an employee shall open, handle or serve samples. 
(g)  No open wine or malt beverage containers shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(h)  Not more than two times per week for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours, the holder of a wine or malt beverage package license in a wine or malt beverage specialty shop may conduct educational classes and sampling for class participants. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. 
(i)  Licensees shall not charge for samples or tastings. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pt. V, 11-17-15) 
Secs. 6-259—6-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - NON-BEVERAGE ALCOHOL MANUFACTURERS AND IMPORTERS 

Sec. 6-261. - Alcohol, license required, inspection, records. 
(a)  Manufacture or importation of ethyl alcohol to be used exclusively for the uses enumerated herein is necessary and appropriate to ensure that ethyl alcohol manufactured or imported for the stated purposes is not directed to use as a beverage, or as a distilled spirit in contravention of law and evasion of federal, state and local excise taxes and license fees. Enumerated purposes are: 
(1)  Non-beverage scientific; 
(2)  Chemical; 
(3)  Mechanical; 
(4)  Industrial; 
(5)  Medicinal; or 
(6)  Culinary purposes. 
(b)  Every person, firm corporation or organization who desires to manufacture or import non-beverage ethyl alcohol exclusively for any of the uses enumerated in subsection (a) above, shall first obtain a license by completing an application form, in duplicate, for a non-beverage distillery, manufacturer or importer license on forms furnished by the city clerk. Each application for a non-beverage manufacturer's, distiller's, or importer's license shall also include, in duplicate, the following: 
(1)  A personnel statement and a set of fingerprint cards, as prescribed by the city clerk, for each owner or owners and all principal employees such as manager, foreman, superintendent, etc. 
(2)  An accurate and precise description of the exact location where any non-beverage manufacturing or importing facility is to be located. 
(3)  A copy of a valid operating permit or other proper authorization issued to the applicant by the U.S. Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau. 
(c)  When all of the requirements of subsection (b) of this section and all other legal requirements are met, licenses for the non-beverage manufacture or importation of ethyl alcohol solely for non-beverage use shall be issued by the city clerk. Each applicant for a non-beverage alcohol manufacturer's license shall pay a license fee in an amount as established by action of the city council. A copy of the license shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Any non-beverage alcohol license issued by the city clerk shall be renewed annually. Unless renewed, each license shall become void on December 31 of the calendar year in which such licenses are issued; however, the city manager may authorize licensees who have filed an application for license renewal to operate until the license has been renewed or denied. 
(e)  Each non-beverage manufacturing or importing facility issued a non-beverage alcohol license pursuant to this article shall be subject to inspection by federal, state and local law enforcement officers at all times. 
(f)  Each licensee shall maintain all invoices, bills of lading, reports, books, papers, or documents of whatever nature involving all transactions relating to the purchase, sale, distribution, storage, manufacture, importation or handling of ethyl alcohol in any manner. 
(g)  Each licensee manufacturing or importing ethyl alcohol for use as fuel shall be properly registered with the motor fuel tax section of the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(h)  Licenses may be denied by the city clerk to any applicant who has been convicted of any crime involving the illegal sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages. 
(i)  The failure of any person, firm, corporation, or organization holding such license under this article to meet any obligations imposed by any tax laws of the City of Chamblee or to otherwise comply with any requirements of the law shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 639, pt. I, 11-15-11) 
Sec. 6-262. - Investigatory and administrative fee. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in an amount as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, but the investigative and administrative fees shall be retained. 
(Ord. No. 639, pt. I, 11-15-11; Ord. No. 692 , pt. VIII, 11-17-15) 
Secs. 6-263—6-274. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PERFORMING ARTS FACILITIES 

Sec. 6-275. - Performing arts facility. 
For the purposes of this article, a performing arts facility is defined in section 6-1 of this chapter. Performing arts facilities that allow consumption of alcohol on the premises are subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pt. IV, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 754 , pt. XXVIII, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 6-276. - License required; compliance with applicable regulations. 
It shall be unlawful to operate an establishment governed under the provisions of this article without first obtaining a license from the city clerk and paying such fees and taxes as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pt. IV, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 6-277. - Investigative and administrative fee. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in an amount as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, but the investigative and administrative fees shall be retained. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pt. IV, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 6-278. - Hours and location of sale generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, alcoholic beverages may not be sold for consumption on the premises at a performing arts facility except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages may not be dispensed earlier than one hour before the start of a performance or after the performance has ended. 
(c)  Alcoholic beverages may only be sold at a bar located in the lobby area of the facility or by a waiter or waitress serving patrons within the facility. 
(Ord. No. 692 , pt. IV, 11-17-15) 
Secs. 6-279—6-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - MANUFACTURERS 

Sec. 6-301. - Manufacturer license required; compliance with applicable regulations. 
It shall be unlawful to operate an establishment governed under the provisions of this article without first obtaining a license from the city clerk and paying such fees and taxes as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 703 , pt. II, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 6-302. - Investigative and administrative fee. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in an amount as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, but the investigative and administrative fees shall be retained. 
(Ord. No. 703 , pt. II, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 6-303. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 741 , pt. I, adopted Aug. 15, 2017, deleted § 6-303 entitled "Tastings," which derived from Ord. No. 703 , pt. II, adopted Apr. 19, 2016. 
Secs. 6-304—6-320. - Reserved. 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; offenses, ch. 58; signs, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; taxation, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 94. 

Sec. 10-1. - Billiard rooms. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Billiard room means any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards and for which a charge is made for use of equipment. 
(2)  Billiards means any of several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue and shall include all forms of the games known as "carom billiards," "pocket billiards" and "English billiards." 
(b)  No billiard room shall operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  Alcoholic beverages may not be sold, served or allowed to be used in or on the premises of a billiard room or any place operated in connection therewith unless such premises or establishment is an establishment which is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages and derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenues from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to billiard tables or billiard rooms operated by private industrial concerns, Young Men's Christian Associations, religious orders, charitable institutions, state, county or city institutions, fraternal orders or bona fide clubs using such tables for members or employees only. 
(Ord. No. 371, § 9-3-1, 3-12-93; Ord. No. 477, § 1, 9-21-99) 
State Law reference— Authority to license and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 
Sec. 10-2. - Pinball machines and other coin-operated games. 
Generally. There shall be no gambling of any kind permitted, either directly or indirectly, in using pinball machines and other coin-operated game machines or devices, whether mechanical, electronic or video. No such pinball machine or other coin-operated game machine or device shall be permitted where the property line of a place of business containing any such pinball machine or other coin-operated game machine or device is located within 200 yards of the property line of any college or school, measured along the most direct route, with the most direct route being defined as a straight line from property line to property line. 
(Code 1982, §§ 9-3-2, 9-3-3; Ord. No. 477, § 1, 9-21-99) 
State Law reference— Exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c); coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, adopted Dec. 12, 2015, amended ch. 14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 14, §§ 14-1—14-44, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1982, §§ 11-3-1—11-3-17, 11-3-31—11-3-33; Ord. No. 431, adopted Dec. 17, 1996; and Ord. No. 478, § I, adopted Oct. 19, 1999. 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 46; law enforcement, ch. 50; offenses, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— City's and county's authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(3); livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - ANIMAL CONTROL 

Sec. 14-1. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Animal Control Ordinance of the City of Chamblee, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means that any domesticated animal shall be considered abandoned, for the purposes of this article, which shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property and is unattended or uncared for. Any domesticated animal shall also be considered as abandoned, for the purposes of this article, which shall have been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of this animal for a period of time in excess of 36 hours unattended and without proper food and water. 
Abused animal means any animal which is mistreated, beaten, tormented or teased, or is deprived of water, food or shelter, or is kept under unsanitary conditions, or is abandoned, or is trained for fighting other animals. 
Adequate care means exhibiting attention to the needs of an animal, including but not limited to, the provision of food, water, shelter, sanitary, safe and healthy conditions, and adequate and timely veterinary medical attention necessary to maintain good health for the specific age, size, species and breed of animal. 
Adequate food means sufficient quantity of non-contaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, breed, size, age and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian; which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
Adequate shelter means a protective covering for a domestic animal that provides adequate space and protection to maintain the animal in a state of good health, and that prevents pain, suffering, or significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with four sides, a constructed floor, and a roof with a door opening. It should also be clean, dry and compatible with current weather conditions, in addition to age, size, species and condition of the animal. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down and go in and out of the structure comfortably. To be adequate, some type of bedding that is quick drying, such as hay or pine straw, must be provided to maintain comfortable temperatures within the structure during times when the ambient, outside temperature is below freezing. In addition, the structure shall include a heavy plastic or rubber flap to cover the door and/or window openings during the months of November through March. From April through October, the structure shall either be shaded or moved out of direct sunlight. If the shelter is made of wood, it shall be raised at least two inches off the ground to prevent seepage or rotting. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, boxes, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks, or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
Adequate water means clean, fresh, potable water sufficient to prevent dehydration and properly sustain health presented in a clean dish, free from contamination. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to, snow, ice and rancid/contaminated water. 
Animal at large means an animal not under restraint. 
Animal control center means the facility designated for the detention of animals by the Chamblee City Council and under the supervision of the Chamblee Public Works Director. It is staffed with such personnel as may, from time to time, be authorized in the city budget and appropriations. 
Animal control officer means any person designated by the City of Chamblee to perform the duties prescribed by this article or imposed by local ordinance, and any police or code enforcement officer of the city. 
Animal under restraint means any animal humanely secured by a leash or led or enclosed by way of fence or other enclosure or the animal is confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion. 
Companion animal means a domesticated animal, a "pet", kept for pleasure rather than utility. Pets include, but are not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, hamsters, horses, mice, reptiles, domesticated wild animals, exotic animals and other animals associated with man's environment. 
Cruelty means causing death or unjustifiable pain or suffering to any animal by an act, an omission, or neglect. Cruelty also includes transporting an animal in an unrestrained open-air vehicle or transporting an unrestrained animal in the trunk of any vehicle or leaving an animal unattended in a closed vehicle without proper ventilation or temperature control, where the outside air temperature is 80 degrees Fahrenheit or above. Cruelty also means allowing or causing any animal to participate in training for or engaging in an animal fight operated for sport, entertainment or gaming purposes. Routine medical procedures by a licensed veterinarian shall not be regarded as cruelty. 
Dangerous animal means any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other domestic animals by virtue of a known propensity to endanger life by an unprovoked assault or bite so as to cause serious bodily harm. An animal trained, owned or harbored for the purpose primarily or in part, of animal fighting. Exceptions: An animal shall not be deemed dangerous if: 
(1)  It bites, attacks or menaces: 
a.  Anyone assaulting the owner; 
b.  A trespasser on the property of the owner; 
c.  Any person or other animal which has tormented or abused it; 
d.  Where the animal is otherwise acting in defense of an attack from a person or other animal upon the owner or other person; 
e.  Where the animal is protecting or defending its young or another animal; or 
f.  Where a dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out official law enforcement duties and injures someone. 
(2)  It is otherwise acting in defense of an attack from a person or other animal upon the owner or other person; or 
(3)  It is protecting or defending its young or other animal. 
Domesticated animals means animals that are accustomed to live in or about the habitation of men including, but not limited to, cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, swine, domesticated wild animals and/or exotic animals. This definition only applies to those animals mentioned herein and is only applicable to this article, and in no way affects the meaning or application of a definition of the described animal, as may be found in any other city ordinances. 
Electronic animal confinement system means a commercially produced, functioning and professionally installed electronic fence which utilizes an invisible electrically generated perimeter, in which the animal within the perimeter wears an electronic collar that produces an electric shock when the animal approaches or exceeds the perimeter. 
Euthanasia means the legal act of putting an animal to death using humane methods, recommended by the American Veterinary Medical Association Panel on Euthanasia and approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture, as defined by Georgia law in the Georgia Animal Protection Act, as may hereinafter be amended. 
Fence means any structure of wire, wood, stone or other material, which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. A fence must be sufficient to prevent the animal from being able to jump, dig or escape from confinement. 
Garbage means all refuse matter/effluent, either animal or vegetable by-product from a restaurant, kitchen, or meat/poultry processing establishment; spoiled/rancid food and refuse accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that is normally discarded. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons independently or upon oral command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of its owner and/or upon and within which he or she is located. 
Hazardous animal means an animal that may be harmful to humans or other animals by virtue of its ability to produce poison or, due to its size and feeding habits, could prey on humans as a food source. Hazardous animal includes, but are not limited to, pit vipers (genus Crotalidae ), coral snakes (genus Micrurus ), poisonous spiders, frogs, large reptiles, Nile monitors, caiman, alligators, crocodiles, and large constricting snakes greater than ten feet in length. 
Identification means any tag, tattoo, microchip, or other type of marking that can be used to locate an animal's owner. 
Kennel means any establishment, other than an animal shelter, where animals are maintained for boarding, holding, training, or other similar purposes for a fee or compensation. 
Open-air vehicle means the cargo area of any pick-up truck that is not covered by a permanent attached utility cover or any convertible vehicle with its top down. 
Owner means any person owning, keeping, harboring or acting as custodian of a domesticated animal. 
Potentially dangerous animal means any animal that, without provocation bites or attacks humans or any other animal on public or private property. 
Proper enclosure means any structure or device used to restrict an animal to a limited amount of space such as a fenced area, electronic animal confinement system, building, house, pen, or other device or structure out of which an animal cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape. 
Public nuisance means any animal which: 
(1)  Is found at large in violation of this article; 
(2)  Is unlicensed (unregistered) in violation of this article; 
(3)  Is trained, owned or harbored for the purpose, primarily or in part, of dog fighting; 
(4)  Is dangerous, as defined, and is not restrained or confined, as provided for in this article; 
(5)  Produces, because of quantity, manner or method in which the animals are domesticated or maintained, unsanitary conditions in the city; 
(6)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare or safety according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the DeKalb County Board of Health, which rules and regulations are incorporated herein and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. 
Severe injury means a physical injury that results in broken bones, significant puncture wounds, disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or significant medical procedures or a physical injury that results in death. 
Spay/neuter certificate means documentation that certifies that the animal listed therein has been sterilized as of the date of surgery. 
Sterilized animal means an animal that has been surgically or chemically altered by a licensed veterinarian in order to render the animal incapable of reproduction. 
Tethered means an animal attached to a stationary object by a chain, cable or similar device commonly used for the size and type of animal involved. 
Unsanitary conditions means an animal living space, shelter, or exercise area contaminated by health hazards, irritants, pollutants, items, or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-3. - Penalties for violation and repeat offenders. 
Any person violating the terms of this article or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be punished pursuant to section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-4. - Running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, or anyone having an animal in his or her custody, to allow it to run at large unattended on or about the streets and highways of the incorporated limits of the city; or on the property of another person, without permission of the owner of that property, or of the person in possession of that property, except dogs being used for hunting in accordance with state game and fish department laws, rules and regulations. Failure to comply with this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-5. - Duty of all animal owners to be responsible owners. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property, and other animals from injury or damage resulting from such animal's behavior, including, but not limited to, chasing, biting, or otherwise jeopardizing the safety or welfare of the public, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness or ferocity. 
(b)  If the owner of an animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure full compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to immediately remove excrement deposited by the animal on any street or right-of-way. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any animal aiding the handicapped (e.g., guide dog) or to an animal used for law enforcement related activities. 
(d)  Domesticated or caged non-farm animals may not make any vocalizations for more than ten minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if the vocalization is intermittent. These time limits do not apply if the vocalizations are given as a warning to the presence of an intruder. Officers enforcing this subsection are not required to measure the vocalizations with the use of a sound level meter. Upon notification of a complaint concerning such vocalizations, the owner of such animal shall be given a written warning indicating that such animal is creating a disturbance, so long as the complainant provides the police chief with the address of the owner. If the disturbance is not resolved within two days or a subsequent complaint is made for such animal by a different individual, who resides at a different location from the first complainant, a court summons shall be issued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-6. - Duty to keep animal under restraint while on property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to ensure that the animal is kept under restraint, and that precautions are taken to prevent the animal from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner. Failure to keep any animal confined or under constraint as provided for in this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to ensure that the animal is securely and humanely enclosed within a proper enclosure as a means of primary restraint. Such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended. When outside the proper enclosure but on the owner's property, it shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to ensure that the animal is humanely secured by a leash or lead and under the control of a responsible and competent person; or off leash but under the direct control of a responsible and competent person who is physically present with the animal, provided that such animal is obedient to that person's command. 
(c)  As an additional means of restraint to a proper enclosure, dogs may be confined to the premises of the residential property of their owner, keeper or harborer by an electronic animal confinement system. Dogs confined to residential property by an electronic animal confinement system shall not be permitted to be nearer than ten feet away from any public sidewalk, nearer than ten feet away from the curb if there is no sidewalk or nearer than ten feet away from a property line that is contiguous to neighboring property. No dog that has been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be potentially dangerous or dangerous shall be confined by an electronic animal confinement system. All owners, keepers or harborers of dogs who use an electronic fence shall clearly post their property to indicate to the public that a dog is confined to the property by an electronic animal confinement system. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to tether an animal unless the owner or custodian is physically present and within reach of the animal the entire time it is tethered. Any tethering device used to tether an animal must be at least ten feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-7. - Duty to keep animal under restraint while off property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal or anyone having an animal in his or her possession to keep the animal under restraint and control at all times while the animal is off the real property of the owners, possessor or custodian. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, an animal is deemed under control when: 
(1)  It is securely confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion; 
(2)  It is properly confined within a secure enclosure with the permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located; or 
(3)  It is securely restrained by a leash or other device held by a competent person. 
(c)  Failure to keep animal under restraint or control as provided for in this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-8. - When collar and tag required; dog. 
It shall be the duty of each dog owner, possessor or custodian thereof, to provide a collar for his or her dog to which the rabies inoculation tag shall be attached. The collar, together with the rabies tag, shall be worn by the dog at all times, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Failure to comply with this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-9. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon information made known to or complaint logged with any officer of the city police department or code enforcement, that any owner, possessor or custodian of any dog or animal is in violation of this article, he or she or his or her authorized representative shall cause a summons to be issued requiring the owner, possessor or custodian of his or her dog or animal to appear before a judge of the municipal court of the city on a day and time certain then and there to appear for the violation of this article. If a violation of this article has not been personally witnessed by any officer of the city police department or code enforcement, a subpoena shall be issued by the court to the person making the complaint, to be and appear on the day and time set for trial, then and there to testify on behalf of the city. 
(b)  In the event that the owner, possessor or custodian of any dog or animal is not known and this dog or animal is upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, school ground or other public places or premises or the property of another without that property owner's permission as prohibited by this article, upon complaint made to or information made known to the city the animal may be impounded by the police chief, his authorized representative or animal control. 
(c)  In the enforcement of the provisions of this article, all animal control officers employed as such by DeKalb County are specifically deputized as animal control officers of the city for the purposes described in this section when they witness, while on duty, violation of the provisions of this article within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-10. - Vaccinations for rabies, dogs and cats. 
It shall be the duty of any owner, possessor or custodian of any dog or cat three months of age or older, when the animal is being kept in the city limits, to procure a current rabies vaccination from a duly licensed veterinarian. Where a dog or cat is being transported into the city limits where it will reside on a permanent basis with its owner, possessor or custodian, it shall be the duty of the owner, possessor or custodian to have a current rabies tag on the animal transported into the city limits unless the animal has not reached the age of three months. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-11. - Warning signs; guard dogs and dangerous dogs. 
All owners, keepers or harborers of any guard dog or dangerous dog shall display in a prominent place on their premises, and at each entrance or exit to the area where such dog is confined, a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog." 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-12. - Abandonment, neglect or abuse of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon, neglect or abuse any domesticated animal within the city. Each person who knowingly abandons, neglects or abuses, or willingly permits such abandonment, neglect or abuse, or aids in the abandonment, neglect or abuse of any domesticated animal shall be in violation of the law shall be punished as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-13. - Required permanent identification. 
It shall be the duty of every animal owner who has been convicted of abandonment, cruelty or neglect of an animal by a court of competent jurisdiction or owns a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal, to have the animal permanently identified by insertion of a microchip by a licensed veterinarian. Said chip must be registered with the chip parent company and the police chief. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-14. - Dangerous and potentially dangerous animals. 
(a)  If the police chief, his designee or animal control officer learns of the existence of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal, the police chief shall then cause a summons to be issued requiring the owner of the animal to appear before a judge of the city municipal court at a date and time certain, to conduct a hearing as to the appropriate classification of the animal. The police chief or his designee shall also immediately impound the animal believed to be dangerous or potentially dangerous. 
(b)  The court shall determine after a hearing if the animal is to be classified as a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal. In making its findings in this regard, the court shall enter a written order notifying the animal's owner and the police chief of its decision. 
(c)  The appeal of any order of the court concerning the classification of an animal as potentially dangerous or dangerous shall be by petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County. 
(d)  If the court classifies the animal as dangerous or potentially dangerous, and no appeal is filed, the owner shall be required to obtain an annual certificate of registration in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the DeKalb County Animal Control Ordinance. No potentially dangerous or dangerous animal shall be released to its owners until such certificate is issued by the appropriate party. 
(e)  If the owner fails to obtain the certificate of registration as required by this chapter, the animal will not be released and will be euthanized. The animal shall not be euthanized if the owner appeals the court's classification order by petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County. In the event the owner appeals the court's order, the animal shall not be released to its owner until the appeal is concluded and the certificate of registration is issued to the owner, if applicable. In such event, the animal will be housed at a licensed veterinarian's office or a licensed kennel and the cost of such detention shall be borne by the owner of the animal. In the event the city appeals the court's order, the animal shall not be released to its owner until the appeal is concluded and the certificate of registration is issued to the owner, if applicable. In the event of an appeal by the city, the animal will be housed in the DeKalb County Animal Service. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-15. - Certificate of registration. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous animal and potentially dangerous animal must obtain a certificate of registration for the animal from DeKalb County annually and pay an annual registration fee to be determined by the county. The requirements of this section apply to any animal living in the city that has been deemed dangerous or potentially dangerous by any other state, county or municipal court, hearing officer, or other authorized government agency. 
(b)  The certificate of registration shall be issued to the owner upon receipt of all of the following: 
(1)  Written evidence that the animal is permanently identified by insertion of a microchip by a licensed veterinarian. Said chip must be registered with the chip parent company and the police chief, or other authorized representative, within 15 days of an order classifying the animal as dangerous or potentially dangerous or within such later time as specified by a court of competent jurisdiction or within 15 days of the conclusion of any appeal of a court's order that upholds the classification of an animal as dangerous or potentially dangerous; 
(2)  A copy of a current policy of insurance in the amount of $25,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state, insuring the owner of the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal; or a copy of a current surety bond in the amount of $25,000.00, issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state, payable to any person injured by the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal; 
(3)  Written or photographic proof that the animal will be confined as defined in sections 14-6 and 14-16 when allowed outdoors; and 
(4)  Written evidence that the animal has been sterilized by a licensed veterinarian. 
(c)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the police chief, or designated representative, immediately if the animal dies or has been sold or given to another person. If the animal dies, the body must be available for microchip scanning to provide positive identification of the dangerous animal or potential dangerous animal. If the animal is sold or given to another person, the current owner listed on the most current certificate of registration must provide the police chief, or designated representative, with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner within 30 days of the sale or transfer of such animal. New owners are subject to all requirements of this Code upon transfer of such animal. 
(d)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal must notify the police chief, or designated representative, in writing immediately upon changing his/her address. Such written notice shall provide the owner's new address and telephone number. The owner shall promptly obtain a new certificate of registration reflecting the new address if such address is located within the city. 
(e)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the police chief, or designated representative, in writing immediately upon moving the dangerous animal or potential dangerous animal into the city. Such written notice shall provide the address and telephone number of the owner and the owner shall immediately obtain a certificate of registration for the animal. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-16. - Confinement of potentially dangerous and dangerous animals. 
(a)  Animals that are classified as potentially dangerous or dangerous shall have adequate shelter and be confined in accordance with the requirements of this section. Confinement shall consist of a fenced area on the owner's property. Within this fenced area, the owner shall provide a structure to house the animal that is completely enclosed with secure sides and a secure top. The sides of the fence must be buried two feet into the ground, sunken onto a concrete pad or securely attached to a wire floor. The door or gate to the fence must be equipped with a working lock. In addition, the minimum open space requirements within the fenced area shall be the same as set forth in section 14-7. All fencings shall be of industrial gauge type. 
(b)  The owner of an animal that has been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be potentially dangerous or dangerous must post signs on all means of ingress and egress to the real property that read "Dangerous Animal on Property" or "Potentially Dangerous Animal on Property" which shall be no smaller than eight and five-tenths by 11 inches. 
(c)  Whenever outside its fenced area, but on the owner's property, an animal classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall be attended by the owner, restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. Such leash shall not exceed six feet in length. 
(d)  No dangerous or potentially dangerous animal shall be permitted off the property of its owner unless accompanied by the owner, muzzled by any means sufficient to prevent biting of person or animals and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. Such leash shall not exceed six feet in length. 
(e)  The owner of an animal that has been declared by a court to be dangerous or potentially dangerous shall make the animal and the area of confinement available for periodic, unannounced inspections by the police chief, his designated representative or animal control officer to ensure compliance with the confinement requirements of this section, provided the owner consents to such entry and inspection. If consent is not obtained, the police chief, or designated representative, shall obtain an inspection warrant prior to any inspection in accordance with the requirements of state law. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-17. - Transportation of animals in open-air vehicles. 
If transporting an animal in an open-air vehicle, the animal must be secured so as to prevent the animal from escaping out of the vehicle, getting tangled, or having the ability to extend over the edge of the vehicle that could result in an injury or strangulation of the animal while the vehicle is in motion. If the animal has been classified as a potentially dangerous animal or dangerous animal, requirements of this section are in addition to requirements outlined in section 14-16. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-18. - Hazardous animals. 
No person shall own, keep, harbor, house, or permit to be kept, harbored or housed, a hazardous animal within the city, unless granted prior written approval from the police chief, or designated representative. Written approval may be granted upon presentation of photographic proof that the animal will be kept adequately restrained or confined as is common for the species. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-19. - Right of entry. 
The police chief, his designated representative or an animal control officer, including a DeKalb County Animal Control Officer, may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle when the ambient temperature is 80 degrees Fahrenheit or above outside the vehicle. If the vehicle is damaged during such removal, the police chief or other personnel involved in the removal shall not be liable for any damage to the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-20. - Sterilization. 
It shall be the duty of the owner of a dog or cat declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be a potentially dangerous animal or dangerous animal to have the animal sterilized. Such sterilization must be performed by a licensed veterinarian within 30 days of a final order of a court of competent jurisdiction declaring the animal to be a potentially dangerous animal or dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-21. - Transient animals. 
A dog, cat or ferret shipped or transported through the city or entering the city for less than 15 days shall be exempt from collar and tag sections of this chapter. However, all other provisions of this chapter are applicable to such transient animals. In addition, proof of a current rabies vaccination or health certificate for such animal must be available for inspection by the police chief, designated representative or animal control officer at any time the animal is within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-22. - Violations and enhanced penalties for dangerous animals. 
(a)  A dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal may be immediately impounded by any police officer, code enforcement officer or animal enforcement officer if such animal or its owner has violated any of the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the police chief, or designated representative, immediately if the animal is on the loose, unconfined, or has attacked a human or another animal and failure to so notify the police chief, or designated representative, shall be a violation of this chapter by the owner of the animal. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to possess within the city a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction of any violation of this chapter by a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal or its owner, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(e)  Upon a second or subsequent conviction for a violation of this chapter by a dangerous animal or its owner, the court may order the dangerous animal to be euthanized. 
(f)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction for a violation of section 14-10, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $300.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(g)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 24-month period of time, as measured from the date of issuance of previous court summonses for which convictions were obtained, for a violation of section 14-7, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $300.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(h)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction for a violation of subsection 14-5(c), the court shall impose a fine of not less than $300.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(i)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 24-month period of time, as measured from the date of issuance of previous court summonses for which convictions were obtained, for a violation of subsection 14-5(d), the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(j)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction of a violation of section 14-11, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(k)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period of time, as measured from the date of issuance of previous court summonses for which convictions were obtained, for a violation of section 14-16, the court shall require the owner to provide additional confinement, as outlined in subsection 14-16(a). The additional confinement requirements shall apply regardless of whether the animal has been classified as a potentially dangerous animal or dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-23. - City designated bird sanctuary; hunting or molesting birds. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl, or to rob bird's nests or nests of wild fowl. 
(c)  If starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper authorities of the city, then the city authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society, or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three days' actual notice of the time and place of the meeting to the representatives of the clubs. If, as a result of the meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then the birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the city authorities, under the supervision of the chief of police and mayor of the city. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Secs. 14-24—14-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14-30. - Cruel treatment of animals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall willfully place within reach of any domestic animals any substance that is poisonous or harmful to the animal. 
(b)  No person shall willfully and unjustifiably kill or injure any domestic animal other than livestock maintained for food purposes. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 14-31. - Disposal of deceased animals. 
No person shall place any dead animal upon his premises or upon the premises of any other person or allow any dead animal to remain upon his premises or any dead animal belonging to the person to remain upon the premises of another without disposing of same or causing the animal to be properly removed or disposed of within 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 694 , pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Secs. 14-32—14-55. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 743 , adopted Dec. 19, 2017, amended ch. 18 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-164, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1982; Ord. No. 369, adopted Dec. 11, 1992; Ord. No. 386, adopted Nov. 12, 1993; Ord. No. 417, adopted May 21, 1996; Ord. No. 438, adopted May 20, 1997; Ord. No. 471, adopted Apr. 20, 1999; Ord. No. 448, adopted Jan. 20, 1998; Ord. No. 546, adopted Apr. 18. 2006; Ord. No. 559, adopted Nov. 21, 2006; Ord. No. 680 , adopted June 18, 2015; and Ord. No. 731 , adopted Feb. 21, 2017. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 46; signs, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; zoning, ch. 94; environment, app. A, ch. 310. 
State Law reference— Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); adoption and continuation of state minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; state-wide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-1. - Display of address number during construction. 
Street numbers will be assigned for all buildings and structures. Numbers must be erected and displayed in front of the project on a board with permanent numbers not smaller than six inches high. Numbers must be in place at the beginning of the job before the footing inspection is made and be continuously displayed thereafter until the job is complete and all final inspections have been made. No inspection will be made where street numbers are not in place as required in this section. Contractors and others shall always refer to the street number when calling the building inspector for an inspection request or information. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-2. - Preliminary building inspection required for repairs to damaged buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to repair damage or undertake to repair damage to any dwelling, residence, building, business, house, place of business, commercial sign board, billboard or improvement to realty of any kind or nature whatsoever that has sustained damage by reason of fire, explosion, flooding, lightning, hurricane, tornado or other natural disaster or catastrophe, without first applying for and obtaining a preliminary building inspection from the city manager, or his duly authorized representative, as provided in section 18-11. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Secs. 18-3—18-10. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING PERMIT 

Sec. 18-11. - Permits. 
(a)  Application. 
(1)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. A permit shall not be issued to an owner who is neither a licensed contractor nor the occupant of the structure being built or altered. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application separate permits shall be required. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs, with a value of less than $2,500.00, may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Information required. Each application for a permit, along with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(5)  Time limitations. A permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of the permit, unless before then a permit extension has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information in the form of notes or otherwise as to the quality of materials where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific and the construction codes shall not be cited, as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used in lieu of specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. 
a.  The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data for the following: 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
1.  All Group A, E and I occupancies. 
2.  Buildings and structures three stories high or higher. 
3.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
b.  Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect or engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  High hazard occupancies (as defined by the International Building Code, Chapter 3, Section 307). The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan, drawn at a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan, drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid-tight rooms and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents consisting of drawings, specifications, computations and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon. 
(e)  Contractor responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall enter contracts for the installation or repair of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. If the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with its license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who prepared the drawings or computations supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his place a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the city council have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance . Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the city council. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. For new construction, valuation shall be calculated based on uses listed in the ICC Building Valuation Data Construction Cost Table (use latest published edition). The valuation of interior construction shall be 50 percent of the calculation of valuations based on uses listed in the ICC Building Valuation Data Construction Cost Table (use latest published edition). The permit fee shall be based on a proportion of the ICC valuation, as adopted in the fee schedule set from time to time by city council. 
(h)  Inspections. The building official or their designee shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections by approved agencies or individuals shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (h)(6) of this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)  Required inspections. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
a.  Building. 
1.  Foundation and foundation wall inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated, the reinforcement is in place, and the forms erected, prior to the placing of concrete. 
2.  Slab inspection: To be made prior to the placing of concrete. 
3.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, and all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
4.  Moisture barrier inspection: To be made prior to the installation of the exterior finish materials. 
5.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
4.  Required tests: See state plumbing code for required tests. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all ducting and other concealed components are complete and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
f.  Energy. 
1.  Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
2.  Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(9)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(i)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuance of certificate. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications and after the final inspection the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
c.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a commercial building which in the opinion of the building official may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. The temporary/partial certificate of occupancy shall be forfeited if the permanent certificate of occupancy is not issued within 90 days. 
d.  Existing building occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. A certificate of completion or occupancy is not a guarantee that all work complies to required codes. The permit holder/owner shall remain fully responsible for the performance of work in compliance with all codes. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes by a specific business when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-12. - Tests. 
The building official may require test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner or his agent by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-13. - Violations. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish or utilize any structural, electrical, fuel gas piping, mechanical, or plumbing system, or occupy any building, structure, or equipment regulated by this code or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Notice of violation. The building official shall serve a notice of violation on the owner and/or the person responsible for the erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolition of structural, electrical, fuel gas piping, mechanical or plumbing work or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this Code, or in violation of a detail statement or the authorized construction documents thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Such notice shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with by the established deadline, the owner and/or the person responsible shall be subject to issuance of a citation by the building official to appear in the Chamblee Municipal Court to respond to violations of any of the provisions of this Code. 
(c)  Stop work order. The building official is authorized to issue a stop work order on the responsible person to immediately cease work on any structural, electrical, fuel gas piping, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The stop work order shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to issuance of a citation by the building official to appear in the Chamblee Municipal Court to respond to violations of any of the provisions of this Ccode. 
(d)  Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair structural, electrical, fuel gas piping, mechanical or plumbing work in violation of the authorized construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance, and subject to punishment upon conviction of any such violation in accordance with section 1-6 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Chamblee. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(e)  Abatement of violation. When any building structure, or electrical, fuel gas piping, mechanical or plumbing system or installation is maintained in violation of this Code, and in violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the building official shall institute appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the city's code enforcement officer or his/her designee from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction, restrain, correct or abate a violation, prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the installations on or about any premises. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-14. - Means of appeals. 
(a)  Application for appeal. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or authorized agent, shall have the right to appeal a denial, revocation of a permit, or administrative decision of the building official to the city council as outlined in title 2, article 6, Appeals of Administrative Decisions. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Secs. 18-15—18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCEMENT OF ADOPTED CODES 

Sec. 18-26. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-27. - Code remedial. 
(a)  Generally. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan under the requirements of construction codes, shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the city, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-28. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Generally. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the UDO or any of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy related systems, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(8)  Residential . The provisions of the International Residential Code for One-family and Two-family Dwellings, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every one-family and two-family building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(9)  Existing . The provisions of the International Existing Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every existing building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in section 100-10, "Adoption of Certain Codes," of appendix A of the Code of Ordinance of the City of Chamblee, "Unified Development Code," shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(d)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-29. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  Generally. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes; provided, that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within the fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-30. - Building division of the development department. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established a division of the development department to be called the building division and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The city council shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. The duties of the division may be contracted out in full to a third party entity. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the division shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or in conflict with the interests of the development department. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep or cause to be kept a record of the business of the division. The records of the division shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of the construction codes and acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties is provided with all immunities recognized by the state and federal law. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-31. - Building official. 
(a)  Generally. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. Copies of the adopted construction codes will be maintained by the building official and may be viewed by the public upon request. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes which are consistent with its intent and purpose. The city may contract with a third party to provide the duties of the building official. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes; provided, that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having the charge, care or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of the construction codes in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by codes. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-32. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the city manager whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. The city manager, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in his opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this article, the construction codes or public interest; and only upon making all of the following findings: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures or service system. 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
In granting any variance, the city manager may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the city manager may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Any violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(c)  Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the city manager made pursuant to subsection 18-32(b) shall be made to the Chamblee Mayor and City Council for a final decision. In so ruling the city council shall have the powers to reverse or modify the decision of the city manager. 
(d)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk within 30 calendar days after the city manager renders a decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(e)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system which in the opinion of the building official is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for filing such notice of appeal to a period of less than 30 calendar days after the decision of the city manager. 
(f)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  Decisions. The city council shall issue its decision in writing without unreasonable or unnecessary delay, including the reasons for such decision. If a decision of the city council reverses or modifies the decision of the city manager or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Written decisions of the city council shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the city council shall be final, subject to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Secs. 18-33—18-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Flow rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 18-46. - Purpose of article. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to: 
(1)  Require the use of ultra-low-flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction, or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings; 
(2)  Promote compliance with state law for the purpose of conserving water; and 
(3)  Maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies and reduce wastewater flows. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-47. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial building means any type of building other than residential. 
Plumbing fixtures means any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory or kitchen faucet, and replacement aerators. 
Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-48. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-6. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any building or plumbing contractors, developers, etc., who violate the provisions of this article shall be subject to suspension of their right to engage in business within the city for a period of up to 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-49. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  In addition to the penalty provided in section 18-48, the city may take other actions as described in this section to compel compliance, and may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(1)  Compliance with the requirements for installation and labeling at the time of installation as set out in section 18-51 shall be determined by the city plumbing inspector or his agent in cases of new or replacement plumbing fixture installations, and compliance shall be a condition for receipt of any occupancy permit. 
(2)  The appropriate water authority or water service agency may deny any service connection to an establishment which does not comply with the standards set forth in section 18-51. 
(3)  Compliance with the requirements in section 18-52 regarding the labeling of plumbing fixtures offered for retail sale shall be determined by the city plumbing inspector or his agent. The agency shall have access to all establishments which offer for sale or sell these plumbing fixtures for purposes of determining compliance with section 18-52. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-50. - Exemptions from article. 
(a)  The following fixtures, uses or applications shall be exempt from the standards established in section 18-51: 
(1)  Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc. 
(2)  Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for the physically handicapped. 
(3)  Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in a correctional institution which may require more water for proper operation. 
(4)  Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate existing technology. 
(b)  Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the director of the appropriate governmental department administering this article. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-51. - Standards for fixtures. 
(a)  No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state plumbing code (or the Standard Plumbing Code with state amendments), whichever is more strict. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 18-50. The effective date of this requirement for residential buildings shall be April 1, 1992, and for commercial buildings shall be July 1, 1992. 
(1)  All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to in this section should not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 
a.  Toilets, per flush, 1.6 gallons. 
b.  Urinals, per flush, 1.0 gallons. 
c.  Showerheads, per minute, at 60 psi gauge pressure, 2.5 gallons. 
d.  Kitchen faucets, per minute, 2.5 gallons. 
e.  Bathroom and lavatory faucets, per minute, 2.0 gallons. 
(2)  The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow a flow rate in excess of that stated in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (1) of this section. 
(4)  The flow rates for all showerhead, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/ASME A112.18.1M-1989, Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not exceed those given in subsection (1) of this section. 
(5)  All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for low consumption water closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990, Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSI/ASME A112.19.6-1990, Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-52. - Product certification. 
The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards listed in section 18-51 by labeling the fixture and packaging as described in this section and providing, upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the city plumbing inspector. Effective April 1, 1992, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in section 8 of such standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Secs. 18-53—18-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-71. - Adoption of 2012 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC). 
(a)  The City of Chamblee hereby adopts by reference the provisions of the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, including all referenced standards and appendices with the following revisions: 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)  In section 101.1 "Title" of the IPMC the City of Chamblee hereby replaces the word "jurisdiction" with the words "City of Chamblee". 
(2)  In Section 103.5 "Fees" the City of Chamblee hereby replaces the words "Jurisdiction to insert appropriate schedule" with "Fee Schedule adopted under separate ordinance by the City of Chamblee". 
(3)  In Section 106.4 "Violation Penalties" the City of Chamblee hereby replaces the words "Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense" with "A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense." 
(4)  In Section 112.4 "Failure to Comply" the City of Chamblee hereby replaces the words "shall be liable to a fine of not less than [AMOUNT] dollars or more than [AMOUNT] dollars" with the words "Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in Section 106.4." 
(5)  In Section 302.4 "Weeds" the City of Chamblee hereby replaces the words "jurisdiction to insert height in inches" with the words "12 inches". 
(6)  In Section 304,14 "Insect Screens" of the IMPC the City of Chamblee hereby replaces the words "[DATE] to [DATE]" with the words "March 1 to November 1". 
(7)  In Section 602.3 "Heat Supply." of the IPMC the City of Chamblee hereby replaces the words "[DATE] to [DATE]" with the words "October 1 to April 1". 
(8)  In Section 602.4" Occupiable Work Spaces." of the IPMC the City of Chamblee hereby replaces the words "[DATE] to [DATE]" with the words "October 1 to April 1". 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure detached from the principal building located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or use. "Accessory structure" includes, but is not limited to, any portable, demountable or permanent enclosure, shade structure and carport or garage. 
Alter or alteration means any change or modification in construction. 
Approved means approved by the city. 
Basement see the latest edition of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
Bathroom means a room containing plumbing fixtures, including a toilet, bathtub, or shower. 
Bedroom means any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 
Boarding house see the latest edition of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Cellar means that portion of a building having more than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
Chief of police means the Chief of the Chamblee Police Department or designee. 
City means Chamblee, Georgia. 
Dangerous structure means any of the following: 
(1)  An abandoned or vacant structure that constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the property on which the structure is located and which is not fenced in or otherwise protected to reasonably prohibit public access thereto. 
(2)  A structure that is severely damaged by fire, storm or other natural or manmade causes and which has remained in such damaged condition for a period of six months or more and which constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the property on which it is located. 
(3)  A structure that is in a condition of being partially constructed and construction thereon has ceased for a period of 12 months or more and which constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the property on which it is located. 
(4)  Any combination of the foregoing that would constitute a hazard to the safety and welfare of any person living on property located adjacent thereto. 
Department means the police department or such other department as may hereafter be designated to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Director means the director of development or designee. 
Domestic sewage disposal system means a sewage disposal system designated or intended to dispose of domestic sewage that includes byproducts of domestic activities. 
Dwelling means any structure which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, whether or not such structure is occupied or vacant. 
Dwelling unit see the latest edition of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
Egress means a way to exit from a structure or dwelling unit. 
Exterior property means open space on the premises and on any adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Extermination means the control or eradication of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods. 
Family see the latest edition of the City of Chamblee Unified Development Ordinance. 
Floor area means the gross heated horizontal areas of the floors of a building, exclusive of open porches and garages, measured from the interior face of the exterior walls of the building. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking and serving of food and the storage of produce, tin cans, glass containers and newspapers. 
Habitable room means a space in a building for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
Heated water means water that has been heated sufficiently to ensure a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit at the outlets. 
Infestation means the presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests within or contiguous to a structure or premises. 
Inoperable vehicle means: 
(1)  A vehicle which is incapable of operation or use upon a highway; 
(2)  A vehicle that has no resale value except as a source of parts or scrap; or 
(3)  Any wrecked or non-operable automobile, truck or other vehicle. 
Inspection warrant means a warrant authorizing a search or inspection of private property where such search or inspection is necessary for the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article. 
Lavatory means a washbowl or basin permanently installed with running hot and cold water. 
Maintenance means the act of keeping buildings, structures and equipment in a proper condition so as to prevent their decline or failure. 
Major overhaul means the repair, alteration or restoration of a motor vehicle which involves the removal of the paint or major parts of or the disassembly of major parts of a motor vehicle, including, without limitation, the following major parts: engine, body, interior seats, interior equipment necessary for the operation of the vehicle, and/or drive train. 
Multiple dwelling means any dwelling which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of more than two families living independently of each other, each doing its own cooking in such dwelling. "Multiple dwelling" includes a flat or apartment. 
Occupant means any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, eating or having actual possession of a dwelling unit. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units are let. 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation or entity who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Has legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Has charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, prime tenant, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. 
Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article to the same extent as the owner. 
Party-in-interest or interest holder means an individual, association, entity or corporation, executor, administrator, guardian, or trustee, that has a legal interest in or possession of a dwelling, building, or structure. 
Plumbing means the practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, repair, extension and alteration of all piping fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting systems and the public or private water supply systems within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, repair, extension or alteration of stormwater, liquid waste or sewerage and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with a point of public disposal or other approved terminal. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land including dwellings, buildings, or structures thereon. 
Proper or properly means in accordance with the general provisions of this article and in accordance with standards of cleanliness, stability and safety as required by this article. 
Property means land and whatever is erected or growing upon or affixed thereto. 
Property maintenance code official (code official), as it is used in the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code shall have the same meaning as "director". 
Public authority means any member of the city council, the city manager, the public works director, or the chief of police or his or her designee. 
Reckless means the conscious disregard of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that an act or omission will cause harm or endanger the safety of another person and the disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. 
Repair means the replacement of existing work with approved material of a similar kind to that used in the existing work, not including additional work that would change the structural safety of the building or that would affect or change required exit facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or heating installations, or that would be in violation of this article. 
Rooming house see the latest edition of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches or trunks, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust or other similar materials. 
Safety means the condition of being free from danger and hazards that may cause accidents or disease. 
Sanitary sewage disposal system means a sewage disposal system designed and intended to dispose of sanitary and domestic wastes including all liquid and solid wastes from the flush toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower and clothes washing machine. 
Stairway means one or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one story to another in a building or structure. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Toilet means a bowl flushed with water under pressure with a water-sealed trap above the floor level, used primarily for human elimination. 
Townhouse means one of a row of houses connected by common sidewalls. 
Trash means putrescible solid wastes, consisting of combustible and noncombustible materials such as, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, yard clippings, wood, glass, crockery and similar materials. 
Unfit for human habitation means designation of dwellings or dwelling units as so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that such create a serious hazard to the health or safety or which lack illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or the public. 
Unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not necessarily for cooking or eating purposes. 
Unsanitary condition means the presence of a condition that is conducive to the spreading of disease or illness, or is conducive to harboring insects, rodents or other pests. 
Ventilation means the process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. 
Water and sewer system includes private wells, public water utility mains, private septic tanks, sewage disposal systems and public sewer mains. 
Water closet means a room containing a toilet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
Weeds means vegetative growth including but not limited to, kudzu, poison ivy, jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, plants of obnoxious odors, or other similar unsightly vegetative growths. This term shall not include cultivated flowers, fruits and vegetables and gardens. 
Workmanlike condition of maintenance and repair means that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner and in accordance with the requirements of all applicable manufacturer's specifications, ordinances and law. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-73. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  The governing authority finds that there is a need to establish minimum standards governing the use, occupancy, condition and maintenance of property, dwellings, buildings, and structures. Left completely unregulated, the failure to properly maintain property can become a threat to public safety and a detriment to property values and to the city's general public welfare, as well as create an aesthetic nuisance. The city finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. The purpose and intent of the governing authority of Chamblee in enacting this article is as follows: 
(1)  To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to implement the policies and objectives of a comprehensive property management plan throughout the city through the enactment of a comprehensive set of regulations governing property maintenance in the city; 
(2)  To preserve the value of property and maintain for the city's residents, workers and visitors a safe and aesthetically attractive environment and to advance the aesthetic interest of the city; 
(3)  To establish minimum standards governing supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to make dwellings, buildings and structures and surrounding premises safe, sanitary and fit for human use and habitation; 
(4)  To establish minimum standards governing the use, occupancy, condition and maintenance of property, dwellings, buildings, and structures; 
(5)  To promote and protect the public health and safety through the control of weeds and grass which constitute a fire hazard and a public nuisance; 
(6)  To fix certain responsibilities and duties of owners, operators and occupants of dwellings; 
(7)  To provide for the condemnation of buildings and structures deemed unfit for human use and habitation and provide for removal of such buildings at public expense after hearing; 
(8)  To authorize the inspection of dwellings and structures; and 
(9)  To prohibit property owners from maintaining property in a manner not expressly authorized by this article, to provide for the maintenance of property, and to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-74. - Scope and application. 
(a)  Every building, dwelling or structure in the city, whether occupied or vacant, shall conform to the requirements of this article, regardless of when such building may have been constructed, altered or repaired. However, when a building, dwelling or structure is vacant, the owner shall only maintain the exterior of the property in compliance with this article, ensure the interior has been cleaned of trash, rubbish and debris, and secure the building, dwelling or structure in a closed and inaccessible manner until occupied. Any building, dwelling or structure that is vacant and closed shall be boarded to minimum specifications as determined by the chief of police. Owners shall conform their property to the full requirements of this article prior to the occupation of any vacant property. Where applicable, this article also governs the condition of unimproved property. 
(b)  Repairs and alterations in restoring a building to its condition previous to damage or deterioration, or altering such building in conformity with this article in such manners as will not extend or increase an existing nonconformity or hazard may be made with approved materials similar in kind to those of which such building is constructed and are authorized by law. 
(c)  Where repairs, alterations, construction, maintenance and work required to meet the provisions of this article are regulated and/or required to be permitted by other ordinances, such repairs, alterations, construction, maintenance and work shall comply with all provisions of this code. In the event of a conflict between two regulations, the regulation most recently enacted shall govern. 
(d)  The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings, dwellings or structures designated by the state or the city as historic buildings when such buildings, dwellings or structures are judged by the public authority to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-75. - Vehicles. 
(a)  Inoperable vehicles. No owner or occupant of any premises shall park any inoperable vehicle or permit any other person to park any inoperable vehicle on the owner's or occupant's premises for more than 72 hours, unless the inoperable vehicle is parked in an enclosed structure. This section does not apply to premises for which the zoning code permits the storage of junk vehicles outside an enclosed building. No person shall park any inoperable vehicle upon any public street, alley, or other public property. A court of competent jurisdiction shall have the authority, upon conviction of a violation of this subsection, to order the owner and/or occupant of the premises to replace ground cover beneath the inoperable vehicle, if appropriate. 
(b)  Major overhaul. 
(1)  No person shall perform a major overhaul of any vehicle or permit any other person to perform a major overhaul of any vehicle on premises in a residential zone unless: 
a.  The person performing the overhaul is the occupant of the premises; 
b.  The person performing the overhaul is the owner of the vehicle; and 
c.  The work is done inside a garage or enclosed structure; provided, however, the major overhaul of such a vehicle on-premises in a residential zone may be resumed outside of a garage or enclosed structure as long as it is completed within three days of the initiating such overhaul. 
(2)  No person shall perform a major overhaul of any vehicle or permit any other person to perform a major overhaul of any vehicle on any premises in a business, commercial or industrial district, unless the overhaul is performed at an approved automobile sales or repair establishment and completely indoors. 
(c)  Tarps and covers over vehicles. Within a residential zone, no owner or occupant of any premises shall cover a vehicle or permit any other person to cover a vehicle on the owner's or occupant's premises with anything other than a cover specifically designed for covering vehicles. Said covers must be maintained in a good clean condition at all times. 
(d)  Storage of vehicles used for recreational purposes. No person shall park or permit any other person to park any inoperable or junk vehicles which are used for recreation purposes including, but not limited to, boats, snowmobiles, travel trailers, cargo trailers, campers, all-terrain vehicles and motor homes, on premises in a residential district, unless they are stored within an enclosed building. No person may park or permit any other person to park a vehicle used for recreation purposes except in the manner described in chapter 250 of the Chamblee Zoning Ordinance, as amended. 
(e)  Storage of machinery, implements and equipment. No person shall park or permit any other person to park any machinery, implements or equipment designed for use in agriculture, construction or other commercial enterprise, unless the machinery, implement or equipment is parked in an enclosed garage. This requirement does not apply to single parcels zoned for commercial or industrial purposes. This requirement does not apply to such machinery, implements or equipment that is being used in construction of structures or dwellings so long as such machinery, implements or equipment is removed within 15 days after completion of its use. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-76. - Transfer of ownership. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the notice of violation have been complied with or until such owner or the owner's authorized agent shall furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-77. - Vegetation and debris. 
(a)  Vegetation. There shall be no dead or hazardous trees, shrubs, ground cover or weeds likely to: harbor vermin or insects, create a health menace or fire hazard, restrict or impede access to or public use of adjacent sidewalks and streets, obstruct traffic-control signs and devices and fire hydrants, or pose a risk of physical injury to the public. 
(b)  Height of grass and weeds. Owners and occupants of property shall not permit weeds or grass within 150 feet of any building or structure to grow on such property to a height exceeding 12 inches. 
(c)  Debris. There shall not be maintained on a property for more than seven calendar days any used or damaged lumber, junk, trash, debris, scrap metal, concrete, sand, asphalt, cans, bottles, tires, salvage materials, boxes, containers, bins, and abandoned, discarded, inoperative or unusable furniture, stove, refrigerator, freezer, sink, toilet, cabinet or other household fixtures, yard waste or equipment stored so as to be visible from public street, alley or from an adjoining property unless appropriate permits have been obtained from the city. Nothing herein shall preclude the placement of stacked firewood for use on the premises in the side or rear yards of the premises. 
(d)  Shared property. Where parking in open areas is used jointly for the benefit of two or more owners or tenants, the responsibility for maintaining these parking areas free of garbage and trash shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owners and tenants. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Secs. 18-78—18-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DWELLINGS AND BOARDING HOUSES 

Sec. 18-91. - Dwellings and boarding houses regulations. 
See latest version of International Property Maintenance Code. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Secs. 18-92—18-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 18-116. - Enforcement generally. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this article. Authorized agents of the department may be selected and vested by the chief of police with the police power to prosecute persons charged with violating the terms of this article and to take all necessary steps to ensure compliance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection or to enforce any of the provisions of this article or whenever the chief of police has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or structure any condition which makes such building or structure unsafe, the chief of police may enter the building or structure during normal work hours with the consent of the owner or an inspection warrant to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the chief of police by this article. 
(1)  If such property is occupied, the chief of police shall first present proper credentials and request and obtain consent to enter before entering the building or structure. Reasonable effort must be made to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the property when seeking permission for entry. 
(2)  If no consent has been given to enter or inspect any building or structure, no entry or inspection shall be made without the procurement of a warrant from a municipal court judge, magistrate of the county, or a judge of the state or superior court of the county. 
(3)  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property. 
(4)  The chief of police may enter the premises without consent or an inspection warrant to make an inspection or enforce any provisions of this code only if so authorized by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-117. - No financial interest. 
No official or employee of the police department, the development department, the public works department or the department making inspection of properties for the purpose of determining the necessity for repairs or corrections shall or may have any financial interest, directly or indirectly in any repairs or corrections which may be required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-118. - Owner's right of entry. 
Every occupant of a building, dwelling, or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or the owner's agents or employees, access to any part of such building, dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of maintenance, improving or making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-119. - Stopping work. 
Whenever the department determines defective or illegal work is performed in violation of a provision or requirement of this article, it shall order, in writing, all further work to cease until such defective or illegal work is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-120. - Prohibited manner of managing or controlling real property. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person who has management authority over or control of property within a residential zoning district or of residential units within a mixed-use district, whether as a legal or equitable owner, managing agent, leasing agent, rental agent or otherwise, to recklessly permit the physical condition or facilities of the property to become or remain in any condition which endangers the health or safety of any person. Such conduct shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Recklessly allowing property to be improperly secured; 
(2)  Recklessly allowing property to collapse or partially collapse; 
(3)  Recklessly allowing property to remain in violation of applicable building codes, fire codes, or other applicable provisions of this code; 
(4)  Recklessly failing to respond to reasonable requests by the city to repair property that is in violation of an applicable provision of the code; or 
(5)  Recklessly endangering the health and safety of any person by illegally altering or modifying a structure to increase the number of dwelling units or habitable rooms within the structure, or by allowing any such alteration or modification to continue or be used. 
(b)  Any person found to have violated subsection (a) shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500.00 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day on which such person shall continue any such violation. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any freestanding, owner-occupied single-family home or to any owner-occupied townhouse; provided, however, the requirements of this section shall apply to any single-family home, or townhouse, which is rented, or to any structure that is altered or modified in violation of this code. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-121. - Violations. 
A person who violates a provision of this article or fails to comply with this article is guilty of an offense. The owner of a building, structure or premises, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, or any person who may have assisted in the commission of such violation, shall each be guilty of a separate offense. A purchaser, transferee, lessee or mortgagee who has actual or constructive knowledge of the issuance of a citation or notice of violation pursuant to this article shall be deemed to have notice of the violation as of the date of such sale, transfer, lease or mortgage. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-122. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by the provisions of this article, as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon citation by the chief of police or his/her designee and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with the city Charter. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Without limiting the foregoing, upon the presentment of evidence, the judge may consider whether the imposition of a fine authorized under this article would: 
(1)  Result in undue burden or hardship; 
(2)  Alter or impair the obligations created by court order or decree; or 
(3)  Otherwise not further the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Secs. 18-123—18-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAE AND TOWERS 

Sec. 18-150. - Purposes. 
(a)  This article is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the city, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunications facilities within the city so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and so as to promote the city as a proactive city in the availability of personal wireless telecommunications service. To that end, this article shall: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities in the city; 
(2)  Protect the city's built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunications facilities; 
(3)  Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(4)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antennae failure through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications tower structures and antennae; 
(5)  Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the city; 
(6)  Maximize and encourage use of alternative telecommunications tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; and 
(7)  Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications facilities in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-151. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves for telephonic radio, television, or personal wireless services. For the purposes of this article, the term "antenna" does not include any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, any device designed for over-the-air reception of radio or television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service, or any cable television head end or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
City manager means the City Manager of the City of Chamblee or his/her designee. 
Governing body means the City Council for the City of Chamblee. 
Macro-telecommunications facilities are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures and which project more than three feet above the top of the structure but no more than ten feet above the roof line, parapet or top of the structure. Macro-telecommunication facilities may exceed the height limitation specified for the zoning district. 
Micro-telecommunications facilities are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures where antennae do not project more than three feet above the top of the structure and there are no more than six antennae per site. 
Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Telecommunications facilities refers to antennae and towers, either individually or together. 
Tower means a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a freestanding structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-152. - Exclusions. 
The following shall be exempt from this article: 
(1)  Any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
(2)  Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multi-channel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service; 
(3)  Any telecommunications facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city, provided a license or lease authorizing the telecommunications facility has been approved by the governing body; or 
(4)  Any cable television head end or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-153. - Placement of telecommunications facilities by zoning district. 
(a)  In districts zoned for primarily light industrial use, micro- and macro-telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least one user are permitted as a use of right up to a height of 80 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the city manager. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least two users are permitted as a use of right up to a height of 100 feet following design review by and receipt of building permit from the city manager. 
(b)  In districts zoned for primarily multifamily residential use or mixed-use, micro- and macro-telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the city manager. Monopole towers up to a height of 50 feet are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the city manager. 
(c)  In districts zoned for primarily single-family residential use, micro-telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use as of right on nonresidential structures following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the city manager. Macro-telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a special use on nonresidential structures following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the city manager. 
(d)  Telecommunications facilities outside the guidelines listed above may only be built after approval of a variance in accordance with the zoning provisions of the city (see subsection 18-156(c)), as well as receipt of a building permit. 
(e)  No application for a telecommunications facility with a tower height above the minimum heights as set forth above will be accepted unless the applicant has a valid, binding contract with a co-locator for a term no less than the term of the lease between the applicant and the property owner or tenant of the property on which the telecommunications facility is to be located. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-154. - Preferred and disfavored location sites. 
(a)  Preferred locations sites. 
(1)  Co-location sites. Any existing telecommunications towers currently being used for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication shall be a preferred location site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site, provided, however, that locations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this article and co-location sites shall not become an "antenna farm" or otherwise be deemed by the city manager or the governing authority to be visually obtrusive. 
(2)  Publicly-used structures. Publicly-used structures are preferred locations throughout the city because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout the city, and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunications facilities. Therefore, telecommunications facilities should be less noticeable when placed on publicly-used structures than when placed on commercial or residential structures. Publicly-used structures include, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches. 
(3)  Industrial and commercial structures. Wholly industrial and commercial structures such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages, or service stations shall be preferred locations particularly where existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a roof line can and will be removed as part of the installation of the telecommunications facility. 
(4)  Mixed-use buildings in high density districts. Mixed-use buildings (housing above commercial or other nonresidential space) are also preferred location sites. 
(b)  Disfavored location sites. Any single-family residential structure or site or two-family dwelling (duplex) structure or site, shall be a disfavored site for the location of telecommunications facility. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-155. - Requirements for telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  General requirements for all telecommunications facilities. The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunications facilities governed by this article. 
(1)  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of a telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for such telecommunications facilities, as amended from time to time. Owners of telecommunications facilities shall conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every year to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a qualified, independent engineer licensed to practice in the state. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the city manager. 
(2)  Regulatory compliance. 
a.  All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the telecommunications facilities governed by this article shall bring such telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standard or regulations. 
b.  Owners of telecommunications facilities shall provide documentation showing that each telecommunications facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every 12 months. 
(3)  Security. All telecommunications facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the telecommunications facility. 
(4)  Lighting. No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety. If lighting is required or necessary, the city manager may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
(5)  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. However, a whip antenna may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent billboard or outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this article are met. 
(6)  Visual impact. 
a.  Telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness; provided, however, any such facility located within 100 feet of a tree or trees with a minimum height of 25 feet shall be camouflaged so as to give the appearance of a tree, including bark, limbs and foliage. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. 
c.  Where feasible, telecommunications facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
d.  Telecommunications facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
e.  Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports telecommunications facilities must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(7)  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the telecommunications facility from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 
b.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
c.  The city manager may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes, for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms or where an antenna is placed on existing structure. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the city manager. 
(8)  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
(9)  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
b.  Telecommunications facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. 
(10)  Lot size and setbacks. 
a.  The following setback requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities, provided however, that the city manager may reduce the standard setback requirements of this section if the goals of this article would be better served thereby. 
1.  Telecommunications towers must be set back a distance equal to 1-1/2 times the height of the tower from any property line. (Example: 80-foot-high antenna and supporting structure requires 120-foot setback from any property line). 
2.  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
3.  Telecommunications facilities must be set back from any property line a sufficient distance to protect adjoining property from the potential impact of telecommunications facility failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in section 18-156. 
b.  For antennae attached to the roof or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a 1:1.5 setback ratio (example: ten-foot-high antenna and supporting structure requires 15-foot setback from edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
(b)  Additional requirements for towers. 
(1)  Site location and development shall preserve the pre-existing character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zone district as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
(2)  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
(3)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and build environment. 
(4)  Towers shall not be located any closer than 1,500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable. 
(5)  In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard, back yard or side yard in a residential district. 
(6)  Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or any state or federal law or agency or where they will create visual clutter. 
(7)  Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device designed to prevent tower access. 
(8)  Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the tower on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
(9)  No tower may be located within 800 feet of the centerline of any approach or departure flight path of aircraft, including helicopters, operating from any airport or helipad located partially or wholly within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-156. - Application procedures. 
(a)  General application requirements for all building and special use permits. Application for a building permit or special use permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the city manager by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any building permit, special use permit or other permit or variance included in this article and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
(1)  Basic information. 
a.  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. Applicants shall submit both a paper location map and digitized location map in a format compatible with the GIS software currently utilized by the city; 
b.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in subsection 18-155(a)(7); 
c.  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors; 
d.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance; 
e.  Report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the state, documenting the following: 
1.  Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
2.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; 
3.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
4.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
f.  A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity; 
g.  Information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity; 
h.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable; 
i.  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network; 
j.  Designation of which location preference, identified in section 18-154, above, the proposed facility is meeting. If the proposed location is not a preferred location of subsections 18-154(a)(1) through (4) or is a disfavored site, describe: 
1.  What publicly-used building, co-location site or other preferred location sites are located within the geographic service area. Provide a list (by address with lot and block number noted) and a map at 1:200 scale of all such buildings within the service area; 
2.  What good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure each of these preferred location sites; 
3.  Why each such site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible and why such efforts were unsuccessful; and 
4.  How and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area and city-wide network. 
(2)  Five-year plan and site inventory. Each application shall include a five-year facilities plan and site inventory including the following: 
a.  A list of all existing, existing to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed telecommunications facility sites within the city limits and within one mile of the city limits and a map showing these sites. The list must include the following information for each site: 
1.  Street address; 
2.  Assessor's block and lot or other applicable ad valorem tax identification number; 
3.  Zoning district; 
4.  Type of building (commercial, residential, mixed-use) and number of stories; 
5.  The number of antennae and base transceiver stations per site and the location and type of antenna installation (stand-alone rooftop, building facade, etc.) and location of the base transceiver station(s); 
6.  The height from grade to the top of the antenna installation; and 
7.  The radio frequency range in megahertz, the wattage output of the equipment and effective radiated power. 
b.  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations but does know of areas where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide service, the applicant shall list the assessor's blocks contained within the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
(3)  Additional information requirements for towers. 
a.  If the proposed site is zoned for primarily residential use or mixed-use and there are alternative sites zoned primarily for light industrial use, applicants must justify why those alternate sites have not been proposed. The city manager will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The city manager shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
b.  Applicants must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are applications currently on file with the city manager. Applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. If co-location on any such tower would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicants must justify why such co-location is not being proposed. If co-location on any such tower would increase negative visual impact, then the applicant must so state and demonstrate. The city manager will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The city manager shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
c.  In all zones, applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of a telecommunications tower. 
d.  The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennae. The applicant shall provide a drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antennae locations. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. The city manager shall approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means. 
e.  The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
(4)  The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the city manager to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(5)  All applicants for telecommunications facilities shall pay an application fee of $500.00. Such application fee shall be due and payable at the time the application for a permit is filed with the city. 
(b)  Expedited review for building permits only. When a telecommunications facility will be a use as of right pursuant to section 18-153 of this article and requires only a building permit and design review before it may be erected, the city manager will expedite review of the application and render a decision on the application within ten business days after receipt of a complete application. 
(c)  Variances. 
(1)  A request for a variance shall be initiated by application to the city manager and handled in accordance with the provisions in appendix A, title 2 of this Code. The governing body may issue a variance under this section provided it shall have determined that all of the requirements of section 18-155 have been satisfied and, further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
(2)  In granting variance, the governing body may impose additional zoning conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-157. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-158. - Appeals. 
The owner of a building, structure or service system, or authorized agent, shall have the right to appeal a denial, revocation of a permit, or administrative decision of the building official to the city council as outlined in title 2, chapter 280, article 6, Appeals of Administrative Decisions of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-159. - Nuisances. 
Telecommunications facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times within the limits of this Code, shall not be operated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-160. - Removal of antennae and towers. 
All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the city manager any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have 30 days to bring such facility into compliance. In the event such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within 30 days, the city may provide notice to the owners requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. In the event such telecommunications facility is not removed within 30 days of receipt of such notice, the city may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-161. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)  Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the city may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are removed. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-162. - Pre-existing towers/nonconforming uses. 
(a)  All telecommunications facilities operative on March 18, 1997, shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a nonconforming use and shall be treated as a nonconforming use in accordance with appendix A, chapter 270 of this Code. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or antenna of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing telecommunications facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  A telecommunications facility that has received city approval as of March 18, 1997, in the form of either a building permit or variance, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(c)  Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the nonconforming structure. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-163. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who attempts to erect or erects a telecommunications facility covered by this article without having first obtained the necessary building permit or variance in the manner provided in this article shall be deemed in violation of this article. Any responsible party or other persons convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted article of the city and shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person guilty of violation of this article on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(b)  If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this article or without obtaining the required permits, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this article, the city attorney, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violations. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sec. 18-164. - Coordination with federal law. 
Whenever the governing body finds that the application of this article would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a conditional use permit waiving any or all of the provisions of this article may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Secs. 18-165—18-190. - Reserved. 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 46; law enforcement, ch. 50; pawnbrokers, § 58-1; signs, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; taxation, ch. 82; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; zoning, ch. 94; environment, app. A, ch. 310. 
State Law reference— Authorization of cities to levy and collect taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 626, adopted Dec. 21, 2010, art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. I, §§ 22-1—22-24.11, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. 398, adopted Dec. 9, 1994; Ord. No. 407, adopted Nov. 21, 1995; Ord. No. 437, adopted May 20, 1997; Ord. No. 529, pt. I, adopted Nov. 18, 2003; and Ord. No. 611, pt. I, adopted Oct. 20, 2009. Furthermore prior Ord. No. 398, adopted Dec. 9, 1994, had set out provisions repealing the former art. I, "In General" in its entirety, which consisted of § 22-1, "provisions saved from repeal" and, specifically, had saved from repeal §§ 3-3-1—3-3-26 and §§ 9-1-1—9-1-21 of the 1982 Code. 

Sec. 22-1. - Imposition and levy of occupational tax. 
(a)  Each person engaged in a business, trade, profession or occupation, whether with a location within the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupational tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation. 
(b)  Occupation taxes shall be based upon gross receipts in combination with profitability ratio and number of employees. The profitability ratio for the type of business will be determined from nation-wide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. 
(c)  The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any profession, trade or calling. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term Chamblee is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean Chamblee, Georgia; wherever the term city is used herein, it shall be construed to mean Chamblee, Georgia. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any person, sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, trade, profession, occupation or other entity and the efforts or activities associated thereby for the purposes of raising revenue or producing income. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual, for purposes of documenting compensation, a form W-2, but not a form IRS 1099. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without being limited to the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise taxes; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent subsidiary controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
License means a permit or certificate issued by the city that allows an entity to operate lawfully in the city. A license does not create any rights to operate in violation of any provision of this Code and it may be denied, suspended or revoked by the city at any time pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. This definition applies to any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Location or office means and includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction worksite which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location, which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another, does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business. 
Practitioner of professions and occupants means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. This definition shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its municipal power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee does not include an administrative or registration fee. Regulatory fees do not include required occupation taxes for businesses and professions located in the city. 
Tax collector means an individual duly appointed and named as tax collector to serve in that capacity. In the absence of a duly appointed tax collector, the finance director or city manager may perform the duties of the tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-3. - Business license required. 
(a)  Except as specifically exempted herein, all persons, firms, companies (including limited liability companies), corporations (including professional corporations) and other business entities, now or hereafter operating a business within the city, are hereby required to register their business or office, obtain an occupation tax certificate for their business or office, and pay the amount now or hereafter fixed as taxes and fees thereon as authorized under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq., as amended. 
(b)  Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location or has multiple business trade names, each trade name shall be considered to be separate for the purpose of the occupation tax, and the gross receipts of each will be returned on a form furnished by the city clerk in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The occupation tax certificate shall serve as a business license. Additional business licenses may be required as established by the city. 
(d)  The occupation tax certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. It the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such occupation tax receipt shall be shown to the city tax clerk or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city, upon request. 
(e)  Stock or manufacturing companies or other companies, subsidiaries, agencies, district offices, branch offices, corporations or individuals, having either their business proper or their general branch offices located within the city, and either represented by the officers of the company, or any agent, for the purpose of soliciting patronage for the same, or for the transaction of any business pertaining thereto, shall be required to obtain a occupation tax certificate. 
(f)  All licenses granted under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees shall be required to file an application in each ensuing year. The applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-4. - Estimation of gross receipts; filing of returns. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on the amount of business transacted during the current calendar year and the number of employees to be employed in the business conducted. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, those businesses subject to the occupational tax shall, on or before March 15, file with the city clerk a return showing all gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year ending on December 31. This return showing preceding calendar year gross receipts shall be used as the total of gross receipts for making payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The number of employees reported for the current year's business operations may be based upon the number of employees employed in the business conducted during the previous year. Applicants or owners engaged in the business shall be reported as employees of the business. 
(b)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be set forth in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. 
(c)  If a business is to begin on or after January 1 of the occupation tax year, the tax on such business shall be payable on the date of the commencement of the business and shall be considered delinquent if not paid within 30 days of said commencement date. The occupation tax shall be based upon the number of employees and the estimated gross receipts of the business from the date of commencement until the end of the calendar year. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a lawyer begins or continues business after January 1 of the occupation tax year, the tax on such business shall be due and payable on December 31 of the year in which the business begins or continues. Any lawyer failing to pay the occupation tax within 120 days after December 31 shall be considered delinquent and shall be subject to and shall pay a ten percent penalty of the amount of tax or fee due and interest as provided by state law. Such penalty shall be assessed in full on the 121st day of the year following the tax year in addition to interest on delinquent occupational taxes. In addition, a list of all delinquent lawyers may be sent to the State Bar of Georgia. The general penalty for continuing violations of this Code shall not apply to violations of this chapter by lawyers. Specifically, failing to comply with the article will not result in the city closing the business or penalizing the continued practice of law by fining, imprisoning or criminalizing noncompliance. 
(e)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have, nor shall the city require a business to pay an occupational tax for more than 100 percent of the business' gross receipts. 
(f)  Real estate brokers shall pay an occupational tax for each principal office and each separate branch office located in the city based upon gross receipts derived from transactions with respect to property located within the city. Payment of the occupation tax shall permit the broker, the broker's affiliated associates and salespersons to engage in all of the brokerage activities described in O.C.G.A. § 43-40-1 without further licensing or taxing other than the state licenses issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 40. 
(g)  For out-of-state businesses with no location in the state, occupation taxes include the gross receipts of business as defined in section 22-2. 
(h)  For purposes of this section, prima facie evidence of gross receipts generated during any period shall be a sworn statement under oath and penalty of perjury (affidavit) that the provided gross receipt information is true and correct as stated on the filed federal income tax return of the business for the applicable year, less allowed exemptions. If no federal tax return has been filed for the applicable year, the applicant must swear under oath and penalty of perjury that no federal tax return has been filed for the applicable year, and the gross receipts as presented to the city are true and correct to the best of the applicant's knowledge, ability and training. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-5. - Regulatory fee. 
A regulatory fee will be imposed on those applicable businesses listed under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b) that the city deems necessary to regulate. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-6. - Renewal returns and applications; due date; penalty for late payment. 
(a)  On or before March 15 of each year, businesses liable for occupation taxes levied under this article for the year shall file with the city clerk's business occupation tax section, on a form furnished by the city clerk, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year ending December 31. 
(b)  Occupational taxes on businesses continuing from the preceding year shall be due and payable on January 1 of each subsequent year. Occupational tax due from businesses continuing operation in the current year from the preceding year shall be considered delinquent if not paid by April 15 of each year. Any business failing to pay the occupational taxes within 120 days after January 1 shall be subject to and shall pay a ten percent penalty of the amount of tax or fees due and interest as provided by state law. Such penalty shall be assessed in full on the 121st day of the tax year in addition to interest on delinquent occupation taxes and regulatory fees. 
(c)  If any person or business whose duty it is to obtain a registration or occupation tax certificate in the city begins to transact or offers to transact any kind of business after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, such offender shall be assessed interest according to the rate as provided by state law and shall upon conviction by the city judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment not to exceed six months, either or both in the discretion of the city judge. Provided, however, the provisions of this chapter with respect to transaction of a profession, trade or calling after the registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent and the provisions of this chapter concerning punishment by fine or imprisonment, or both, shall not apply to professions which are licensed by the state. 
(d)  The city clerk may issue an execution for failure to pay taxes against the person so delinquent and against such person's property for the amount of the occupational tax required to be paid for the purpose of carrying on any of the businesses enumerated in this article. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-7. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and the assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city, and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city, for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-8. - Professional occupation tax. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees and gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in this article; or 
(2)  Four hundred dollars for the year 2009 and subsequent years, but a practitioner paying according to this shall not be required to provide information relating to the gross receipts of such practitioner. The tax is for each professional described in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18). 
(b)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by instrumentalities of the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to register or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-9. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; city and state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43, shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license next to the city occupation tax receipt in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep both the state license and the city occupation tax receipt there at all times while valid. 
(c)  Any transient or nonresident person doing business within the city shall carry their occupational tax receipt either upon such person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in such business, and such person shall exhibit it to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a lawyer shall not be required to post the city occupation tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-10. - Change of location. 
Any person moving from one location to another shall notify the city clerk of this move and shall submit the new address in writing on a form provided by the city clerk prior to the day of the moving. A new receipt for the occupational tax will be issued for the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-11. - Transferability. 
Occupational receipts shall not be transferable and a transfer of ownership shall be considered in the same light as the termination of the business and the establishment of a new business. Filing a new registration application and payment of applicable fees and taxes shall be required of the new owner of the business. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-12. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of city registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-13. - Inspections of books and records; audits; confidential information. 
(a)  The finance department, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, shall have the right to inspect the books or records of any business for which returns have been based upon the number of employees and gross receipts. Upon demand of the finance department, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative or agent of the city within 30 days. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classified as agents for the purposes of this article. Failure of submission of such books and records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the occupation tax registration currently existing in the city. If it is determined that a deficiency exists as a result of under reporting, additional payment of occupation taxes required to be paid under this article shall be assessed the interest as provided by state law and penalties provided for by this Code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no attorney shall be required to disclose any information that would violate the attorney/client privilege. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, information provided by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(c)  Information provided to the city by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collection of occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-14. - Business classifications for determining tax levy. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, every person, firm, company or corporation engaged in trade, business or profession requiring the payment of occupational taxes is classified in accordance to the major line of business, as defined by the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS), and profitability classes are assigned in accordance with the Statistics of Income, Business Income Tax Returns, U.S. Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service. The finance department shall review assignment of businesses to profitability classes on a biannual basis and shall administratively reassign businesses as necessary to the then most accurate profitability class. 
(b)  Classifications by business profitability to be established by the city council are incorporated herein by reference and adopted for use in the application of this article. All separate businesses engaged in more than one business activity shall be classified on the basis of their dominant business activity at each location where business is done; except, that a person whose dominant business activity is legally exempt as defined by this article shall be classified according to such person's principal subsidiary business, if any, which is subject to the levy and assessment of occupation taxes. 
(c)  The occupation tax shall be determined by applying the business' gross receipts and number of employees returned to the city to the business' profitability classification established for each business type. The gross receipts tax shall include a flat rate of $125.00 for the first $50,000.00 of gross revenue, and a fee per employee. Gross revenues above $50,000.00 are taxed using a fee class table based on profitability. 
(d)  A copy of business classifications shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for inspection by all interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10; Ord. No. 674 , pt. I, 1-20-15) 
Sec. 22-15. - Casual and isolated transactions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to require any person who may engage in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions to register the business and pay occupational tax therefore, where the activity or commercial transactions: 
(1)  Involve personal assets; 
(2)  Are not the principal occupation of the individual; and 
(3)  Gross less than $12,000.00 per year. 
(b)  Street vendor, transient vendor or flea market vendor activities shall not be considered to be casual and isolated business transactions and shall be required to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-16. - Exemption for disabled veterans, disabled indigent persons, certain organizations. 
(a)  Organizations which are exempt from federal income taxation under the United States Internal Revenue Code shall be eligible for exemption from the city occupational tax. Any such organization claiming an exemption shall provide to the city clerk a federal tax exemption letter showing the code section under which an exemption is claimed unless filing for exempt status with the IRS is not required (such as a church). However, with respect to any activity for which an organization otherwise entitled to an exemption under this section shall be liable for federal income tax on unrelated business income or shall be deemed to be a feeder organization under the United States Internal Revenue Code, the exemption from payment of occupational taxes shall not be available. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the exemption from payment of city occupation taxes, an exempt person or business under this section shall comply with the same laws and regulations as are required of other registered businesses. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-17. - Denial, revocation or suspension; appeals. 
(a)  An occupation tax certificate may be denied, suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant or certificate holder is engaged in the business or occupation under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(2)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(3)  The business or establishment is not authorized to operate within the city, or within the zoning district within which it is located, or is otherwise not in conformity with locational requirements of any of the city's ordinances; 
(4)  The business or establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; 
(5)  The business or establishment has been found by a court of law to have been operating unlawfully; 
(6)  Any other violation of this article; or 
(7)  Violation of another statute, ordinance, rule or regulation that governs the operation of the business in question. 
(b)  Within 45 days of the filing of a completed application, the city clerk shall either issue an occupation tax certificate to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny an occupation tax certificate for one or more reasons set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(7) of this section. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The written notice shall also notify the applicant of the right to appeal said decision as designated in this section. 
(c)  Should the city manager or designee find cause for one or more reasons set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(7) of this section for an occupation tax certificate to be suspended or revoked, the city manager or designee shall notify the occupation tax certificate holder by written notice of intent to suspend or revoke said occupation tax certificate. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice shall state the grounds for the suspension or revocation of said occupation tax certificate and notify the holder of the right to appeal said decision as designated in this section. 
(d)  The city manager or designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. Should an aggrieved person or entity desire to appeal a decision under this article, the following procedure shall apply: A notice of appeal must be filed with the city manager or designee within 15 calendar days after receipt of the decision. The notice of appeal shall be in the form of a letter and shall clearly identify all of the objections or exceptions taken to the decision of the city. The notice of appeal shall also contain an address for receipt of future notices. Should the aggrieved person or entity fail to file a notice of appeal within the time allowed, the right to appeal is lost. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a timely and proper notice of appeal, the city manager or designee shall notify the appellant, in writing, of the date, time and place where a hearing will be held. The notice shall specify the time, place and date, not less than ten days, nor more than 30 days after the date the notice is issued, on which the mayor and city council, or such hearing officer or board as the mayor and council may designate, shall conduct a hearing on the city manager or designee's written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the occupation tax certificate. Said hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the administrative hearing procedures as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(f)  The mayor and city council, or such hearing officer or board as the mayor and council may designate, shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke an occupation tax certificate, the decision shall become final unless the applicant or certificate holder files an appeal by petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court within 30 days of the date of the decision. In case of intent to deny, if the decision concludes that no grounds exist for denial, of the occupation tax certificate, the city tax collector shall, within three business days of the issuance of the decision, issue the occupation tax certificate to the applicant. 
(g)  This section shall not apply to attorneys in the practice of law. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-18. - Proration of fee. 
No license fee shall be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-19. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the Constitution of this state or the Constitution of the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the occupational tax. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-20. - Intent of article. 
It is the intent of the article to impose the taxes set forth in this article upon all businesses and practitioners operating in the city consistent with the requirements of the Constitution and laws of the state. In the event that the fees imposed hereby shall not be authorized on any business and practitioner, or taxes and fees shall be in excess of the maximum amount authorized by law, such taxes and fees shall be imposed only to the extent authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-21. - Amendment of article. 
This article may be amended so as to increase the occupation tax on any business or practitioner only after the conduct of at least one public hearing pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 22-22. - Compliance with standard building codes and approval for occupancy by fire marshal. 
City business registration under this chapter may be issued contingent upon the applicant's business premises being in full compliance with all minimum standard building codes that have been adopted by the city and approval of occupancy by the city's code enforcement officer. City business registration under this chapter may be issued contingent upon approval of applicant's business premises for occupancy by the Fire Marshal of DeKalb County, Georgia, or any authorized personnel of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 626, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Secs. 22-23—22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BONDING COMPANIES AND PROFESSIONAL BONDSMEN[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 378, adopted Oct. 8, 1993, set out provisions codified, at the editor's discretion, as superseding the former Ch. 22, Art. II, which pertained to bonding companies and derived from the Code of 1982, §§ 9-5-1—9-5-11. 
State Law reference— Persons deemed professional bondsmen, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50; unlawful for elected official, officer of the court, law enforcement officer or attorney to engage in bail bond business, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-8. 

Sec. 22-26. - Authority to approve bonding business. 
(a)  A certificate of authority ("certificate") is required for any and all individuals, corporations or other legal entities wishing to engage in the bonding business in the city. This certificate is renewable annually unless the applicant has defaulted under this article, ceases to be in good standing or has violated other general federal and state laws applicable to either the entity or to any individual involved with the applicant or the bonding business itself. No person or business shall commence to do business or continue to do business in the city without a valid certificate of authority. 
(b)  Within the context of these requirements and as defined by state law, a "professional bondsperson" is one who holds him or herself out as a signer of surety of bonds for compensation (O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50). The requirements contained in this article shall in no way lessen the requirements placed upon professional bondspersons under state law. A certificate of authority will be issued annually by the police department to those applicants meeting the requirements contained herein and a professional bondsperson shall be authorized to write surety bonds in the city only upon issuance of a certificate of authority and upon maintaining that certificate in force. A professional bondsperson shall not be authorized to directly write bonds in the city at any time while his, her or its certificate of authority is suspended or revoked. 
(c)  An "applicant" can be an individual, trust, a group of individuals, whether or not formed as a partnership or other legal entity, a corporation or a combination of individuals, trusts and corporations. An applicant can and often is the same as a bondsperson. 
(d)  All employees, agents, applicable creditors and other individuals or entities described in these regulations are required to complete, swear to and file a professional bondsperson application form with the city police department. 
(e)  All certificates must be prominently displayed in the business location of the applicant. 
(f)  All applications must be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of $100.00 to cover costs of investigation and all applications must be accompanied by a fee of $25.00 for each person required to submit a professional bondsperson application. Each renewal application and all additional professional bondsperson applications must be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of $25.00 each. 
(g)  Bondsman shall be deemed to include the term bondsperson and can include a natural person or a corporation. 
(h)  Certificates of authority are nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 22-27. - Applications. 
(a)  In order to be considered for a certificate of authority, an applicant must submit all appropriate applications to the city police department. 
(b)  All entities in the form of associations, trusts, individuals, partnership or corporations must file an application for certificate of authority and a professional bondsperson application with the city police department in order to be considered for a certificate of authority. Application forms are available at the police department for use by any of the following: 
(1)  Shareholders of a corporate applicant; 
(2)  Directors of a corporate applicant, not otherwise shareholders; 
(3)  Employees, officers and agents of a corporate applicant; 
(4)  Individuals who loan money or provide collateral for or to a corporate applicant or to any employee, officer, director or shareholder of a corporate applicant, or to partners of a partnership; and 
(5)  Members of an association or partnership. 
(c)  The following documents will be provided by a corporate applicant: 
(1)  Certified copies of the articles of incorporation and bylaws as amended through the date of the filing of an application; 
(2)  Certificate of good standing from the secretary of state; 
(3)  A list of all shareholders of record as of the date of filing of the application and of all individuals or other entities which have liens, options or warrants on existing shares outstanding or future shares to be issued; 
(4)  A list of all the duly elected members of the board of directors; 
(5)  A list of all duly elected officers; 
(6)  A list of all employees; 
(7)  A biographical sketch of each person or entity listed in subsection (b)(1) through (5) above; 
(8)  A corporate resolution, duly signed by the appropriate officers, affixed with the corporate seal (optional), stating that the corporation, by and through its duly authorized agents, is permitted to transact surety business in the state and in the city and that such authority includes the power to execute and guarantee bond obligations or contracts to which the state, county or city is or may be a party; 
(9)  A list of all surety or bonding companies with which the corporation or any individual, listed in subsection (b)(1) through (5) above, has been affiliated with during the past ten years as of the date of filing the application; 
(10)  A list of all individuals or entities which will be authorized to sign or act on behalf of the applicant; and 
(11)  Name and address of the individual who shall be authorized to accept service or process on behalf of applicant. This person must be a resident of Dekalb County. A certified copy of a corporate resolution, duly adopted, appointing such person as agent, must accompany the application. 
(12)  Current compiled financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant. 
(d)  If the applicant is an entity other than a corporation, such as a partnership, joint venture, trust or sole proprietor, then the additional following information shall be provided: 
(1)  A list of all partners, including all parties that have an equitable interest in the partnership or operation of the sole proprietorship; 
(2)  Any individual or entity that is or may be a creditor of the bonding operation or of an individual running or owning a bonding operation who will benefit from or receive compensation, whether in money or special benefits, from the operation of the bonding entity; 
(3)  Those individuals who will be signing on behalf of the trust or partnership; and 
(4)  If a partnership or joint venture agreement with all amendments, as of the date of the application. If a trust, a certified copy of the trust instrument. 
(5)  A biographical sketch of each person or entity listed in subsection (d)(1) through (3) above. 
(6)  A current financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant. 
(7)  Such other relevant information as may be required on the application pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93; Ord. No. 390, 2-11-94) 
Sec. 22-28. - Qualifications—General. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to act as an agent for a professional bonding business, be a professional bondsperson, or own any interest in or be an officer, agent, partner or member of the board of directors of a professional bonding business, who has been convicted of a felony offense of any kind or any offense involving acts of moral turpitude or violence or entered a plea of nolo contendere to such offenses. 
(b)  No applicant or agent or employee of an applicant shall have received other than an honorable discharge from the armed services or have been court marshalled while in the armed services. 
(c)  No person shall be permitted to sign as agent for a professional bonding business or as a professional bondsperson, who has failed to meet his or her bonding requirements of either the city or any other county within the state. 
(d)  No certificate of authority shall be issued to any professional bonding business or entity whose officers, members of the board of directors, as shareholders (or respective spouses, children, siblings or parents, as the case may be) have failed to meet the bonding requirements of either the city or any other county in the state. 
(e)  No person shall be permitted to write bonds who is otherwise prohibited by law. 
(f)  No person, entity, or applicant will be permitted to write bonds when, at any time, their escrow account shall be less than the amount required under these regulations. 
(g)  All new applicants who submit applications in order to start doing business in the city, in addition to all of the other requirements found in these regulations for doing business in the city, must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the chief of police that there exists a need in the city for additional bonding businesses and that the operation of an additional bonding business will not be an administrative burden to the city or to the police department. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93; Ord. No. 390, 2-11-94) 
Sec. 22-29. - Same—Financial. 
(a)  All new applicants applying for a certificate of authority to do business in the city, as a professional bonds person, must individually, or as an officer or agent of the operating entity, place on deposit, in an escrow account in a banking institution located in the city, approved by the chief of police, not less than $4,000.00 in cash or cash equivalent. This escrow account shall be set up so that the funds contained therein shall be made immediately payable by the depository to the city for any unsatisfied forfeiture which may be due and payable to the city 30 days subsequent to the entry of judgment on the general execution docket. The chief of police, or his designated agent, shall be the sole signatory on said escrow account and such funds shall not be available for the general use of any applicant. In no event shall the escrow account be less than $4,000.00. 
(b)  The chief of police shall notify an applicant in writing of any unpaid forfeited bond amount and, within five days of receipt of such notice, such applicant must liquidate such outstanding obligations. Failing to do so within this time period shall entitle the chief of police to withdraw the amount from the escrow account. Failure of the applicant to maintain the escrow account at the required funding level shall be grounds for suspension of their right to make bond in the city. The time frame for such action is as follows: Within 30 days after withdrawal of funds from such escrow account, such certificate shall be suspended if such account has not been reestablished to the level required in this article. After such period of time, the applicant's certificate of authority shall be permanently revoked and the applicant will have to make new application in order to do business in the city. 
(c)  Such business entity must present annual proof of a current business license. 
(d)  All applicants will be required to remain in good standing with respect to all applicable state and federal laws governing doing business. A violation of such applicable laws, such as tax laws, will result in suspension or revocation of an applicant's certificate. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93; Ord. No. 390, 2-11-94) 
Sec. 22-30. - Same—Approval. 
(a)  All employees, owners, shareholders or agents of the professional bonding business, subsequent to the submission of their biographical sketch, must agree to be fingerprinted and photographed by the designated authorities of the city, and agree to execute such releases as would be necessary in order to facilitate an investigation to be conducted by the police department as to ascertain whether or not the qualifications contained herein have been met. 
(b)  Further, no bonding business or agent acting on behalf of a bonding business shall be permitted to accept any funds in addition to those fees authorized by law for the performance of their services. Nor shall anyone accept from the principal on the bond or from anyone on his behalf, any sums with respect to the issuance or continuance of a bail bond on his behalf. Violation will cause the certificate of authority of the bonding business involved to be immediately revoked. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93; Ord. No. 390, 2-11-94) 
Sec. 22-31. - Reports. 
(a)  Individuals or legal entities applying for or holding a certificate of authority shall submit copies of annual compiled financial statements (or income tax returns, if an individual) as of December 31 for the last two years preceding the date of the application and shall also submit annual financial statements on or before April 15 for the prior year just completed. Periodic reports may be requested on a quarterly basis and, if so requested, will be due by the fifteenth day of the month following the applicable quarter, i.e., April 15 for the January through March quarter, etc. These statements shall be sworn to by a corporate officer or the individual submitting them, or may be signed by a certified public accountant. (Facsimile signatures are not acceptable on any application or reports required for a certificate of authority or to renew a certificate of authority.) 
(b)  These reports shall also include a list of all bonds in force as of the application date and as of each reporting date, if not an original application, and the known current status of each obligation shall be submitted with the application and periodic quarterly or annual reports, and shall be submitted as heretofore required or more frequently as may be determined by the chief of police and will be due 15 days subsequent to written notice of such request other than those already required herein. The nature and amount of bonds will be considered in conjunction with these financial reports of an applicant or approved bonding business as well as the current escrow balance in order to ascertain bonding limitations of the respective businesses. Generally, a bonding business shall be limited from writing more than five times the face value of their escrow account. However, in no event shall a business holding a certificate of authority be prohibited from writing less than the face value of the amount of their escrow account and in no event shall that account be permitted to have a cash balance of less than $4,000.00 at any time. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93; Ord. No. 390, 2-11-94) 
Sec. 22-32. - Reissuance of certificates of authority. 
Violations of the regulations contained herein or as later amended and promulgated will cause the certificate of authority to be suspended or revoked. No bond shall be written without a current certificate of authority or during a suspension of such certificate. An applicant wishing to again be approved as a professional bondsperson subsequent to a revocation or suspension must make a new application, as contained herein, indicating the current status of bonds in force at the time of new application and current status of bonds subject to forfeiture at the time of the new application. Furthermore, any information with respect to violations of this article or violation of other state or federal law will be investigated by the chief of police and such information will be directed to either the city solicitor's office or the district attorney's office, as the case may be, for further investigation and criminal prosecution whenever it appears that there has been a violation of Georgia law or this article. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 22-33. - Applicability of article to all applicants or holders of certificates. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all new applicants for bonding business in the city as of the date herein. All existing bonding companies shall be required to comply with these regulations, with the exception of the $4,000.00 minimum escrow account, effective April 1, 1994, by resubmitting new applications to the police department by March 15, 1994. All existing bonding companies shall be required to comply with the increase to a $4,000.00 minimum escrow account on or before July 1, 1994. All certificates of authority are for a term of one year, effective January 1 and must be renewed annually. 
(b)  Annual renewal of certificates will be issued subject to submission of annual reports. Failure to timely submit required reports will cause an applicant's certificate to be suspended for 60 days from the due date. If, at the end of the 60-day suspension period, such reports still have not been filed, such certificate shall be revoked permanently. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93; Ord. No. 390, 2-11-94) 
Sec. 22-34. - Ongoing reports. 
There shall be a continuous duty on all bonding businesses to update their records with the city police department upon the happening of any of the following events: 
(1)  Change in ownership; prior approval required (except in cases of liquidations); 
(2)  The acquisition of new shareholders if a corporation, new partners if a partnership, new beneficiaries if a trust; prior approval required; 
(3)  The hiring of new employees, which will necessitate the filing of a professional bondsperson application on each new employee, officer or director, shareholder or other individual who commences working for an applicant subsequent to the filing of its application; 
(4)  If, at any time, an applicant becomes indebted to any creditor in an amount in excess of $1,000.00 or where the applicant gives collateral to a creditor, which collateral would, or encumbers, the applicant so that upon foreclosure the applicant would become insolvent; and 
(5)  If an applicant receives a loan from any individual or other entity in excess of $1,000.00; provided, however, that where such loan is made by a duly chartered bank or other lending institution regulated by state or federal laws, that such report need not be made to the police department, if otherwise disclosed in the annual financial report. 
(6)  Changes in the articles of incorporation, bylaws, articles of partnership, trust document or other governing instruments. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 22-35. - Conduct of bondspersons at the jail. 
(a)  Bondspersons will obey all criminal and civil statutes of this state in addition to applicable federal statutes and city ordinances. 
(b)  Bondspersons will not loiter in the police department nor on any curtilage thereof. 
(c)  Bondspersons will not write bonds while under the influence of intoxicants or drugs. 
(d)  Bondspersons will refrain from attempting to pirate clients away from other bonding businesses either openly or covertly. 
(e)  Bondspersons will refrain from harassing any competitive bondsperson, members of the public, clients, members of a client's family or employees of the police department. 
(f)  Bondspersons will at no time represent themselves to the public as police officers or deputy sheriffs or having any affiliation with such law enforcement agencies. 
(g)  Bondspersons shall refrain from contacting judges or magistrates to have bond set for a client. 
(h)  Bondspersons will comply with O.C.G.A. § 17-6-51, 17-6-52 and 17-6-53 as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 22-36. - City police department jail area rules. 
(a)  Be prompt! Complete your business and leave! 
(b)  Only one representative of a bonding business allowed in the jail area at a time with the following exception: 
(1)  Two representatives may be in the jail area if one of them is being trained. 
(c)  Only one bond will be completed at a time. As soon as the bond has been completed, leave the jail area in order that the next bonding business can complete its business. The jail area will not be used as a business office. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 22-37. - City jail and police department, general rules. 
(a)  Absolutely no soliciting of business at the police department or jail at any time. 
(b)  Bondspersons will refrain from using loud, boisterous language or behavior while at the police department or jail. 
(c)  Bondspersons surrendering a person off-bond shall have all required paperwork completed and turned over to police department personnel at the jail door. 
(d)  No bondspersons are allowed in the police department office area at any time. 
(e)  Bonds will not be completed by bondspersons until the person has completed all book-in procedures at the police department. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 22-38. - Violation of bonding regulations; penalties. 
The penalties set forth in section 22-39 cannot of necessity be all inclusive of every possible violation and are restricted to those infractions occurring most frequently. Any violation, in the determination of the chief of police or his authorized agents, which is not specifically enumerated in these regulations, and which is felt to warrant a penalty, shall be dealt with on a case by case basis and appropriate action taken by the chief of police. All statutory laws, rules, ordinances and regulations are likewise incorporated herein to by reference and made a part hereof. No penalty will be evoked for a violation not otherwise published without prior notice to the bonding business. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93; Ord. No. 390, 2-11-94) 
Sec. 22-39. - Penalties for violation of rules, regulations and requirements. 

 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 22-40. - Hearings. 
A hearing will be held within five business days of any alleged violation of any regulation contained herein. Such hearing will be held at a time and place designated by the chief of police after notification by mail or phone to the violator, of the hearing date, time and place. The bonding business and agent shall show cause at such hearing why the penalty for violation of such regulation should not be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 22-41. - Authority of the chief of police. 
This article in no way prohibits the chief of police or his authorized agents, from time to time, in establishing additional criteria and policies approving and regulating bonding businesses, nor limits the right of the chief of police to approve applications for the privilege of writing bail bonds. 
(Ord. No. 378, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 22-42. - Business license required. 
The business of arranging, posting and acting as surety on bonds for accused persons in any city ordinance violation coming within the jurisdiction of the city is hereby declared to be a business or trade, and any person desiring to conduct such business within the city limits is required, prior to the conducting of such business, to obtain a business license from the city. Such license shall be granted in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in this article, and may be revoked by the city upon violation of any of the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 390, 2-11-94) 
Sec. 22-43. - License fee. 
The license fee for the conduct of a bonding business shall be determined pursuant to the variable fee business license ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 390, 2-11-94) 
Sec. 22-44. - Revocation of business license. 
Any violation of any section of this article or other regulation of the city, any violation of O.C.G.A. § 17-6-30 et seq., or any violation of any other statute, law or regulation by any bonding company shall be grounds for the revocation of the business license of the offending company. In the event of any such revocation, the bonding company shall immediately cease to act as surety on any bonds after the date of revocation, but shall remain liable and bound to the city for any bonds for which it is surety prior to such revocation. The city manager shall have the power to revoke any business license for any bonding company, after notice to the offending bonding company and a hearing to be held at a time and place designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 390, 2-11-94) 
Secs. 22-45—22-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSE FEES ON INSURERS 

Sec. 22-61. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2011 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $75.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 22-62, which is operated on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $75.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 622, pt. I, 11-16-10; Ord. No. 638, pt. I, 7-19-11) 
Sec. 22-62. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance such insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $17.50 per location for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 2, 12-12-94) 
Sec. 22-63. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2011 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 22-61 hereof in the amount of $75.00 for each such location of within the city. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 3, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 622, pt. I, 11-16-10; Ord. No. 638, pt. I, 7-19-11) 
Sec. 22-64. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-61. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 4, 12-12-94) 
Sec. 22-65. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, subsection 1, doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-61. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 5, 12-12-94) 
Sec. 22-66. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 22-61 and 22-62 shall be due and payable on the first day of 1995 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 6, 12-12-94) 
Secs. 22-67—22-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUSINESS LICENSE TAX ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 22-70. - Established. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is hereby levied for each year an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of one-fourth of one percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 419, 5-21-96) 
Sec. 22-71. - Filing of returns. 
Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Ord. No. 419, 5-21-96) 
Sec. 22-72. - Due date. 
The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 419, 5-21-96) 
Secs. 22-73—22-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 22-80. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease for 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease, including, but not limited to charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers, and used primarily for the transportation of persons, that is rented or leased without a driver, regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in this state. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 22-81. - Assessment and levy; responsibility for payment. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed and levied an excise tax upon the rental charge collected by a rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for purpose of state sales and use tax, under O.C.G.A., article I of Chapter 8, title 48. Such tax shall be three percent of the rental charges as defined herein. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time when, and place where, the customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. 
(b)  Such tax is imposed upon the customer who pays the rental charge, and such customer shall be liable for the tax until such tax is paid over to the rental motor vehicle concern by the customer. 
(c)  The owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern shall collect the excise taxes as set forth in this article and shall remit the same to the city as hereinafter provided. Any owner or operator who shall neglect, fail or refuse to collect the tax herein provided shall be liable for, and shall pay the tax personally. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 22-82. - Exemptions. 
The following rentals are exempt from the excise tax imposed under this article: 
(1)  Rental charges associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
a.  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside this state and returns it in this state; or 
b.  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in this state and returns it outside this state; 
(2)  Rental charges associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle in excess of 31 consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 22-83. - Use of proceeds. 
(a)  The tax proceeds levied and imposed by this article shall be dedicated to and expended for the following projects: 
(1)  Capital outlay projects consisting of the construction and/or renovation of public safety facilities; 
(2)  Additional public improvements associated with any of the capital outlay projects outlined above, or the retirement of debt issued with respect to such capital outlay projects; 
(3)  Maintenance and operation expenses associated with qualified capital outlay projects as set out above. 
(b)  In addition, the tax proceeds levied and imposed by this article shall be dedicated to and expended for the following purposes: 
(1)  Promoting industry, trade, commerce, and tourism; 
(2)  Capital outlay projects consisting of the construction of convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities, or public safety facilities, including the acquiring, constructing, renovating, improving, and equipping of parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, plazas, connections, and other public improvements associated with such convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities or public safety facilities or the retirement of debt issued with respect to such capital outlay projects; and 
(3)  Maintenance and operation expenses or security and public safety expenses associated with capital outlay projects funded pursuant to subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 22-84. - Intergovernmental agreements concerning use of proceeds. 
The city acting as an entity may contract with a county, municipality, development authority, downtown development authority, urban redevelopment authority, recreation authority, or any combination of two or more such entities for the purpose of expending the proceeds authorized by this article, and in accordance with the purposes outline in section 22-83 above. Such intergovernmental contracts may pertain to the construction and maintenance of facilities located outside the city, but the existence and operation of which the city deems beneficial to the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 22-85. - Monthly report and remittance; penalties. 
The rental motor vehicle concern liable for the taxes set out herein shall on or before the 20th day of each month, for the preceding calendar month, transmit to the city clerk a statement showing the gross sales and gross taxes collected by authority of this article. Along with such statement, the rental motor vehicle concern shall submit to the city clerk the net taxes due. Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the tax due, and in addition to such penalty, to interest on the unpaid amount computed at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 22-86. - Collection fee for rental motor vehicle concern. 
For the purpose of compensating the rental motor vehicle concern for collecting, accounting for and remitting the tax levied by this article, such rental motor vehicle concern shall be allowed three percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for and remitted to the city in the form of a deduction, provided such report and remittance is submitted to the city by the due date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 22-87. - Records to be kept by rental motor vehicle concern. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article, and to collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of all sales and charges for rental motor vehicles and the taxes collected. Such records shall be open for inspection by any duly authorized agent of the city during regular business daytime hours. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 22-88. - Inadequate returns; powers of the city clerk. 
(a)  If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the excise tax and the amount of tax required to be paid to the city by any rental motor vehicle concern, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  The city clerk or his designated representative shall give to the rental motor vehicle concern written notice of the determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail, if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator or the owner of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month, following the monthly period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should expire last. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 22-89. - Failure to make return; powers of city clerk. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the rental tax due. The estimate shall be made for the period or period in respect for which such rental motor vehicle concern failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is, or may come into the possession of, the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 22-88. 
(b)  The amount of determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 22-90. - Audit authority of city. 
Duly authorized employees of the city upon exhibition of written identification and during regular business hours may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of a rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 22-91. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article sells out its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover the amount required until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the city clerk showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount of outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 22-92. - Refunds or credits for overpayment. 
Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be refunded by the city. If the owner or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city, he will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing, stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city, the excess amount paid may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid or his administrators or executors, or shall be refunded if no amount then remains due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Sec. 22-93. - Penalties for violations. 
In addition to the interest and delinquent penalties specified in section 22-85, any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by the municipal court of the city in accordance with limits established by the city charter. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. A finding of guilt may be considered as a basis for forfeiture or revocation of the business license of the rental motor vehicle concern. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-18-96) 
Secs. 22-94—22-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, adopted Oct. 16, 2018, amended art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VI, §§ 22-100—22-130, was entitled "Adult Entertainment Establishments," and derived from: Ord. No. 439, § 1, adopted May 20, 1997; Ord. No. 498, pt. I, adopted Mar. 20, 2001; Ord. No. 546, pt. I, adopted Apr. 18, 2006; Ord. No. 701 , pt. I, adopted Mar. 15, 2016; and Ord. No. 734 , pt. I, adopted Feb. 21, 2017. 

Sec. 22-100. - Purpose; findings and rationale. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate adult establishments in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of adult establishments within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings and rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. , 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); Sewell v. Georgia, 435 U.S. 982 (1978); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); City of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 19 (1989); and 
Maxim Cabaret, Inc. v. City of Sandy Springs, 816 S.E.2d 31 (Ga. 2018); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. City of Doraville, 297 Ga. 513 (2015); Trop, Inc. v. City of Brookhaven, 296 Ga. 85 (2014); Flanigan's Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County, 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010); Peek-a-Boo Lounge v. Manatee County, 630 F.3d 1346 (11th Cir. 2011); Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); Jacksonville Property Rights Ass'n, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 635 F.3d 1266 (11th Cir. 2011); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 331 F.3d 1196 (11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306 (11th Cir. 2000); Williams v. A.G. of Alabama, 378 F.3d 1232 (11th Cir. 2004); Gary v. City of Warner Robins, 311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange, 217 F.3d 1350 (11th Cir. 2002); Boss Capital, Inc. v. City of Casselberry, 187 F.3d 1251 (11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, 200 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker, 670 F.2d 943 (11th Cir. 1982); International Food & Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale, 794 F.2d 1520 (11th Cir. 1986); 5634 E. Hillsborough Ave., Inc. v. Hillsborough County, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 4, 2007), aff'd , 2008 WL 4276370 (11th Cir. Sept. 18, 2008) (per curiam); Fairfax MK, Inc. v. City of Clarkston, 274 Ga. 520 (2001); Morrison v. State, 272 Ga. 129 (2000); Goldrush II v. City of Marietta, 267 Ga. 683 (1997); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan, 601 S.E.2d 106 (Ga. Ct. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County, 272 Ga. 887 (2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee, 270 Ga. 33 (1998); World Famous Dudley's Food & Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park, 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson, 242 Ga. 214 (1978); Entm't Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 721 F.3d 729 (6th Cir. 2013); Lund v. City of Fall River, 714 F.3d 65 (1st Cir. 2013); Imaginary Images, Inc. v. Evans, 612 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 2010); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Ocello v. Koster, 354 S.W.3d 187 (Mo. 2011); 84 Video/Newsstand, Inc. v. Sartini, 2011 WL 3904097 (6th Cir. Sept. 7, 2011); Plaza Group Properties, LLC v. Spencer County Plan Commission, 877 N.E.2d 877 (Ind. Ct. App. 2007); Flanigan's Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County, 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010); East Brooks Books, Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 360 (6th Cir. 2009); Entm't Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 372 (6th Cir. 2009); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir. 2008); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); Heideman v. South Salt Lake City, 348 F.3d 1182 (10th Cir. 2003); H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); Fantasy Ranch, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 459 F.3d 546 (5th Cir. 2006); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall, 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir. 2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph, 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Knox County, 555 F.3d 512 (6th Cir. 2009); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales, Inc. v. Montgomery County, 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols, 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); DCR, Inc. v. Pierce County, 964 P.2d 380 (Wash. Ct. App. 1998); City of New York v. Hommes, 724 N.E.2d 368 (N.Y. 1999); Taylor v. State, No. 01-01-00505-CR, 2002 WL 1722154 (Tex. App. July 25, 2002); Fantasyland Video, Inc. v. County of San Diego, 505 F.3d 996 (9th Cir. 2007); U.S. v. Baston, 818 F.3d 651 (11th Cir. 2016); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. v. City of Littleton, Civil Action No. 99-N-1696, Memorandum Decision and Order (D. Colo. March 31, 2001); People ex rel. Deters v. The Lion's Den, Inc., Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order (Ill. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale, No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); 
and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around adult establishments, including, but not limited to, "Correlates of Current Transactional Sex among a Sample of Female Exotic Dancers in Baltimore, MD," Journal of Urban Health (2011); "Does the Presence of Sexually Oriented Businesses Relate to Increased Levels of Crime?" Crime & Delinquency (2012) (Louisville, KY); Metropolis, Illinois - 2011-12; Manatee County, Florida - 2007; Hillsborough County, Florida - 2006; Clarksville, Indiana - 2009; El Paso, Texas - 2008; Memphis, Tennessee - 2006; New Albany, Indiana - 2009; Louisville, Kentucky - 2004; Fulton County, GA - 2001; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Jackson County, Missouri - 2008; Ft. Worth, Texas - 2004; Kennedale, Texas - 2005; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Houston, Texas - 1997, 1983; Phoenix, Arizona - 1995-98, 1979; Tucson, Arizona - 1990; Spokane, Washington - 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; New York, New York Times Square - 1994; the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); Dallas, Texas - 2007; "Rural Hotspots: The Case of Adult Businesses," 19 Criminal Justice Policy Review 153 (2008); "Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence," by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota; "Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View," by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000; Sex Store Statistics and Articles; Law Enforcement and Private Investigator Affidavits (Adult Cabarets in Forest Park, GA and Sandy Springs, GA); DeKalb County Testimony and Reports - 2014; and Strip Club-Trafficking Documents, 
the city council finds: 
(1)  Adult establishments, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, human trafficking, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. Alcohol consumption impairs judgment and lowers inhibitions, thereby increasing the risk of adverse secondary effects. 
(2)  Adult establishments should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other adult establishments, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent a concentration of adult establishments in one area. 
(3)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the city's rationale for this article, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the city's interest in regulating adult establishments extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future adult establishments that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this article are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of adult establishments, including the judicial opinions and reports related to such secondary effects. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-101. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the words and phrases defined in the sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context. 
"Adult arcade" means a commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited that maintains booths or rooms smaller than 100 square feet, wherein image-producing devices are regularly maintained, and where a fee is charged to access the booths or rooms or to view the images displayed on the image-producing devices. 
"Adult bookstore" means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." A "principal business activity" exists where the commercial establishment meets any one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  At least 35 percent of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of said items; or 
(2)  At least 35 percent of the establishment's revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of said items; or 
(3)  The establishment maintains at least 35 percent of its floor space for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways used to access said items, as well as cashier stations where said items are rented or sold, shall be included in "floor space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); or 
(4)  The establishment maintains at least 500 square feet of its floor space for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways used to access said items, as well as cashier stations where said items are rented or sold, shall be included in "floor space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); or 
(5)  The establishment regularly offers for sale or rental at least 500 of said items; or 
(6)  The establishment regularly makes said items available for sale or rental and holds itself out, in any medium, by using "adult," "adults-only," "XXX," "sex," "erotic," "novelties," or substantially similar language, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests. 
"Adult establishment" means an "adult arcade," an "adult bookstore," an "adult motion picture theater," a "semi-nude lounge," or a "sex paraphernalia store." 
"Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited that maintains viewing rooms that are 100 square feet or larger wherein films or videos characterized by their emphasis upon "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly shown. 
"Characterized by" means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this article, no business shall be classified as an adult establishment by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
"City" means the City of Chamblee, Georgia. 
"City clerk" means the City of Chamblee City Clerk or his or her designee. 
"Employ, employee, and employment" describe and pertain to any person who works or engages in activity for pay on the premises of an adult establishment, on a full-time, part-time, temporary, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, lessee, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
"Establish or establishment" means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any adult establishment as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult establishment, to any adult establishment; or 
(3)  The addition of any adult establishment to any other existing adult establishment. 
"Floor space" means the floor area inside an establishment that is visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms. 
"Hearing officer" means an attorney, not an employee of the city, who is licensed to practice law in Georgia, and retained to serve as an independent tribunal to conduct hearings under this article. 
"Influential interest" means the actual power to control or influence the operation, management, or policies of the adult establishment or legal entity which operates the adult establishment. An individual is deemed to have an "influential interest" if he or she: (1) is the on-site general manager of the adult establishment, (2) owns a financial interest of 30 percent or more of a business or of any class of voting securities of a business, or (3) holds an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the adult establishment. 
"Licensee" means a person in whose name a license to operate an adult establishment has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for an adult establishment license. In the case of an "employee," it shall mean the person in whose name the adult establishment employee license has been issued. 
"Nudity or nude conduct" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. For purposes of this article, a "fully opaque covering" must be non-flesh colored, shall not consist of any substance that can be washed off the skin, such as paint or make-up, and shall not simulate the appearance of the anatomical area that it covers. 
"Operator" means any person on the premises of an adult establishment who manages, supervises, or controls the business or a portion thereof. A person may be found to be an operator regardless of whether such person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
"Person" means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
"Premises" means the real property upon which the adult establishment is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the adult establishment, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for an adult establishment license. 
"Regional shopping mall (enclosed)" means a group of retail and other commercial establishments that is planned, developed, and managed as a single property, with on-site parking provided around the perimeter of the shopping center, and that is generally at least 40 acres in size and flanked by two or more large "anchor" stores, such as department stores. The common walkway or "mall" is enclosed, climate-controlled and lighted, usually with an inward orientation of the stores facing the walkway. 
"Regularly" means the consistent and repeated doing of an act on an ongoing basis. 
"Semi-nude or semi-nudity" means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
"Semi-nude lounge" means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment that regularly offers live semi-nude conduct. No establishment shall avoid classification as a semi-nude lounge by offering nude conduct. 
"Sex paraphernalia store" means a commercial establishment: 
(1)  Where more than 100 sexual devices are regularly made available for sale or rental; or 
(2)  Where sexual devices are regularly made available for sale or rental and the establishment regularly holds itself out, in any medium, by using "adult," "adults-only," "XXX," "sex," "erotic," "novelties," or substantially similar language, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests. 
This definition shall not be construed to include any establishment located within an enclosed regional shopping mall or any pharmacy or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical products. 
"Sexual device" means any three-dimensional object designed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, buttocks, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices commonly known as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, cock rings, anal beads, butt plugs, nipple clamps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily designed for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
"Specified anatomical areas" means and includes: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region; buttock; and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
"Specified criminal activity" means any of the following specified crimes for which less than five years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
(1)  Rape, child molestation, sexual assault, sexual battery, aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual battery, or public indecency; 
(2)  Prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, or pandering; 
(3)  Obscenity, disseminating or displaying matter harmful to a minor, or use of child in sexual performance; 
(4)  Any offense related to any sexually-oriented business, including controlled substance offenses, tax violations, racketeering, crimes involving sex, crimes involving prostitution, or crimes involving obscenity; 
(5)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses; or 
(6)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Georgia, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
"Specified sexual activity" means any of the following: 
(1)  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(2)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in (1) above. 
"Transfer of ownership or control" of an adult establishment means any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
"Viewing room" means the room or booth where a patron of an adult establishment would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, digital video disc, or other video on an image-producing device. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-102. - License required. 
(a)  Adult establishment license. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult establishment in the city without a valid adult establishment license. 
(b)  Employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an "employee," as defined in this article, of an adult establishment in the city without a valid adult establishment employee license, except that a person who is a licensee under a valid adult establishment license shall not be required to also obtain an adult establishment employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person who operates an adult establishment to employ a person at the establishment who does not have a valid adult establishment employee license. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for an adult establishment license or an adult establishment employee license shall file in person at the office of the city clerk a completed application made on a form provided by the city clerk. An adult establishment may designate an individual with an influential interest in the business to file its application for an adult establishment license in person on behalf of the business. The application shall be signed as required by subsection (d) herein and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in this subsection (c), accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license, a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by a governmental agency, or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(4)  If the application is for an adult establishment license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the adult establishment. 
(5)  If the application is for an adult establishment license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(6)  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
(7)  A statement of whether any adult establishment in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to a court order of closure. 
(8)  An application for an adult establishment license shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor area occupied by the business and a statement of floor area visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room configuration requirements of this article shall submit a diagram indicating that the setup and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of the applicable regulations. See sections 22-111 and 22-115. The city clerk may waive the requirements of this subsection (c)(8) for a renewal application if the applicant adopts a legal description and a sketch or diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(9)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's lawful presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, a signed and sworn affidavit verifying the lawful presence of each individual that executes the application on behalf of the applicant. With regard to a renewal application, if an individual has previously complied with the requirements of this subsection (9), the city clerk may waive the requirements of this subsection for that individual. 
(10)  If the application is for an adult establishment license, a signed and sworn affidavit attesting that the establishment either uses the federal work authorization program in accordance with federal regulations or that the applicant employs fewer than 11 people or otherwise does not fall within the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6. 
The information provided pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city clerk within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  Signature. A person who seeks an adult establishment employee license under this section shall sign the application for a license. If a person who seeks an adult establishment license under this section is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who seeks an adult establishment license is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the adult establishment or in a legal entity that controls the adult establishment shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this article and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this article shall be maintained by the office of the city clerk on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by governing law or court order. Any information protected by the right to privacy as recognized by state or federal law shall be redacted prior to such disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-103. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Adult establishment license. Upon the filing of a completed application for an adult establishment license, the city clerk shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the completed application is from a pre-existing adult establishment that is lawfully operating in the city and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual adult establishment license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within 30 days of the filing of a completed adult establishment license application, the city clerk shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The city clerk shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  An applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  The adult establishment, as defined herein, is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this article. 
(5)  The location of the adult establishment does not comply with the location requirements of this article or of the Chamblee Code. This ground for denial of an adult establishment license, however, shall not prevent issuance or renewal of an adult establishment license to an establishment that was, in all respects, operating lawfully at the location for which the adult establishment license is sought, at the time of the adoption of this subsection. 
(6)  Any adult establishment in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure. 
(7)  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(b)  Employee license. Upon the filing of a completed application for an adult establishment employee license, the city clerk shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the applicant seeks licensure to work in a licensed adult establishment and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual adult establishment employee license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within 30 days of the filing of a completed adult establishment employee license application, the city clerk shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The city clerk shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  Any adult establishment in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for an adult establishment, the address of the adult establishment. The adult establishment license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult establishment so that it may be read at any time that the business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. An adult establishment employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-104. - Fees. 
The initial license and annual renewal fees for adult establishment licenses and adult establishment employee licenses shall be established by resolution and set forth in a fee schedule kept and maintained by the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-105. - Inspection. 
Adult establishments and adult establishment employees shall permit the city clerk, chief of police, or their designees or agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the adult establishment premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this article, during those times when the adult establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize only reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-106. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this article. When a renewal license is issued, it shall become effective the day after the previous license expires and shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from its effective date unless otherwise suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least 90 days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and when made less than 90 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the current license will not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-107. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend an adult establishment license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the adult establishment licensee has knowingly or recklessly violated this article or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this article. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend an adult establishment employee license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the employee licensee has knowingly or recklessly violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-108. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke an adult establishment license or an adult establishment employee license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly or recklessly violates this article or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this article and a suspension of the licensee's license has become effective within the previous 12-month period. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke an adult establishment license or an adult establishment employee license, as applicable, if: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for the adult establishment license or the adult establishment employee license; 
(2)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the adult establishment; 
(3)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the adult establishment; 
(4)  The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the adult establishment during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; 
(5)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity or specified criminal activity to occur in or on the premises of the adult establishment; 
(6)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the age of 21 years to consume alcohol on the premises of the adult establishment; 
(7)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a semi-nude condition or in a state of nudity on the premises of the adult establishment; or 
(8)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed three or more violations of this article within a 12-month period. 
(c)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. 
(d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this article, the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued an adult establishment license or adult establishment employee license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-109. - Hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal. 
(a)  When the city clerk issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the city clerk shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the city clerk for the respondent. The notice shall also set forth the following: The respondent shall have ten days after the delivery of the written notice to submit, at the office of the city clerk, a written request for a hearing. If the respondent does not request a hearing within said ten days, the city clerk's written notice shall become a final denial, suspension, or revocation, as the case may be, on the 30th day after it is issued. 
(b)  If the respondent does make a written request for a hearing within said ten days, then the city clerk shall, within ten days after the submission of the request, send a notice to the respondent indicating the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after the date that the hearing notice is issued. The city shall provide for the hearing to be transcribed. 
(c)  At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all relevant arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the city clerk's witnesses. The city clerk shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a final written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. 
(d)  If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall advise the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction, and the decision shall not become effective until the 30th day after it is rendered. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the city clerk to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the city clerk shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(e)  If any court action challenging a licensing decision is initiated, the city shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall apply to any adult establishment that is lawfully operating as an adult establishment, or any adult establishment employee that is lawfully employed as an adult establishment employee, on the date on which the completed business or employee application, as applicable, is filed with the city clerk: Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of any denial, suspension, or revocation of a temporary license or annual license, the city clerk shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the adult establishment or to continue employment as an adult establishment employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. While a provisional license is in effect, the provisional licensee shall comply with the regulations set forth in sections 22-105, 22-111, 22-112, and 22-115, and any violations thereof shall be subject to the provisions of section 22-113. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-110. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate an adult establishment under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the adult establishment license application. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-111. - Regulations pertaining to operation of adult arcade or adult motion picture theater. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult arcade or adult motion picture theater shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each application for an adult establishment license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(3)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot-candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no specified sexual activity occurs in or on the premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than 100 square feet is limited to one person. 
b.  That specified sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
c.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
d.  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
e.  That violations of these regulations are unlawful. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in subsections (a)(5)a. though d., above. 
(7)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from an operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator's station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the premises has two or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the operator's stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that no porous materials are used for any wall, floor, or seat in any booth or viewing room. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(8) to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(c)  No patron shall knowingly or recklessly enter or remain in a viewing room less than 100 square feet in area that is occupied by any other patron. 
(d)  No patron shall knowingly or recklessly be or remain within one foot of any other patron while in a viewing room that is 100 square feet or larger in area. 
(e)  No person shall knowingly or recklessly make any hole or opening between viewing rooms. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-112. - Loitering, exterior lighting and monitoring, and interior lighting requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to: (i) ensure that at least two conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on the premises are posted on the premises; (ii) designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on the premises by visually inspecting the premises at least once every 90 minutes or inspecting the premises by use of video cameras and monitors; and (iii) provide lighting to the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. Said lighting shall be of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle as measured at the floor level. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to ensure that the interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot-candles as measured at the floor level and the illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer is present in or on the premises. 
(c)  No adult establishment shall erect a fence, wall, or similar barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment from being visible from a public right-of-way. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-113. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  A person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by fines not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. For violations of this article that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. For violations of this article that are not continuous with respect to time, each violation is a separate offense. 
(b)  Any premises, building, dwelling, or other structure in which an adult establishment is repeatedly operated or maintained in violation of this article shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to civil abatement proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  The city's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this article to enjoin, prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings shall be brought in the name of the city, provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this article, or any of the laws in force in the city or to exempt anyone violating this code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-114. - Applicability of article to existing businesses. 
(a)  Licensing requirements. All pre-existing adult establishments lawfully operating in the city in compliance with all state and local laws prior to the effective date of this article, and all adult establishment employees working in the city prior to the effective date of this article, are hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue operation or employment for a period of 120 days following the effective date of this article. Within 90 days following the effective date of this article, all adult establishments and adult establishment employees must apply for a license under this article. 
(b)  Interior configuration requirements. Any pre-existing adult establishment that is required to, but does not, have interior configurations or stages that meet at least the minimum requirements of section 22-111 and subsection 22-115(b) shall have 90 days from the effective date of this article to conform its premises to said requirements. During said 90 days, any employee who appears within view of any patron in a semi-nude condition shall nevertheless remain, while semi-nude, at least six feet from all patrons. 
(c)  Other requirements. Except as provided for in subsections 22-114(a) and (b), adult establishments shall comply with this article on the date that it takes effect. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-115. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No patron, employee, or any other person shall knowingly or intentionally, in an adult establishment, appear in a state of nudity or engage in a specified sexual activity. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in an adult establishment, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, remains at least six feet from all patrons and on a stage at least 18 inches from the floor in a room of at least 600 square feet. 
(c)  No employee who appears semi-nude in an adult establishment shall knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of an adult establishment. No customer shall knowingly or intentionally touch such an employee or the clothing of such an employee on the premises of an adult establishment. 
(d)  After December 31, 2018, no person shall possess, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of an adult establishment. 
(e)  No person shall knowingly or recklessly allow a person under the age of 18 years to be or remain on the premises of an adult establishment. 
(f)  No operator of an adult establishment shall knowingly or recklessly allow a room in the adult establishment to be simultaneously occupied by any patron and any other employee who is semi-nude or who appears semi-nude on the premises of the adult establishment, unless an operator of the adult establishment is present in the same room. 
(g)  No operator or licensee of an adult establishment shall violate the regulations in this section or knowingly or recklessly allow an employee or any other person to violate the regulations in this section. 
(h)  A sign in a form to be prescribed by the city clerk, and summarizing the provisions of subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e), shall be posted near the entrance of the adult establishment in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. No person shall cover, obstruct, or obscure said sign. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-116. - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
This article does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this article, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the adult establishment licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this article, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-117. - Location of adult establishments. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated an adult establishment: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned NR-1, NR-2, NR-3, CR, or VR; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public library, or public park is located; or 
(3)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which an adult establishment or an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages is located. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest part of any structure occupied by the adult establishment to the closest point on a property line of a parcel identified in subsection (a) above. Where a use identified in subsection (a) is located in a multi-tenant development, the distance shall be measured to the closest part of the tenant space occupied by that use rather than the property line of the entire development, so as to maximize the number of locations available to adult establishments. 
(c)  The zoning and/or use of land in adjacent jurisdictions shall not disqualify any location within the City of Chamblee from being available to an adult establishment. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provision in the Chamblee Code of Ordinances to the contrary, an adult establishment in a location that satisfies the standards in this section 22-117 shall not be deemed noncompliant with this section by virtue of the subsequent establishment or expansion of a land use or zoning district specified in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-118. - Hours of operation. 
No adult establishment shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-119. - Severability. 
This article and each section and provision of said article hereunder, are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provision of said article, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this article be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the substantive aspects of this article. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-120. - Conflicting code provisions repealed. 
Any provision(s) in the Chamblee Code of Ordinances specifically in conflict with any provision in this article is hereby deemed inoperative and repealed. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-121. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 752 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Secs. 22-122—22-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SALESMEN[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 519, pt. 1, adopted Aug. 20, 2002, renumbered former art. VII, §§ 22-200—22-218, as app. A, art. VII, §§ 701—719. Former art. VII, §§ 22-200—22-218, pertained to extended-stay motels/hotels. 

Sec. 22-200. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Licensed solicitor means and includes any person who has obtained a valid permit as hereinafter provided, which permit is in the possession of the solicitor on his person while engaged in soliciting. 
Residence means and includes every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
Soliciting means and includes any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or publication; or 
(3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication. 
(Ord. No. 695 , pt. I, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 732 , pt. I, 2-21-17) 
Sec. 22-201. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of soliciting, calling on residences door-to-door without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the provisions contained in this chapter. 
(b)  The requirement of subsection (a) of this section is meant to apply to door-to-door solicitations for commercial transactions for profit only. 
(1)  It is not meant to regulate solicitation for charitable, political, or other nonprofit purposes, provided that all sales proceeds are the property of and used by the nonprofit organization. 
(2)  It does not apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state or federal governments, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. 
(c)  Each person shall at all times while soliciting in the city, wear and display upon his person the permit so issued and the same shall be exhibited by such solicitor whenever he is requested to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited. 
(d)  Each permit issued shall contain the name of the solicitor, the name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association by whom the solicitor is employed or represents and photograph of the solicitor. 
(e)  The permit shall state the expiration date thereof. In no event shall a permit be valid for more than three months. Upon expiration of the maximum three-month period, the permit holder may receive a renewal for an additional three-month period without any additional fees and without having to comply with section 22-202, so long as no more than one complaint has been submitted to the city concerning the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 695 , pt. I, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 732 , pt. I, 2-21-17) 
Sec. 22-202. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Application for a permit shall be made upon a form provided by the city. The city shall have applications available on request. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to wit: 
(1)  Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also business address if other than present address; 
(2)  Address of place of residence during the past three years if other than present address; 
(3)  Age of applicant; 
(4)  Physical description of the applicant; 
(5)  Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association by whom the applicant is employed or represents; and the length of time of such employment or representation; 
(6)  Name and address of employer during the past three years if other than the present employer; 
(7)  Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage; 
(8)  Period of time for which the certificate is applied; 
(9)  Proposed route, including streets to be included on each day, which applicant intends to follow; 
(10)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for permit under this chapter, if any; 
(11)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, a crime of moral turpitude, or any other violation of any state or federal law; 
(12)  Names of magazines, books, or journals to be sold; 
(13)  Names of the three most recent communities where the applicant has solicited house to house; 
(14)  Description and license plate number of vehicles intended to be operated by applicant; 
(15)  Signature of applicant; and 
(16)  Social Security number of applicant. 
(b)  All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
(c)  The application form shall also bear the following statement: 
"Georgia Code § 16-10-71 provides that a person who makes a lawful oath or affirmation or who executes a document knowing that it purports to be an acknowledgment of a lawful oath or affirmation commits the offense of false swearing when, in any matter or thing other than a judicial proceeding, he knowingly and willfully makes a false statement." 
(d)  Access to criminal history records information "CHRI". This article Door-to-Door Salesmen, Code section 22-202 "Permit required", requires a state and national criminal back check of persons engaged in work as door-to-door salesmen as defined in this Code. This section is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35 to regulate the issuance of licenses and work permits of the employment of those engaged in door-to-door sales. An applicant, employee, or volunteer seeking to engage in door-to-door sales shall submit, if required, two sets of his/her fingerprints taken by the Chamblee Police Department as set out in subsection (e) below. 
(e)  The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting and background investigation by the police department in connection with the application for the permit. The police department shall make a complete search relative to any police record of the applicant. A complete set of fingerprints of each applicant shall be required. Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the Chamblee Police Department will transmit both sets of fingerprints and appropriate fees (unless a satisfactory billing arrangement has been entered into between the Chamblee Police Department and GCIC and/or FBI) to GCIC. GCIC will compare the subject's fingerprints against its criminal file and submit the fingerprints to the FBI for comparison with nationwide records, unless submission to the FBI is automatic pursuant to the use of live-scan. The results of the FBI check will be returned to the Chamblee Police Department if submissions are manually sent to GCIC, or electronically from both the GBI and FBI where submissions are made electronically to GCIC. 
(f)  The city manager shall cause to be kept in his office or designee's office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all permits issued under the provisions of this chapter, and of the denial of applications. Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every permit issued shall be identified with the number of the application upon which it was issued. 
(g)  No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within five years of the date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; nor to any person whose permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided. 
(h)  In rendering a fitness determination, the police department will decide whether the record applicant has been convicted of, or is under pending indictment for enumerated disqualifiers, as set forth in subsection (g) of this section. 
(i)  A record applicant may request and receive a copy of his/her criminal history record information from the police department. Should the record applicant seek to amend or correct his/her record, he/she must contact GCIC as to state records and/or the FBI for records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. 
(j)  The fee for a permit shall be valid for a six-month period. 
(Ord. No. 695, pt. I, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 702 , pt. I, 3-15-16; Ord. No. 732 , pt. I, 2-21-17) 
Sec. 22-203. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  Any permit issued hereunder shall be revoked by the city manager if the holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  The permit may be revoked by the city manager after a hearing in front of the city manager or designee if the city receives at least two complaints against the permit holder alleging any violations of this article. The hearing shall be noticed in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the permit holder and shall not be less than ten days following the receipt of the notice by the permit holder. The notice shall state in specificity the time and place of the hearing and the reason(s) for the intended revocation. At the hearing, the city shall present evidence of the permit holder's violation of this article either through documents or affirmative testimony of the complaining parties and the permit holder shall be given an opportunity to rebut same and present his own evidence that no such violations have occurred. The burden of proof shall be on the city by preponderance of the evidence. If the city meets its burden, the city manager shall revoke the permit no later than five days following the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given to the holder of the permit in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his residence address set forth in the application. 
(d)  Immediately upon the giving of such notice the permit shall become null and void and must be turned in to the city manager's office. 
(e)  A permit holder whose permit has been revoked in accordance with subsection (b) shall have the right to appeal said revocation to the city council or designated hearing officer by giving notice to the city manager no later than ten days following receipt of the revocation notice by the permit holder. The appeal hearing shall be scheduled no later than 30 days following the receipt of said appeal request and notice of same given to permit holder by mail no later than ten days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the permit holder shall have the right to present evidence as to why the decision of the city manager or designee should be overturned and shall have the burden to show same by the preponderance of the evidence. The city council or designated hearing officer shall make a decision to sustain or reverse the city manager's decision within five days of the hearing and shall notify the permit holder of same in writing. 
(f)  Any permit holder aggrieved by the final decision of the city council or designated hearing officer may appeal same by petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County in accordance with the law. 
(Ord. No. 695 , pt. I, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 732 , pt. I, 2-21-17) 
Sec. 22-204. - Routes. 
To the extent practical, each solicitor shall identify the streets and routes which he will follow on each day he is engaged in the business of soliciting. If changes in routes are made, then such changes must be immediately reported to the city manager's office. 
(Ord. No. 695 , pt. I, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 732 , pt. I, 2-21-17) 
Sec. 22-205. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined if the occupant of said residence has made it clear, by written sign or otherwise, that solicitors are not invited. 
(b)  Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit at a place of residence at any entrance or part of the building other than the main entrance to the residence. 
(d)  Times allowed. 
(1)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful, whether licensed under this chapter or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, or on a state or national holiday. 
(2)  Solicitations for political purposes shall not occur prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to lend, rent or sell a solicitor's permit card to another. 
(Ord. No. 695 , pt. I, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 732 , pt. I, 2-21-17) 
Sec. 22-206. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable, upon conviction, as provided by section 1-6 of this Code; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 695 , pt. I, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 732 , pt. I, 2-21-17) 
Secs. 22-207—22-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MASSAGE AND SPA ESTABLISHMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, amended art. VIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VIII, §§ 22-300—22-312 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 481, § I, adopted Dec. 21, 1999; Ord. No. 723 , pts. I—XIII, adopted Sept. 20, 2016; Ord. No. 733 , pts. I—XIII, adopted Feb. 21, 2017; and Ord. No. 740 , pts. I, II, adopted Aug. 15, 2017. 

Sec. 22-300. - Purpose and legislative findings. 
The Georgia General Assembly has declared that the practice of massage therapy is an activity affecting the public interest and involving the health, safety and welfare of the public and that the practice of massage therapy by a person who is not licensed under the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 43-24A-1 et seq.) is a public nuisance, harmful to the public health, safety and welfare. The city council agrees with those findings. Furthermore, the city council finds that, while there are many excellent and professionally-run massage establishments, the business of some massage/spa establishments is sexual conduct or the intimation of sexual conduct, rather than lawful massage therapy. Such establishments offer massage or spa services as a subterfuge for prostitution, masturbation for hire, and other paid sexual contact, which are harmful to the public health, safety and welfare. There is difficulty and expense in conclusively distinguishing between such establishments and legitimate massage establishments, but one rational distinction is whether the establishment has a relationship with a corporate or franchising hierarchy, which would tend to safeguard against unlawful sexual activities on the massage establishment premises. It is a purpose of this article to impose licensing requirements to help prevent illegal massage, prostitution, and related sex crimes, yet without hindering legitimate massage establishments operating under a business structure with external oversight that serves that purpose. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22 (allowing local regulation of massage businesses and of persons not licensed by the state), it is the purpose of this article to regulate the operation of massage establishments and spa establishments, and to regulate employees of such establishments who are not licensed as massage therapists by the state, as an exercise of the city's police power in order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-301. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity applying for a license to operate a massage establishment or spa establishment, as defined herein, or a person applying for a work permit, as provided for herein. 
City clerk means the City of Chamblee City Clerk or his or her designee. 
Employee means any person who performs any service on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment, on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, apprentice, trainee, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person who is licensed or provisionally permitted pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 43-24A-1 et seq.), or a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Hearing officer means an attorney, not an employee of the city, who is licensed to practice law in Georgia, and retained to serve as an independent tribunal to conduct hearings under this article. 
Initial application means any application for a massage/spa establishment license that is filed for an establishment that is not licensed under this article at the time of filing. 
Massage means the manipulation and/or treatment of soft tissues of the body, including but not limited to, the use of effleurage, petrissage, pressure, friction, tapotement, kneading, vibration, range of motion stretches, a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body, and any other soft tissue manipulation whether manual or by use of massage apparatus, and may include the use of water, oils, lotions, creams, lubricants, salt glows or scrubs, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy, hot packs, cold packs or other topical preparations. This term shall not include diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, or any service or procedure when performed by a person who is licensed by the state to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry or medicine. This term shall not include touching of the scalp or ears while providing a haircut, or touching of the hands or feet while providing a manicure or pedicure, by a person licensed by the Georgia State Board of Cosmetology. 
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power for the purpose of administering a massage. 
Massage establishment means a commercial establishment where any person offers or provides massage. This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the State of Georgia. 
Notice of intent to relinquish license means the statement of a massage/spa establishment licensee, made on a form provided by the city, that the licensee authorizes the city to terminate the license upon the city's decision to issue a massage/spa establishment license to the applicant specified in the notice. A notice of intent to relinquish license shall be considered complete when it contains the information requested on the notice form provided by the city, as well as the notarized signature of the person primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed establishment and, if the licensee is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, the notarized signature of an officer, member, partner, or shareholder, as applicable. A notice of intent to relinquish license is not valid if the massage/spa establishment licensee is the subject of a pending written notice of intent to revoke the massage/spa establishment license or if the license has been revoked. 
Premises means the real property, or portion thereof, upon which the massage establishment or spa establishment is located including, but not limited to, the establishment and the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages under the ownership or control of the establishment. 
Renewal application means any application for a massage/spa establishment license that is filed for an establishment that is licensed under this article at the time of filing. 
Sexual device means any means any three-dimensional object designed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, buttocks, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices commonly known as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, cock rings, anal beads, butt plugs, nipple clamps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. 
Spa establishment means a commercial establishment that offers or engages in personal services that call for the patron to disrobe, such as body wraps, hydro mineral wraps, body polish, body wash, baths and hydro tub soak. This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the State of Georgia. 
Specified criminal activity means any of the following specified crimes: 
(1)  Illegal gambling; 
(2)  Prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, sodomy, aggravated sodomy, rape, child molestation, sexual assault, sexual battery, aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual battery, or public indecency; 
(3)  Obscenity, disseminating or displaying matter harmful to a minor, or use of child in sexual performance; 
(4)  Any offense related to any massage establishment or spa establishment, including controlled substance offenses, tax violations, racketeering, crimes involving sex, crimes involving prostitution, or crimes involving obscenity; 
(5)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses; or 
(6)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Georgia, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
(Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-302. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. For violations of this article that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. For violations of this article that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation occurs is a separate offense. Nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder shall be held to exclude such other civil, criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this Code or any of the laws in force in the city or to exempt anyone violating this article or any part of said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
(Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-303. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses and work permits issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to operate or work at the establishment specified in the license or work permit during the term of the license or work permit only, and shall be subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city and state law. 
(b)  This article shall not be enforced against: 
(1)  Any natural person who is a physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, massage therapist, or similar professional licensed and regulated by or through the state while engaged in the practice of the profession for which the person is licensed by the state; 
(2)  Any hospital or other professional health care establishment, including a physician's, physical therapist's, or chiropractor's office, separately licensed as such by the state; or 
(3)  Any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local legislation by the laws of the state. 
(c)  Licenses and work permits issued before the adoption of this article shall continue in effect for their original terms, subject to the regulations herein, including the provisions in section 22-309, as amended. 
(d)  All massage establishments, spa establishments, and their employees shall comply with this article upon its adoption, including those that hold a license or a work permit issued before the adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-304. - Massage/spa establishment license required; application. 
(a)  Massage/spa establishment license required . It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment in the city without a valid massage/spa establishment license. This license requirement is in addition to obtaining an occupation tax certificate pursuant to chapter 22, article I. No more than 22 massage/spa establishment licenses may be in effect at a time. When there are 22 establishments that hold a massage/spa establishment license or have a renewal application pending before the city under this article, the office of the city clerk shall not accept any initial application for a massage/spa establishment license that is not paired with a completed notice of intent to relinquish license. The city clerk shall return any initial application that is mistakenly accepted by that office. The city shall not issue a massage/spa establishment license that would result in more than 22 such establishments being licensed to operate simultaneously. 
(b)  Background check; access to criminal history records information "CHRI" . This section 22-304 "Massage/spa establishment license required; application" requires a state and national criminal background check of persons engaged in operating a massage establishment or a spa establishment as defined in this Code. This section is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35 to regulate the issuance of licenses to operate massage and spa establishments. 
(1)  Each individual required to be listed in an establishment's license application in response to subsection 22-304(c)(7) shall, before the filing of the application, submit two sets of his/her fingerprints taken by the Chamblee Police Department. Such persons shall submit their fingerprints and pay the required fee to the police department not more than 60 days before the filing of the license application. 
(2)  The police department will consider whether the individual has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article and as set forth in subsection 22-304(e)(8) below. The police department shall advise the city clerk of its fitness determination for each individual within 15 days of the filing of a completed application form. 
(3)  An individual may request and receive a copy of his/her criminal history record information from the police department. Should the individual seek to amend or correct his/her record, he/she must contact GCIC as to state records and/or the FBI for records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for a massage/spa establishment license shall file in person at the office of the city clerk a completed application made on a form provided by the city. The application must be executed by the person primarily responsible for the operation of the establishment. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, the application must also be executed by an officer, member, partner or shareholder, as applicable. Signatures on the application shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains the information and/or items required in this subsection (c), accompanied by the annual regulatory fee: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
(2)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's lawful presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, a signed and sworn affidavit verifying the lawful presence of each person that executes the application on behalf of the applicant. With regard to a renewal application, if an individual has previously complied with the requirements of this subsection (c)(2), the city clerk may waive the requirements of this subsection for that individual. 
(3)  A signed and sworn affidavit attesting that the applicant either uses the federal work authorization program in accordance with federal regulations or that the applicant employs fewer than 11 people or otherwise does not fall within the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6. 
(4)  Current business address, residential mailing address, and e-mail address for the applicant. 
(5)  The business name, location, legal description, mailing address, and phone number of the establishment. If the location is under construction, a copy of a filed building permit application that reflects the intent to establish a massage or spa establishment at the location. 
(6)  If the applicant is a sole proprietor, written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by an agency of a state or of the federal government. 
(7)  If the applicant is not a sole proprietor, then the partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity shall submit a complete list of the legal entity's: 
a.  Officers; 
b.  Directors; 
c.  Partners, members, or shareholders (natural persons) holding a ten percent or greater ownership interest in such legal entity, or if there is no shareholder (natural person) with at least a ten percent interest, the ten shareholders with the greatest ownership interest; 
d.  Employee or agent primarily responsible for operation of the massage or spa establishment; and 
e.  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by an agency of a state or of the federal government for each person listed in subsections (c)(7)a. through d., above. 
(8)  A statement of whether the applicant or any person listed in response to subsection (c)(7) has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. 
(9)  A statement of whether the applicant or any person listed in response to subsection (c)(7), within the previous ten years: 
a.  Has been arrested for, convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each such arrest and/or conviction. 
b.  Has been found by a tribunal to have violated a state law or regulation governing the practice of massage therapy, and if so, the date and place of each violation, the date of the finding, and the name of the tribunal that made the finding. 
(10)  A statement that each person listed in response to subsection (c)(7) has submitted his/her fingerprints to the Chamblee Police Department not more than 60 days before the filing of the license application. 
(11)  A statement of whether the applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (c)(7) has in the previous 12 months resided with someone who has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. 
(12)  If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity required to be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the Secretary of State to do business in the state, such corporation must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the Secretary of State to do business in the state and must submit copies of the certificate of organization or incorporation, as applicable, and articles of organization or incorporation, as applicable. 
(13)  A sworn and notarized statement of a registered agent who is a resident of DeKalb County, Georgia and at least 18 years of age, required to be designated by a licensee to receive any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the applicant. 
(14)  A statement whether the applicant is the owner of the premises wherein the establishment will be operated or the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the license. If the applicant is a lease holder, a copy of the lease shall be submitted with the license application. 
(15)  A copy of a $15,000.00 surety bond, issued by a company approved to issue surety bonds by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner, payable to the city upon the entry of an injunction by the DeKalb County Superior Court against operation of the applicant's massage establishment or spa establishment due to unlawful operation of same while the applicant held a massage/spa establishment license under this article. 
(16)  For every person on the premises who offers, or will offer, services for which a license under O.C.G.A. §§ 43-24A-1 et seq. is required, a copy of the state license for each such person as well as a color photograph, no smaller than two inches by two inches, showing the face, neck, and shoulders of each such person; or, if there are none, a statement certifying that no person on the premises offers, or will offer, services for which said person is required to be licensed by the State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 43-24A-1 et seq. 
The information provided pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the office of the city clerk within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this article shall be maintained on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed to the public only as required under governing law. Any information protected by the right to privacy as recognized by state or federal law shall be redacted prior to any required disclosure under the Georgia Open Records Act or other applicable law. 
(e)  Issuance of license . Within 60 days of the filing of a completed massage/spa establishment license application, the city clerk shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny the license to the applicant. The city clerk shall issue the license unless: 
(1)  The applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (c)(7) is less than 21 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The applicant is neither the owner of the premises wherein the establishment will be operated, nor the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the license. 
(4)  The annual regulatory fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(5)  The application is an initial application for massage/spa establishment license and the establishment is not in compliance with the location requirements of this article. 
(6)  The city has revoked a massage/spa establishment license at the premises within the previous 12 months. 
(7)  The applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (c)(7) has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be operating unlawfully or to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. 
(8)  The applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (c)(7) has within the previous ten years been convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article, or has been found by a tribunal to have violated a state law or regulation governing the practice of massage therapy. 
(9)  The establishment does not comply with all applicable building, health, and life safety codes, or the built space to be occupied does not have a valid, current certificate of occupancy, or if the space to be occupied is under construction, there is no filed building permit application that reflects the intent to establish a massage or spa establishment at the location. 
(10)  The applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (c)(7) has in the previous 12 months resided with someone who has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. 
(11)  The license, if issued, would result in more massage/spa establishment licenses being in effect than authorized under subsection (a). 
(12)  The applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (c)(7) has, in the previous year, engaged in massage therapy as defined by O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-3 without the license or provisional permit required for such activity under state law. 
(13)  The applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity that is required to be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the Secretary of State to do business in the state, but is not so chartered or authorized. 
(14)  The application is an initial application for massage/spa establishment license that is paired with a notice of intent to relinquish license, and the notice of intent to relinquish license is not valid. 
(f)  A license, if issued, shall be issued in the name of the applicant. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the establishment so that it may be read at any time that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. 
(g)  Massage establishments and spa establishments shall post each employee's work permit issued by the city in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the establishment so that it may be read at any time that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-305. - Regulatory fee; expiration. 
(a)  There shall be an annual regulatory fee, consisting of a nonrefundable investigative fee and a license fee, for each massage and spa establishment licensed within the city. The investigative and license fees shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. The full regulatory fee shall be paid with the license application and shall not be prorated under any circumstances. If the applicant withdraws the application or the license is denied, the applicant shall be refunded the full license fee paid. No refund shall be allowed once the license has been issued. 
(b)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to obtain a license for the ensuing year shall file a completed renewal application, with the requisite fee provided for in this article, with the office of the city clerk on or before November 1 of each year. Any licensee that files a renewal application on November 2 through December 31 shall pay a late charge of 20 percent in addition to the annual fee. 
(c)  For an initial license application filed prior to July 1 of the license year, the full regulatory fee must be paid. One-half of a full regulatory fee shall be paid for an initial license application filed after July 1 of the license year. 
(d)  No license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-306. - Employee work permits required; application. 
(a)  Massage/spa establishment work permit required . It shall be unlawful for any person to be an "employee," as defined in this article, of a massage establishment or a spa establishment in the city without a valid massage/spa establishment work permit, except that a person who holds a valid massage/spa establishment license or who is listed in response to subsections 22-304(c)(7)a—c., in relation to a valid massage/spa establishment license shall not be required to also obtain a massage/spa establishment work permit to be an "employee" at that particular licensed establishment. A person who works at more than one establishment shall obtain a separate work permit for each establishment. No applicant for a massage/spa establishment work permit shall work at a massage establishment or a spa establishment in the city until the applicant receives, and the establishment posts, the employee's work permit as required by this article. A receipt issued by the city is not a valid massage/spa establishment work permit and does not authorize the person to work in a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(b)  Background check; access to criminal history records information "CHRI" . This section 22-306 "Employee work permits required; application" requires a state and national criminal background check of persons who work as employees, as defined in this article, of a massage establishment or a spa establishment. This section is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35 to regulate the issuance of work permits for massage/spa establishment employees. 
(1)  An applicant for a massage/spa establishment work permit shall, before the filing of the application, submit two sets of his/her fingerprints taken by the Chamblee Police Department. Such persons shall submit their fingerprints and pay the required fee to the police department not more than 60 days before the filing of the license application. 
(2)  The police department will consider whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article and as set forth in subsection 22-306(e)(6) below. The police department shall advise the city clerk of its fitness determination for each applicant within 15 days of the filing of a completed application form. 
(3)  An applicant may request and receive a copy of his/her criminal history record information from the police department. Should the record applicant seek to amend or correct his/her record, he/she must contact GCIC as to state records and/or the FBI for records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for a massage/spa establishment work permit shall file in person at the office of the city clerk a completed application made on a form provided by the city. The application must be signed and notarized. Applicants shall make themselves available for photographing. An application shall be considered complete when it contains the information and/or items required in this subsection (c), accompanied by the work permit fee: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
(2)  Current business or other mailing address, and an e-mail address, for the applicant. 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by an agency of a state or of the federal government. 
(4)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's lawful presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. 
(5)  The name and address of the massage establishment or spa establishment for which the applicant seeks to obtain the work permit. 
(6)  A statement of whether the applicant has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. 
(7)  A statement of whether the applicant has within the previous ten years: 
a.  Has been arrested for, convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each such arrest and/or conviction; or 
b.  Has been found by a tribunal to have violated a state law or regulation governing the practice of massage therapy, and if so, the date and place of each violation, the date of the finding, and the name of the tribunal that made the finding. 
(8)  A statement that the applicant has submitted his/her fingerprints to the Chamblee Police Department not more than 60 days before the filing of the work permit application. 
The information provided pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city clerk within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a work permit under this article shall be maintained on a confidential basis, and such information may disclosed to the public only as required under governing law. Any information protected by the right to privacy as recognized by state or federal law shall be redacted prior to any required disclosure under the Georgia Open Records Act or other applicable law. 
(e)  Issuance of work permit . Within 30 days of the filing of a completed massage/spa establishment work permit application, the city clerk shall either issue a work permit to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny the work permit to the applicant. The city clerk shall issue the work permit unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a work permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The work permit fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  The establishment for which the applicant seeks a work permit does not have a valid massage/spa establishment license from the city. 
(5)  The applicant has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. 
(6)  The applicant, within the previous ten years, has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article, or has been found by a tribunal to have violated a state law or regulation governing the practice of massage therapy. 
(7)  The applicant has, within the previous year, engaged in massage therapy as defined by O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-3 without the license or provisional permit required for such activity under state law. 
(f)  The work permit, if issued, will be valid for a period of one year from the date it is issued. Replacement and additional work permit(s) shall be issued upon payment of one-half of the fee charged for a work permit and will expire the same date as the then-current work permit. A massage establishment or spa establishment employee shall provide the employee's work permit to the establishment for which it was issued to be posted on the premises pursuant to this article. 
(g)  The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke an employee's work permit, following notice and hearing pursuant to this article, and demand its return if the employee has violated the provisions of this article, any state law or applicable local ordinance. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose work permit has been revoked to refuse to return the work permit to the city clerk or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the work permit. 
(i)  The work permit fee for a massage/spa establishment work permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the council. 
(Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-307. - General operating provisions. 
(a)  Massage establishments and spa establishments shall keep on file, on the premises of the establishment, a list of all persons who perform any service on the premises of the establishment, their home addresses and home or mobile telephone numbers, their duties and services performed for the massage or spa establishment, whether such person has a massage/spa establishment work permit issued by the city, and whether such person has a license or provisional permit issued by the state pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act. The holder of a massage/spa establishment license must also keep on file, on the premises of the establishment, a copy of the establishment's two most-recent license applications. 
(b)  Massage establishments and spa establishments shall maintain correct and accurate records of the following for each instance that a service is provided: 
(1)  The type of service provided, 
(2)  The date and time of service, 
(3)  The amount paid for the service, and 
(4)  The name of the person at the establishment who provided the service. 
This information shall be recorded on an form approved by the city clerk and shall be subject to inspection by the city clerk, the chief of police, or their designees during those times when the establishment is occupied by any of its staff or is open to the public. 
(c)  No massage establishment or spa establishment shall allow any person required to have any state mandated licenses, or a massage/spa establishment work permit pursuant to this article, to perform any service on the premises until such person has procured such license or work permit. Licensees and all managers and/or supervisors of any massage or spa establishment are required by this article to inspect and verify that each person who performs services on the premises who is required to have a valid state license or city work permit, has the required license or work permit on the establishment premises at all times, and failure to do so shall be a violation of this article. No person on the premises engaging in massage for which a state license is required shall refuse to provide a copy of the person's state massage therapy license upon request by any customer or city official. 
(d)  Each massage establishment and spa establishment shall have an owner, manager or supervisor on the premises at all hours that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. If during an inspection there is no owner, manager or supervisor on the premises, the establishment must cease operations and close until an owner, manager or supervisor is on the premises. 
(e)  Records required to be maintained under this article shall be kept for a minimum of three years. Records shall be made available to the city clerk, during business hours, at the establishment's business location in the city. 
(f)  All employees and other persons on the premises, with the exception of customers receiving a massage from a state licensed massage therapist, shall be completely clothed. For the purposes of this article, the term "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and neck, and means having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or shorts, and said pants or shorts must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this article shall be entirely opaque. 
(g)  No customer receiving a massage from a state licensed massage therapist shall expose his or her genitals, pubic area, anus, or the areola or nipple of the female breast to another person on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment. The prohibition against a customer exposing the areola or nipple of the female breast while receiving a massage from a state licensed massage therapist shall not apply when the massage therapist is certified to provide oncology massage or manual lymphatic drainage massage. 
(h)  No massage establishment or spa establishment shall be or remain open for business between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. No patron shall be or remain inside a massage establishment or spa establishment between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. No person shall be or remain inside a massage establishment or spa establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. No massage establishment or spa establishment shall hold itself out as open at a time that the establishment is prohibited, under this subsection, from being open for business. 
(i)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment. Signs shall comply with the sign requirements of this Code. 
(j)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the city's building code, and additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts (or equivalent illumination) shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth. 
(k)  Sofas, futons, beds, and mattresses shall not be permitted in any massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(l)  No massage establishment or spa establishment shall knowingly or recklessly allow any minor (i.e., a person under the age of 18) to be or remain inside the massage establishment or spa establishment unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian, or a person who is at least 21 years of age and has been entrusted with the minor by the minor's parent or legal guardian. 
(m)  No person shall knowingly or recklessly touch, manipulate, fondle, or handle in any manner the sexual organs, genital area, or anus of any other person on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(n)  It shall be unlawful to establish and operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment in the city, unless the massage or spa establishment is at least 300 feet from any parcel that holds the NR-1, NR-2, or NR-3 zoning classification and at least 300 feet from any parcel occupied by a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, or public park. Measurements for this subsection shall be made in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest point on a boundary line of the massage establishment or spa establishment parcel to the closest point on a boundary line of any parcel that holds the NR-1, NR-2, or NR-3 zoning classification or to the closest point on a boundary line of any parcel containing a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, or public park. 
(o)  Massage establishments and spa establishments shall post and maintain a copy of the human trafficking notice available on the Georgia Bureau of Investigation internet website (as per O.C.G.A. § 16-5-47) in each public restroom for the establishment and in another conspicuous location in clear view of the public and employees where similar notices are customarily posted. 
(p)  It shall be unlawful to operate a massage establishment or spa establishment with storefront windows that have material and glazing applied or affixed that reduces light transmission through the windows to less than 32 percent, plus or minus three percent, or increase light reflectance to more than 20 percent. 
(q)  Massage establishments, spa establishments, and their employees shall ensure that storefront windows are not blocked by curtains, blinds, or similar material during those times when the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. 
(r)  It shall be unlawful to store, serve, sell, consume, or allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages within a massage establishment or a spa establishment. 
(s)  It shall be unlawful to store, keep, or use a sexual device, as defined in this article, or a condom within a massage establishment or a spa establishment. 
(Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-308. - Inspection. 
Massage establishments, spa establishments, and their employees shall permit the city clerk, chief of police, or their designees or agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the premises of the establishment for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the regulations of state law and the Chamblee Code of Ordinances applicable to the establishment. Such establishments and employees shall permit such inspections on weekdays between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. as well as during those times when the establishment is occupied by any of its staff or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize only reasonable inspections of the premises pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-309. - Revocation of license or work permit. 
(a)  Revocation for specific violations. The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a massage/spa establishment license or a massage/spa establishment work permit, as applicable, if: 
(1)  The licensee or work permit holder has failed to meet or maintain the qualifications for holding a license or work permit; 
(2)  The licensee or work permit holder has recklessly given false information in the application for the license or the employee work permit or has failed to supplement the application information as required by subsection 22-304(c) or subsection 22-306(c) after a change of circumstances that rendered the information originally submitted false or incomplete; 
(3)  The licensee or work permit holder has failed to maintain correct and accurate records as required by this article; 
(4)  The licensee or work permit holder has engaged in or recklessly allowed possession, use, consumption, or sale of controlled substances or alcoholic beverages on the premises of the establishment; 
(5)  The licensee or work permit holder has engaged in or recklessly allowed sodomy, aggravated sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or disorderly conduct to occur in or on the premises of the establishment; 
(6)  The licensee or work permit holder has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the age of 21 years to consume alcohol on the premises of the establishment; 
(7)  The licensee or work permit holder has violated subsection 22-307(c); 
(8)  The licensee or work permit holder has knowingly or recklessly allowed any minor (i.e., a person under the age of 18) to be or remain inside the massage establishment or spa establishment unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian, or a person who is at least 21 years of age and has been entrusted with the minor by the minor's parent or legal guardian; 
(9)  The licensee or work permit holder has stored, kept, or used a sexual device or a condom within a massage establishment or a spa establishment, or the licensee or work permit holder has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person to store, keep, or use a sexual device or a condom within the establishment; or 
(10)  The licensee or work permit holder has recklessly allowed three or more violations of this article within a 12-month period. 
(b)  When a notice of intent to revoke a license or employee work permit has been issued, the licensee, or the work permit holder, as the case may be, shall not apply for or be issued any new license or permit under Chamblee City Code chapter 6 or chapter 22, article I, until such notice has been withdrawn or, if revocation has become effective, until two years after the effective date of revocation. 
(c)  When any person listed on a massage/spa establishment license application, any employee of the establishment, or any person who performs massage at the establishment, is arrested for unlawful sexual conduct of any kind alleged to have occurred at the massage establishment or spa establishment, no person listed on the establishment's license application and no employee of the establishment may apply for or be issued any new license or permit for that location under Chamblee City Code chapter 6 or chapter 22, articles I through IX, until the arrestee is cleared or until 90 days following the arrest have passed, whichever occurs sooner. 
(Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-310. - Hearing; license denial, revocation; appeal. 
(a)  When the city clerk issues a written notice of intent to deny or revoke a license or employee work permit, the city clerk shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or licensee/work permit holder (respondent) by personal delivery, by posting at the public entrance of the recipient's business location, by transmitting to the recipient's most-recent email address on file with the city clerk, by depositing in the United States mail with adequate postage addressed to the recipient's most-recent mailing address on file with the city clerk, or by providing the written notice to the recipient's registered agent by any of the foregoing means. The notice shall also set forth the following: The respondent shall have ten days after the delivery of the written notice to submit, at the office of the city clerk, a written request for a hearing. If the respondent does not request a hearing within said ten days, the city clerk's written notice shall become a final denial or revocation, as the case may be, on the 11th day after it is issued. 
(b)  If the respondent does make a written request for a hearing within said ten days, then the city clerk shall, within ten days after the submission of the request, send a notice to the respondent indicating the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted not less than ten days nor more than 60 days after the date that the hearing notice is issued. The city shall provide for the hearing to be transcribed. 
(c)  At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all relevant arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the city clerk's witnesses. The respondent shall bear the burden of proving entitlement to the license or work permit. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer may receive, consider, and adopt proposed written decisions tendered by the city clerk and/or the respondent within five business days after the hearing. The hearing officer shall issue a final written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within 15 business days after the hearing. 
(d)  If the decision is to deny or revoke the license or work permit, the decision shall advise the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction, and the decision shall not become effective until the 30th day after it is rendered. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial or revocation of the license or work permit, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the city clerk to immediately withdraw the intent to deny or revoke the license or work permit and to notify the respondent in writing by first class priority mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed or permitted, the city clerk shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license or work permit to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-311. - Remedies. 
(a)  Any premises, building, dwelling, or other structure in which a massage establishment or spa establishment is operated or maintained in violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, harmful to the public health, safety and welfare. The city's legal counsel may bring an action in the Superior Court of DeKalb County to restrain, prohibit, and/or enjoin the use of such premises as a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(b)  The operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment by a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity in violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. The city's legal counsel may bring an action in the Superior Court of DeKalb County to restrain, prohibit, and/or enjoin such operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(c)  The operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment by a person in violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, harmful to the public health, safety and welfare. The city's legal counsel may bring an action in the Superior Court of DeKalb County to restrain, prohibit, and/or enjoin such operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(d)  It shall not be necessary, in order to obtain an injunction under this section, to allege or prove that there is no adequate remedy at law or to allege or prove any special injury. 
(e)  If the court declares a massage establishment or spa establishment to be a nuisance, or if the court issues an injunction against a massage establishment or spa establishment pursuant to this article, the city shall be entitled, on motion, to recover its reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred in bringing the action. 
(Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 22-312. - Severability. 
This article and each section and provision of said article hereunder, are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provision of said article, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held is invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this article be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the substantive aspects of this article. 
(Ord. No. 753 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Secs. 22-313—22-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS 

Sec. 22-400. - Purpose; applicability of state law. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate and establish qualifications for dealers of precious metals, gems and goods made from precious metals and gems, who engage in business in the City of Chamblee. It is a further purpose of this article to enhance and supplement state law. Any permit fee required by the terms of this article shall be collected in addition to any license or registration fee as may be imposed on dealers by any state law. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-401. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer means any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufactures or manufacturers' representatives or other dealers in precious metals or gems or person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers or manufacturers' representatives or other dealers in precious metals or gems, when the purchase is for resale in its original form or is changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remolding or recasting, or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
Employee means any person working for the dealer, whether or not the person is in the direct employment of the dealer, who, in the performance of duties or the management of the business affairs of the dealer, handles precious metals or gems, or who prepares any reports or records which are required by this article. "Employee" does not include any employee of any bank, armored car company, private security company, or other business entity which is acting in the sole capacity of bailee-for-hire in relationship to the dealer. 
Gem means any precious or semiprecious stone, cut and polished. 
Precious metal means gold, silver, platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver or platinum. 
Purchase means buy, barter, trade, accept as collateral for a loan, or receive for the purpose of melting down, crushing or otherwise altering the appearance of the item. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-402. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to dealers exclusively engaged in the sale or exchange of numismatic coins or to transactions exclusively involving numismatic coins or other coinage. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to pawnshops, pawnbrokers or employees of pawnbrokers who maintain permanent places of business within the City of Chamblee and are in compliance with article I of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-403. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer or employee to violate any of the provisions of this article, whether or not such dealer or employee is the holder of a current, valid permit issued according to the terms of this article. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in an application for any permit provided for in this article. 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record or form required by the terms of this article. 
(3)  Violate any criminal law of this state while acting in the course of business as a dealer or employee of a dealer. 
(b)  Willful violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be grounds for revocation of the dealer's business license. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-404. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The city police department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-405. - Records of transaction. 
(a)  Every dealer shall maintain a book in permanent form, in which shall be entered at the time of each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems, the following: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase transaction. 
(2)  The name of the person making the purchase from the seller. 
(3)  The name, age and address of the seller of the items purchased and the distinctive number from each seller's driver's license or other similar identification card containing a photo of the seller. 
(4)  A clear and accurate identification and description of the purchased goods, including the serial, model or other number, and all identifying marks ascribed thereon. 
(5)  The price paid for the goods purchased. 
(6)  The number of the check issued for the purchase price if payment is made by check. 
(7)  The signature of the seller. 
(b)  The permanent record book required in this section shall be in legible English. Entries shall appear in chronological order, and shall be numbered in sequence. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems for at least two years. The book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or any reasonable time. The book shall be kept at the business premises during ordinary hours of business. 
(c)  Dealers exclusively engaged in buying or exchanging for merchandise scrap dental gold and silver from licensed dentists by registered or certified mail may record the post office record of the mail parcel in lieu of the seller's age, driver's license number and signature as required in this section. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-406. - Daily reports. 
(a)  Every dealer shall record, on cards or forms furnished or approved by the police department, the details of each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems. These records shall be entered in legible English at the time of each purchase of such items, and each card or form shall bear the number of the corresponding entry made in the book required by section 22-405 of this article. Each record shall include such information as may be reasonably required by the police department and shall include, as a minimum, the following: 
(1)  An accurate description of all articles received in the transaction with the particular seller. This description shall include to the extent possible the maker of each article, any identifying mark, number or initials, any pattern or shape, and a statement of the kind of materials of which it is composed. 
(2)  The date and time of the transaction. 
(3)  The name and address of the dealer. 
(4)  The name of the person making the purchase. 
(5)  The full name, date of birth and address, race and gender of the seller, as well as a general description of the seller. 
(6)  The number of the seller's valid driver's license or state-issued I.D. card, or other similar identification which bears a photograph of the seller. 
(7)  Signature of seller. 
(8)  Such other information as may be required by any state law regulating dealers of precious metals and gems. 
(b)  Each card or form required by this section shall be delivered or mailed to the police department within 24 hours after the date on which the transaction occurred, and shall be handled in the following manner: 
(1)  All such forms or cards shall be maintained in a locked container under the direct supervision of the police department and shall be available for inspection only for law enforcement purposes. 
(2)  The police department may allow any person to inspect the records for the purpose of locating stolen property, providing such person demonstrates theft of precious metals or gems by presenting an incident report or other similar document. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-407. - Photographs of articles and sellers; photocopies of documents. 
(a)  Every dealer shall take a well-focused, properly exposed color photograph of all precious metals, gems or goods made from precious metals or gems, which are purchased by the dealer. In the case of flatware, a photograph may be made of a representative place setting. 
(b)  In addition to photographing the items purchased, the dealer shall take a well-focused, properly exposed color photograph of the seller, and shall attach the photograph to the corresponding form or card required by section 22-406. In addition to the required photographs, the dealer shall attach to the form or card a photocopy of any bill or sale, receipt or other document tending to show the seller's ownership of the item purchased by the dealer, if any such documents exist, and a photocopy of the seller's driver's license or other identification authorized by this article. 
(c)  All photographs required in this section shall be made with a self-developing camera and film system, or such other system as may be authorized in writing by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-408. - Hours of operation. 
Dealers may not keep open their places of business except between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-409. - Waiting period prior to disposing of articles. 
Any dealer who in the course of business acquires precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems shall hold these items for at least seven calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment, grinding, melting, crushing or otherwise altering the appearance of the items. This section does not prevent any dealer from storing such items off the business premises, or from placing such items in the hands of any bank or security company for safekeeping, provided that no such item shall be removed from DeKalb County during the above-described holding period. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-410. - Inspection of items held by dealer. 
All items held by the dealer in accordance with the terms of section 22-409 shall be produced for inspection upon demand of any authorized law enforcement officer or, if the items are stored off the premises, within one business day thereof, during normal business hours. If the provisions of this section are in conflict with the provisions of section 22-409, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-411. - Permit required; prerequisite to issuance of business license. 
(a)  No business license shall be issued to conduct the business of purchasing precious metals or gems until the annual permit required by this section has been issued by the police department. 
(b)  No dealer shall engage in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems without having first obtained an annual permit issued by the police department and no dealer shall allow an employee to be involved in any way in the purchase of precious metals or gems until that employee has first obtained an annual employee permit from the police department and no person shall work as an employee of the dealer until such person has first obtained an annual employee permit. No annual employee permit shall be issued unless the dealer with whom employment is authorized is a holder of a current dealer's permit. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-412. - Application. 
(a)  The application for the annual dealer's permit required by this article shall include such fingerprints, photographs and information as may be reasonably required by the police department, but shall in any case include the following: 
(1)  The name, age and business address of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  The telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The name, age and business address of all other persons having an ownership interest or actually employed in the business other than publicly held corporations. 
(4)  The address of the premises upon which the business is conducted and the zoning and planning classification of the premises. 
(5)  The applicant shall be required to notify the police department within seven calendar days of any change of address of the applicant or business or any change of ownership in the business. 
(b)  The applicant shall attach to this application a completed and signed employee or owner application as described in section 22-414 for each person named in the dealer's application. Each such application shall be signed by the owner, managing partner, corporate president or chief executive officer of the business, and there shall be a description of the capacity in which the signator is acting. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-413. - Denial. 
No permit required by the provisions of this article shall be issued under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The applicant has no permanent place of business other than a van, mobile home, trailer or similar nonpermanent structure. 
(2)  No owner, corporate officer, majority stockholder, partner or managing director of the business entity applying for the license has been a legal resident of the state for a minimum of 90 days preceding the date of application. 
(3)  Any person required to be listed in the application for a dealer's permit has been convicted of or has entered a plea of guilty to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or any felony under the laws of this state or of the jurisdiction in which the verdict or plea was entered. This subsection does not apply to any person who has been convicted of or has entered a plea of guilty to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or any felony after ten years have expired from the date of the plea, conviction or completion of sentence, whichever is later. 
(4)  The person is not eligible to register as a dealer in precious metals or gems by the terms of any law of this state requiring such registration. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-414. - Employee or owner application. 
(a)  Persons required to obtain an employee permit by this article shall complete an employee or owner application which shall state relevant information including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Name. 
(2)  Date of birth. 
(3)  Driver's license, state identification card or Social Security number. 
(4)  Race. 
(5)  Sex. 
(6)  Residential address and telephone number. 
(7)  Last previous residential address. 
(8)  Height and weight. 
(9)  Hair and eye color. 
(10)  Name, address and telephone number of the dealer. 
(11)  Either a statement that the applicant has never been convicted of, plead guilty to or been sentenced to probation for any offense other than a minor traffic violation, or a list of all such pleas, convictions and sentences of probation. 
(b)  The application form shall also provide a place for applicant's signature. Persons required to be listed in a dealer's application shall also complete an employee or owner application. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-415. - Fingerprints. 
All persons required to complete an employee or owner application shall also submit to fingerprinting by the police department or by any agency or individual designated by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-416. - Issuance; fee. 
(a)  The police department shall provide the permit application forms required by this article, and shall review each completed application prior to issuing any permit. No employee or dealer permit shall be issued if it appears that the applicant or any person required to complete an employee or owner form has been convicted of, or has entered a plea of guilty to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or any felony. 
(b)  After ascertaining that all requisite forms have been completed, all fingerprint cards have been submitted, that no applicant or listed person is disqualified by virtue of a prior criminal record, and that all other requirements of this article have been compiled with, the police department shall approve the application, subject to payment of an annual permit fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-417. - Expiration and renewal. 
Each permit required by this article shall indicate thereon an expiration date which is at least one year from the date of issue and must be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Any permit holder may reapply for a permit at any time following the 60th day preceding the date of expiration. It shall be unlawful for any dealer to apply for a renewal unless all of the dealer's employees are holders of current, valid employee permits. No permits shall be renewed unless the dealer is the holder of a current, valid business license. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-418. - Revocation and surrender of permits. 
(a)  Any dealer or employee permit issued in accordance with provisions of this article shall be revoked by operation-of-law upon the occurrence of any of the following: 
(1)  The conviction of the dealer or employee for violating any state law or county ordinance pertaining to making false statements for the purpose of obtaining registration or authorization to become a dealer or employee of a dealer. 
(2)  The conviction of the dealer or employee for violation of a provision of this article after the dealer or employee has been previously convicted of a violation of this article within the preceding three years. 
(b)  Upon revocation, the permit holder shall surrender the permit to the police department within one business day of the conviction resulting in revocation, and failure to do so shall constitute a separate violation for each day the permit is withheld. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Sec. 22-419. - Appeals. 
In any case in which it appears to the police department that an applicant is not entitled to the issuance of a dealer or employee permit under the provisions of this article, the police department shall so notify the applicant in writing by mailing the notice to the last address furnished to the police department by the applicant. If the police department refuses to issue a permit, or if a permit is surrendered pursuant to the provisions of this article, the applicant or permit holder shall have an absolute right of appeal to the city council according to the procedures set forth herein. The appeal shall be perfected by filing with the police department a notice of appeal to the city council. The notice of appeal to the city council must be filed with the police department within 14 days following the mailing of the notification of denial or surrender of the permit and it shall be the duty of the police department, upon receipt thereof, to transmit such notice of appeal to the city clerk, together with copies of all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Thereafter, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to place the appeal upon the agenda of the city council for the first available date for hearing on the matter. It shall by the duty of the city clerk to so notify the appellant in writing of the date, time and place when the matter shall be heard. 
(Ord. No. 594, pt. I, 1-20-09) 
Chapter 25 - CABLE SERVICES FRANCHISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 507, § I, adopted Oct. 16, 2001, repealed chapter 25, sections 25-1, 25-26—25-33, 25-51 and 25-52, in its entirety and replaced it with a new chapter 25, designated at the discretion of the editor as sections 25-1, 25-26—25-33, 25-51 and 25-52. Former chapter 25 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 489, § I, adopted Oct. 17, 2000. 

ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 25-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act. 
Chapter means this chapter and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
City means the City of Chamblee. 
City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide cable services through a cable system or open video system. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable services to inhabitants within the franchise area. 
May is permissive. 
Open video system means "open video system" as defined by section 76.1500(a) of part 76 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Shall is mandatory, not merely directive. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications services means "telecommunications service" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but does not include cable services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "telecommunications service" shall mean "telecommunications service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
(Ord. No. 507, § I, 10-16-01) 
Secs. 25-2—25-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 25-26. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any cable services or operate a cable system or open video system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The city council may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this chapter, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this chapter by amendment hereof. 
(c)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(d)  Any franchise granted shall be non-exclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and/or itself engage in the provision of cable services. 
(e)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. 
(f)  The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Cable Act, as amended, governing cable television system and open video system franchises and the renewals of cable television system franchises. 
(Ord. No. 507, § I, 10-16-01) 
Sec. 25-27. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The names and residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable systems and open video systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
d.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed cable system or open video system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable system or open video system in the city; 
e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements and a sources and uses of funds statement; and 
f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable system(s) and open video system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof; 
(3)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A description of the cable services proposed to be provided; 
b.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
c.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges, and any other service charges; 
d.  A detailed, informative and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
e.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable services; and 
f.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; 
(4)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to, poles, lines or conduits; and 
(5)  Any other details, statements, supplementary information or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the Council or by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 507, § I, 10-16-01) 
Sec. 25-28. - Non-refundable application fees for new franchises. 
No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(1)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal and consultant's expenses. 
(2)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a non-refundable application fee in the amount of $5,000.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Chamblee. In the event that the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. 
(Ord. No. 507, § I, 10-16-01) 
Sec. 25-29. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 507, § I, 10-16-01) 
Sec. 25-30. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 507, § I, 10-16-01) 
Sec. 25-31. - Evaluation criteria. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and cable services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services to be provided, including the type of cable services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
(5)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
(6)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(Ord. No. 507, § I, 10-16-01) 
Sec. 25-32. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  If the city council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider any application(s), the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Ord. No. 507, § I, 10-16-01) 
Sec. 25-33. - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(1)  The term of the franchise; 
(2)  The franchise area and the cable services which are the subject of the franchise; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or canceled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
(8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the grantee by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 507, § I, 10-16-01) 
Secs. 25-34—25-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 25-51. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this chapter to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this chapter or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or grantee. The city council may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 507, § I, 10-16-01) 
Sec. 25-52. - Retroactivity. 
This chapter shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for cable services existing on the effective date of this chapter, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(Ord. No. 507, § I, 10-16-01) 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; law enforcement, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions, other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions may include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to the civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out such functions. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-2(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-2(f)) 
Sec. 26-3. - Acceptance of county plan. 
The county emergency and disaster operations plan, dated February 1980, is accepted for the emergency management of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-1) 
Sec. 26-4. - Participation in county emergency management unit; emergency management director. 
It is the desire and intent of the mayor and council that the city be a part of the county emergency management unit. The chief executive officer of the county shall nominate for appointment, by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the mayor and council on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county emergency and disaster operations plan emergency functions. The plan will be in consonance with state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities therein for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  To maintaif the emergency management office and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial reports, daily activity reports, etc. 
(6)  To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of emergency, under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-2(b)) 
Sec. 26-5. - Emergency management functions. 
The county emergency management office shall be established around existing city and county departments, and the emergency functions described in the emergency and disaster operations plan are assigned as follows: 

 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-2(c)) 
Sec. 26-6. - Emergency powers of mayor. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor of the city, separately or jointly with the chief executive officer or county commissioners, or, in their absence, their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists, and thereafter shall have and may exercise, for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  To seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and of funds received for such property or supplies; and 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-2(d)) 
Sec. 26-7. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Code 1982, § 4-3-2(e)) 
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 651, adopted Mar. 19, 2013, amended ch. 30 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 30, §§ 30-1—30-7, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1982, §§ 2-2-1—2-2-9, 2-2-11; Ord. No. 361, adopted May 8, 1992; Ord. No. 403, adopted May 9, 1995; Ord. No. 405, adopted Aug. 11, 1995; Ord. No. 476, adopted Sept. 21, 1999; and Ord. No. 499, adopted Mar. 20, 2001. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-1. - Appointment of election officials. 
The mayor and council shall by resolution annually appoint a municipal election superintendent and any other election official as is necessary, all of whom shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in the Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 651, 3-19-13) 
Sec. 30-2. - Filing notice of candidacy. 
Any candidate for municipal office or a designee shall file a notice of candidacy in the office of the municipal superintendent pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. The municipal superintendent shall designate the days of the qualifying period, which shall be no less than three days and no more than five days. The days of the qualifying period shall be consecutive days. Qualifying periods shall commence no earlier than 8:30 a.m. on the last Monday in August immediately preceding the general election and shall end no later than 4:30 p.m. on the following Friday; and, in the case of a special election, the municipal qualifying period shall commence no earlier than the date of the call and shall end no later than 25 days prior to the election. A qualifying fee of three percent of the total gross salary of the office paid in the preceding calendar year pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131 shall be paid to the municipal election superintendent by each candidate in the regular or special election at the time his or her notice of candidacy is filed. 
(Ord. No. 651, 3-19-13) 
Sec. 30-3. - Qualifications of electors. 
Any person meeting the qualifications of, and registered as an elector in the manner prescribed by law for an elector as set forth in the Georgia Election Code, shall be entitled to vote in any city election. 
(Ord. No. 651, 3-19-13) 
Sec. 30-4. - Vote required for election. 
The qualified candidate for mayor receiving the highest number of legal votes shall be declared elected. The candidate who is qualified for council member and who receives the highest number of legal votes for each district post shall be declared elected. The candidate for each other elective office who receives the highest number of votes legally cast shall be declared elected, if he is legally qualified and his name legally entered. 
(Ord. No. 651, 3-19-13) 
Sec. 30-5. - Authority for county to conduct city elections. 
The city does hereby authorize DeKalb County, Georgia, to conduct all city elections held pursuant to the provisions of the state election code and the county is authorized to perform the following functions with respect to the conduct of such elections: The county shall perform all duties as superintendent of elections as specified under the state election code, with the exception of the qualifications of candidates. 
(Ord. No. 651, 3-19-13) 
Chapter 31 - ETHICS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 501, part I, adopted March 20, 2001, added a new chapter 31, sections 31-1—31-12, entitled "Code of Ethics." In order to allow for the future expansion of chapter 31 and to maintain the alphabetical sequence of chapters, the title of chapter 31 has been changed to "Ethics" and the provisions of Ord. No. 501 have been included as sections 31-21—31-32 at the discretion of the editor. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 31-1—31-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CODE OF ETHICS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 660, pt. I, adopted Nov. 19, 2013, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 31-21—31-32, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 501, pt. I, adopted Mar. 20, 2001. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 31-21. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
Benefit means anything having a monetary value in excess of $100.00. The term "benefit" includes, but is not limited to, a valuable act, advance, award, contract, compensation, contribution, deposit, emolument, employment, favor, fee, forbearance, fringe benefit, gift, gratuity, honorarium, loan, offer, payment, perquisite, privilege, promise, reward, remuneration, service, subscription, or the promise that any of these things will be conferred in the future. 
Business means an activity, association, commercial entity, corporation, enterprise, firm, franchise, holding company, joint stock company, organization, partnership, receivership, self-employed individual, sole proprietorship, trust or other legal entity established to earn or otherwise obtain money for profit excluding a municipal corporation or governmental entity. 
Compensation means any benefit conferred upon or received by any person in return for services rendered or to be rendered. 
Confidential information means information which has been obtained in the course of holding public office, employment, an independent contract or otherwise acting as a public servant, and which information is not available to members of the public under the Georgia Open Records Act or other law or regulation and which the public servant is not authorized to disclose, including: 
(1)  Any written information that could lawfully be excepted from disclosure pursuant to state law, unless the public servant disclosing it is authorized to do so by state law, or pursuant to some other pertinent law, policy or procedure; 
(2)  Any non-written information which, if it were written, could be excepted from disclosure under state law, unless the public servant disclosing it is authorized to do so by the state law, or pursuant to some other pertinent law, policy or procedure; and 
(3)  Information which was obtained in the course of or by means of a record or oral report of a lawful executive or closed session, whether or not the disclosure of the information would violate state law, unless the public servant disclosing it is authorized by state law to do so, or unless the public servant disclosing it has been properly authorized to disclose it pursuant to an applicable law, policy or procedure; however, when such information is also available through channels which are open to the public, this provision does not prohibit public servants from disclosing the availability of those channels. 
Decision maker means any public servant or group of public servants empowered to act in a discretionary manner on behalf of the city in any capacity whatsoever, including the making of recommendations. The term "decision maker" includes, but is not limited to, any city agency, bureau, department, division, office, administrator or person who is charged with implementing and administering particular legislation or executive or administrative decisions, and, to the extent this article is applicable to them, any volunteer or independent contractor who is empowered to exercise any discretionary power which could influence a public servant in the performance or nonperformance of an official action. In this article, the term "decision maker" is used to represent any and every public servant who could take any discretionary action regarding a matter in which a public servant or a partner in interest has or may have a conflict of interest, or as a result of which a public servant might receive a personal benefit. 
Decision making means the exercise of any discretionary public power in any capacity whatsoever, including the making of recommendations, by any public servant whose action pertains to a matter in which a public servant or a public servant's partner in interest has or may have a conflict of interest, or as a result of which a public servant receives a personal benefit. 
Direct contractual interest is defined as any direct interest that the public servant has in a contract regarding an individual item that is being considered by the city council and from which the public servant receives direct monetary value or other direct financial benefit from such contract that is directly affected by the public servant's vote on said item. 
Disclose means, unless the context of this article indicates otherwise, to provide the city clerk with written notice of a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest, and any other pertinent information, including the nature and extent of the public servant's conflict of interest, the decision maker who may act on the matter, and the name and address of any person alleged to have a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest. Unless this article or a law which supersedes it requires or permits another procedure, information shall be deemed disclosed if any public servant, within a reasonable time before any official action is to be taken by the decision maker, provides the city clerk with written notice disclosing the conflict or potential conflict. For purposes of this provision, the phrase "within a reasonable time" means within adequate time to allow the city clerk to forward the disclosure to the decision maker before whom the matter is pending or may be brought, and within adequate time to allow the decision maker to review the disclosure before taking any official action. 
Elected official shall be any person who is an elected city official, including the mayor, of the City of Chamblee. 
Employee or public employee means a person, other than an elected public officer, employed and paid a salary to work for the city, whether full-time, part-time, or on a contract basis, and including those officially selected but not yet serving; and, for purposes of establishing ethical obligations under this article and for no other purpose, the term "employee" includes volunteers, notwithstanding the fact that they are unpaid. 
Employment interest means a situation where the public servant is employed by a person or entity or the subsidiary of an entity that is seeking a contract or action from the City of Chamblee. Excluded from this definition is employment of a public servant by another governmental entity. 
Frivolous means a claim or complaint which is clearly insufficient on its face, does not controvert the material points of the opposing party and is presumably interposed for mere purposes of delay or to embarrass the opponent. A claim or defense is frivolous if a proponent can present no reasonable argument based upon the evidence or law in support of this claim. 
Gift means any benefit or thing or act of monetary value of over $100.00 which is conveyed to or performed for the benefit of a public servant or a partner in interest, including any advance, award, contract, contribution, deposit, employment, favor, forbearance, gift, gratuity, honorarium, loan, payment, service, subscription, or the promise that any of these things or acts of value will be conferred in the future, if such thing or act of value is conferred or performed without the lawful exchange of consideration which is at least equal in value to the thing or act conferred or performed. 
Governing body means the elected officials who comprise the legislative body of the city, as defined by the City Charter. 
Member of the family means: 
(1)  A public servant's spouse, children, grandchildren, parents, parents-in-law, grandparents, grandparents-in-law, sisters, sisters-in-law, brothers, brothers-in-law, sons-in-law, daughters-in-law, nieces, nephews, aunts, or uncles (whether by marriage, lineal descent or adoption); 
(2)  A public servant's relative by marriage, lineal descent or adoption who receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half of his support from the public servant or from whom the public servant receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half of his support; and 
(3)  An individual claimed by the public servant or the public servant's spouse as a dependent under the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
Interest means any personal pecuniary benefit accruing to a public servant or the public servant's partner in interest, whether in the public servant's own name or the name of any person or business from which the public servant is entitled to receive any personal benefit, as a result of a matter which is or which is expected to become the subject of an official action by or with the city. 
Loan means a transfer of money, property or anything else of ascertainable monetary value in exchange for an obligation, conditional or not, to repay in whole or in part. 
Matter means, unless the context of this article indicates otherwise, any act, action, agenda item, allegation, application, amendment, auction, bill, business, case, charge, claim, consideration, contract, controversy, decree, deed, deliberation, discussion, hearing, issue, lease, license, measure, offer, order, division, permit, personnel action, petition, policy, presentation, procedure, privilege, proceeding, project, proposal, proposition, purchase, recommendation, regulation, rental, request, resolution, sale, subject, transaction, use, variance or other discretionary choice pending before a city decision maker when a public servant or a partner in interest has a personal interest in the outcome of the decision, or the decision may result in a personal benefit to a public servant or a partner in interest. 
Official action means any act, action, approval, decision, denial, directive, disapproval, inaction, order, performance, nonperformance, recommendation, vote, or other direct result of a public servant's exercise of discretionary authority in connection with the public servant's public position. 
Official duty means any official action or ministerial action which a public servant is obligated or authorized to perform by virtue of being a public servant. 
Official records means any minutes, papers, documents, completed forms, or other records maintained by a public agent for the purpose of fulfilling the disclosure requirements of this article. 
Participate means to take part in official act(s), action(s) or proceeding(s) as a public servant through approval, disapproval, decision or the performance of an official duty as a public servant. It does not include action(s) taken in the individual's private capacity and/or in a non-public servant capacity or the individual's appearance before a board of the city or dealing with employees of the city in such capacity as any other public citizen would in dealing with their individual business or individual interests. 
Partner in interest means, when used in this article in connection with a public servant, as in the phrase "a public servant or a partner in interest," any and all of the following: 
(1)  A member of the public servant's immediate family; 
(2)  A business with which the public servant or a member of the public servant's immediate family is associated; 
(3)  Any other person with whom the public servant or a member of his immediate family is in business, or is negotiating or has an agreement concerning future employment or the future conferring of any personal benefit, whether in the public servant's own name or the name of any business or person from whom the public servant is entitled, or expects to become entitled, to receive any personal benefit, as a result of a contract or transaction which is, or which is expected to become, the subject of an official action by or with the city. The term "partner in interest" does not imply or require any form of legal partnership or formal agreement; or 
(4)  When used in the phrase "a public servant or a partner in interest," the term "partner in interest" refers only to a partner in interest of the public servant to whom reference is being made, and not to any other person's partner in interest. 
Person includes any individual, employee, appointee, entity or trust. 
Personal benefit means any benefit which is offered or received, or reasonably perceived to be offered or received, primarily for the purpose of influencing the manner in which a public servant performs or refrains from performing an official action, so that an attempt is made to induce the public servant, or the public servant is induced, to act in favor of some interest other than the public interest on the basis of an expectation or hope that the public servant or a partner in interest of the public servant will obtain some personal pecuniary gain by acting against the public interest; provided, however, that the term "personal benefit" within the meaning of this article does not include any of the following, which, although they may benefit individual public servants, are deemed to be primarily public benefits rather than personal benefits: 
(1)  Payment by the city of salaries, compensation or employee benefits; or payment by an employer or business other than the city of salaries, compensation, employee benefits or pursuant to a contract, when the payment is unrelated to a public servant's status as a public servant and is not made for the purpose of influencing, directly or indirectly, the vote, official action or decision of a public servant; 
(2)  Fees, expenses, or income, including those resulting from outside employment, which are permitted and reported in accordance with the policies of the city; 
(3)  Authorized reimbursement of actual and necessary expenses; 
(4)  Admission, regardless of value, to events to which public servants are invited in their official, representative capacity as public servants; 
(5)  Campaign or political contributions which are made and reported in accordance with state law; 
(6)  Reasonable hosting, including travel and expenses, entertainment, meals or refreshments furnished in connection with public events, appearances or ceremonies related to official city business, if furnished by the sponsor of such public event; or in connection with speaking engagements, teaching or rendering other public assistance to an organization or another governmental entity; this provision applies only if the city does not also pay the person for the same activity; 
(7)  Awards publicly presented in recognition of public service, acts of heroism or for solving crimes; 
(8)  Anything of value, regardless of the value, when the thing of value is offered to the city, is accepted on behalf of the city, and is to remain the property of the city; 
(9)  Commercially reasonable loans made in the ordinary course of the lender's business in accordance with prevailing rates and terms, and which do not discriminate against or in favor of an individual who is a public servant because of such individual's status as a public servant; 
(10)  Complimentary copies of trade publications; 
(11)  Any unsolicited benefit conferred by any one person or business if the economic value totals less than $250.00 per calendar year, and if there is no express or implied understanding or agreement that a vote, official action or decision of a public servant will be influenced; 
(12)  Reasonable compensation for a published work which did not involve the use of the city's time, equipment, facilities, supplies, staff or other resources, if the payment is arranged or paid by the publisher of the work; 
(13)  Reasonable compensation for a published work which did involve the use of the city's time, equipment, facilities, supplies, staff or other resources, if the payment of the compensation to the public servant is lawfully authorized by a representative of the city who is empowered to authorize such compensation; 
(14)  Anything of value, if the payment, gift, or other transfer of value is unrelated to and does not arise from the recipient's holding or having held a public position, and if the activity or occasion for which it is given does not involve the use of the city's time, equipment, facilities, supplies, staff or other resources which is not available to the general public; 
(15)  Anything of value received as a devise, bequest or inheritance; 
(16)  A gift received from a relative within the third degree of consanguinity, under the civil law computation method, to the public servant, or the spouse of such a relative; or 
(17)  A gift received from a spouse of a public servant, or a spouse's relative within the third degree of consanguinity to the spouse, under the civil law computation method. 
Personal interest means a direct or indirect interest having pecuniary value peculiar to a particular individual or group, which value may accrue to such individual or group or result in such individual or group deriving or potentially deriving a personal benefit as a result of the approval or denial of any division, resolution, order or other official action, or the performance or nonperformance thereof, by a public servant, and which interest is not shared by the general public. 
Public servant means any member of the city council or of any city agency, board, commission, committee, or other voting body, whether elected or appointed. 
Reasonable means fair, proper, equitable and just under the circumstances. 
Relative means a person who is related to an official or employee (whether by marriage, lineal descent or adoption) as spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, grandparent, grandchild, parents-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law or sister-in-law. 
Volunteer means an individual who is permitted by the city, or by a person authorized to act on behalf of the city, to assist public servants in performing any kind of official duty or action without any expectation of receiving compensation. 
Voting body means the city council and any other city authority, board, commission, committee, council or group, regardless of whether its function is legislative, administrative, quasi-administrative or quasi-judicial or any combination thereof, which must act as a body on the basis of a vote of some or all of its members. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-22. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  The city government is a representative democracy. Those who are elected, appointed, hired, volunteer or campaign to serve the public as representatives accept a public trust, which they share with those whom they elect, appoint, hire or otherwise enlist to help them serve the public. Public trust requires that acts which are contrary to the public interest be defined and prohibited; that there be an orderly procedure for raising and addressing ethical questions; that ethical behavior be encouraged and suitably rewarded; and that unethical behavior be discouraged and suitably disciplined through a process which is fundamentally fair. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of each public servant to act in a manner which contributes to cultivating public trust in the integrity of government. 
(c)  In adopting this article, the city recognizes that: 
(1)  Public servants are also members of society and, therefore, share the same general personal and economic interests in the decisions and policies of government as all members of the community; 
(2)  Public servants retain their rights to publicly express their views on matters of general public interest, and to express their opinions on the effect of public actions on their personal or economic interests or rights; 
(3)  It is sound public policy for standards of ethical conduct for public servants to distinguish between those minor and inconsequential conflicts that are unavoidable in a free society, and those conflicts which are personal, material and avoidable; 
(4)  Public servants are entitled to engage in employment, professional or business activities, other than official duties, in order to support themselves and their families and to maintain a continuity of professional or business activity, and are entitled to maintain investments. 
(d)  This article provides the minimum standards which a public servant's conduct cannot fall without the risk of penalty. The principal policy which forms the foundation of this article is to encourage internal commitment by establishing and maintaining a work environment which supports integrity with pride and enthusiasm. A work environment which supports integrity includes public servants who: 
(1)  Recognize with gratitude that the primary reason they hold a public position is to serve the public; 
(2)  Are motivated and committed to pursue ethical ideals which always exceed minimum standards and often achieve the highest standards; 
(3)  Encourage ethical practices which protect, advance and promote the public interest; 
(4)  Recognize that the most effective way to eradicate unethical practices is to consistently act ethically themselves, and to consistently react appropriately with respect to the ethical decisions of others; 
(5)  When they observe serious unethical practices, promptly disclose them to appropriate authorities, and encourage others to do the same; 
(6)  Ensure that those for whom they are responsible are aware of minimum standards of ethics below which their conduct cannot fall without the risk of disciplinary consequences; and 
(7)  When circumstances warrant, appropriately discipline those who are proven to have engaged in unethical behavior. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-23. - Purposes of article. 
This article, including the definitions set forth in section 31-21, is adopted to: 
(1)  Identify the minimum standards of ethical conduct which public servants must meet; 
(2)  Adequately educate public servants, and any subordinates, in the principles of ethics; 
(3)  Encourage public servants to pursue the highest ethical ideals which they can achieve; 
(4)  Provide a process by which public servants may identify and resolve ethical issues; 
(5)  Provide a process to ensure the prompt disclosure by public servants of serious unethical practices, and encourage others to do the same; 
(6)  Provide a fair and impartial process by which alleged violations of this article may be heard; 
(7)  Provide for a just and reasonable balance among the rights of all individuals who are directly affected by the operation of this article; and 
(8)  Establish penalties, as appropriate, for public servants who violate the public trust. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-24. - Applicability of article. 
This article applies to all public servants, as the term is defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-25. - Acceptance of gifts. 
(a)  No public servant, nor any partner in interest of that public servant, shall solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation, or group which: 
(1)  Has or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial relationships with the City of Chamblee; or 
(2)  Seeks in exchange for the thing of value to have a public servant exercise a matter of discretion in his or her favor; or 
(3)  Seeks in exchange for the thing of value to have interests which may be affected by the performance or non-performance of the official duty of the public servant. 
(b)  No public servant nor partner in interest of that public servant shall directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for him/herself or another person if: 
(1)  It could reasonably be considered to influence the public servant in the future or if the public servant is involved in any official act or action which results in a monetary benefit for the donor or lender which is not available to the public at large; or 
(2)  The public servant recently has been, or is now, or within six months in the future, is involved in any official act or action which results in a monetary benefit for the donor or lender which is not available to the public at large. 
(c)  The above prohibitions shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  Occasional non-monetary gift(s) of insignificance or trinkets or gifts such as a calendar, memento or pen received in the normal course of business with a value of/or less than $100.00 and/or admission to and/or consumption of food and/or beverage at a meal, function, social setting or event; 
(2)  Award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
(3)  Transaction authorized by and performed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6 as now or hereafter amended; 
(4)  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such loan or financial transaction; 
(5)  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia laws; 
(6)  Items listed under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-2 that are specifically itemized as "a thing of value shall not include" as now or hereafter amended; or 
(7)  Food, beverage or expenses afforded city official, members of their families, or others that are associated with normal and customary business or social functions or activities. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-26. - Abuse of office. 
(a)  Public servants may not: 
(1)  Engage in, directly or indirectly, financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained from their office; 
(2)  Use their positions to improperly induce or coerce a person in a way that provides financial benefits to themselves or to any for-profit or nonprofit organization of which they are a member; or 
(3)  Vote upon any matter involving any organization of which the public servant is a member of the governing board of such organization, except: 
a.  Boards or authorities on which the public servant serves by virtue of his or her elected office, or by appointment or with approval of the city council, mayor or the governor or an agency of the state; or 
b.  Organizations which the public servant serves on and receives no compensation (other than for expense reimbursements). 
(b)  Aside from these restrictions, public servants are free to engage in lawful financial transactions to the same extent as private citizens. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-27. - Disclosure to avoid appearance of partiality. 
If a matter comes before the city council in which a public servant or a member of the family of the public servant does not have a financial interest, direct contractual interest or employment interest such as provided by the section pertaining to abstention, but in which the public servant in good faith determines that his or her professional representative/client has such an interest and which the public servant in good faith believes could create an impression of partiality, such professional relationship should be disclosed by the public servant prior to the public servant's participating in any discussion or official action with respect to the matter. Such relationship shall not preclude participation and voting on a subject. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-28. - Abstention to avoid conflicts of interest. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this code of ethics for any public servant to participate in an official capacity as a public servant upon any matter in which the public servant has a financial interest, direct contractual interest or employment interest; or 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c), if any public servant has a conflict of interest or has an interest that he has reason to believe either violates this code of ethics or affects his or her official acts or actions in any matter prohibited, the public servant shall immediately leave the meeting room, if the meeting is not open to the public. If the meeting is open to the public, the public servant shall move to the area the general public occupies. The public servant may, however, participate at any meeting open to the general public as would any other person attending the meeting, except as provided in subsection (c). In the event of such conflict of interest, the public servant shall leave his or her regular seat as a member of the Chamblee City Council, and not return to it until the deliberation and action on the matter is completed. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prohibit a public servant from publicly stating that a conflict of interest exists and/or the nature of the conflict as well as participating on the procedural matter if the item is placed on the consent agenda showing the public servant abstaining on the item. 
(d)  Except where an item is on the "consent agenda" or as otherwise permitted under this section, any conflict of interest which prohibits a public servant from voting on an issue shall also prohibit a public servant from presiding during the issue being heard. 
(e)  Nothing herein shall require the public servant to absent himself or herself from her seat while action is taken for any item for which the public servant has a conflict of interest which is contained on a "consent agenda" and upon which there is no deliberation provided the public servant's conflict has been disclosed and the public servant abstains from voting on that particular item on the "consent agenda" and while voting for the "consent agenda", except as noted (Note: The public servant may vote for the adoption of the "consent agenda" provided it shows that he or she abstained from that particular item on the consent agenda). 
(f)  A public servant may abstain from a portion of a motion that the public servant has a conflict on and not have to abstain from the remainder of the items contained in the motion for which there is no conflict of interest. However, a public servant with a conflict may not make or second the motion to approve. 
(g)  The city clerk shall note in the minutes/record when a member leaves the council seat due to a conflict of interest on an issue. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-29. - Unauthorized outside employment. 
(a)  Purpose of policy. The purposes of the policies governing unauthorized outside employment are to prevent conflicts of interest and conflicts of loyalty; to prevent abuses regarding dual compensation, payment for work not done, or unlawful gifts of public funds; and to prevent excessive loss of efficiency in the performance of public service. 
(b)  Conflict of interest. A public servant shall not accept any employment, nor enter into any contract, nor perform any service for compensation that results in a financial conflict of interest or a conflict of loyalties which would affect the performance of the public servant's official duties. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-30. - Use of public property. 
A public servant shall not use City of Chamblee government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he or she direct employees to use such property for these purposes. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-31. - Use of confidential information. 
A public servant shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a financial interest, official information not made available to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-32. - Interests and contracts involving public servants. 
(a)  During the public servant's term, no public servant shall acquire a property interest in any contract or transaction if a reasonable basis exists that such an interest conflicts with a known intended purchase by the city, without first offering said interest to the city. 
(b)  Except as provided herein, the city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a public servant or with a business in which the public servant has an interest requiring disclosure herein. Provided that such interest is disclosed to all parties involved, the prohibitions of this section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  Designating a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; 
(2)  Borrowing funds from any bank or lending institution which offers competitive rates for such loans; 
(3)  Entering into contracts with a business which employs a consultant, provided that such employment is not incompatible with this section; 
(4)  Contracts for services entered into with a business which is the only available source for such goods or services; and 
(5)  Contracts entered into under circumstances which would constitute an emergency situation, provided that such emergency is documented and submitted to the city clerk to be kept on file; 
(6)  Where the city council approves the contract; 
(7)  Where the public servant serves on the board or entity by virtue of his or her office or by appointment or with approval of the city council; 
(8)  Where the public servant discloses the position and the city council approves the service(s) or the transaction; 
(9)  Where the contract is on a bid basis following the city's procurement procedures and provided such service is not a professional service. 
(c)  In the event that a public servant shall be paid any remuneration under this section, it shall not be, as long as disclosure is made, a violation of this section to earn such remuneration during times when the public servant is being remunerated by the city or an agency thereof. 
(d)  The city shall not be prohibited from doing business with an entity which employs a member of the family of a public servant, provided that: 
(1)  Such business relationship does not violate this section; 
(2)  Such business relationship is fully disclosed in writing; and 
(3)  Where applicable, the affected business entity shall be required to use the bid system when conducting business with the city. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-33. - Restrictions on contracts with former members of the governing authority. 
The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding 12-month period a member of the governing authority, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-34. - Unauthorized purchases. 
A public servant shall not order any goods and services for the City of Chamblee without prior official authorization for such expenditure. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-35. - City attorneys used for private business. 
A public servant shall not use an attorney or attorneys who are under retainer by the City of Chamblee, or any board, commission, authority or committee under the umbrella of the City of Chamblee for personal or private business without paying just compensation. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-36. - Unauthorized use of public employees. 
A public servant shall not use his or her position to request or require an employee to: 
(1)  Do work on behalf of his or her social, church or fraternal interests without paying just compensation; 
(2)  Do work on behalf of a member of the family of the public servant without paying just compensation; 
(3)  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business or political purposes; and 
(4)  Work for him or her personally or in his or her private business without paying just compensation. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-37. - Coercion by public servant. 
A public servant shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial or in kind benefit to him or person(s) that are a member of the family of the public servant, or those with whom a council member has a financial interest, direct contractual interest or employment interest. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-38. - Improper use of office; harassment; improper influence. 
(a)  No public servant shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, discriminate against, or give the appearance of or attempt to intimidate, threaten, coerce or discriminate against any employee for the purpose of interfering with that person's freedom of choice in the regular discharge of his or her official duties or to cause the employee to violate the city's personnel policies. 
(b)  No public servant shall improperly influence any city public servant to violate the standards of ethical conduct set forth in this ethics code. 
(c)  No public servant shall create a "hostile work environment" towards an employee as defined under federal law. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-39. - Elections. 
No public servant shall direct any person employed by the city to undertake political activity on behalf of that public servant, any other public servant or any other individual or political party or group or business organization, during such time that the city employee is required to conduct city business. This section does not prohibit incidental telephone calls made for the purpose of scheduling a public servant's daily city business. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-40. - Travel expenses. 
A public servant member shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the City of Chamblee to attend a seminar, convention or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention or conference without refunding the pro-rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-41. - Contact with ethics committee members. 
No public servant shall have discussions or contact, of any manner, with a member of the ethics committee, other than as a witness, about the conduct or actions of a public servant in regard to the potential filing of a complaint or after the filing of a complaint through the decision on a complaint. Should the ethics committee be considering a complaint against a public servant, no discussion regarding the complaint shall be held between public servants and members of the ethics committee until adjudication of the complaint is made. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-42. - No prohibition. 
(a)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit action or make it improper for action taken in the individual's private capacity or the individuals appearance before any board of the city or interaction with employees of the city in his or her private capacity as any other public citizen would in regard to their individual business or individual interests. 
(b)  Except as specifically prohibited in this chapter or state law, a public servant shall be able to and is entitled to participate and vote on any matter that comes before the governing authority of the City of Chamblee. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Secs. 31-43—31-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMPLAINTS 

Sec. 31-71. - Creation of board of ethics; membership; term; compensation. 
(a)  Created; membership. The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of three residents of the city to be appointed as provided in subsection (c) of this section. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. 
(b)  Member restrictions. Members of the board shall not be elected city officials, full-time appointed officials (whether exempt or nonexempt), or city employees, and shall hold no elected public office nor any city employment. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period before appointment to the board, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
(c)  Appointment. 
(1)  The mayor and council members shall each designate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of 12 individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. An appointment to fill a vacancy on the board shall be made by the mayor and approved by the city council. 
(2)  The city manager shall maintain a listing of these 12 qualified citizens. Should it be determined that an ethics board needs to be convened, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified three members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Prior to the random drawing of names, the names of individuals appointed to the pool by any member(s) of the governing body charged in a complaint which the board will be reviewing shall be removed. 
(d)  Chairperson. The board shall elect one of its members to serve as chairperson. 
(e)  Limit of term. No person may serve more than two consecutive full terms as a board member. 
(f)  Deliberations, actions open to the public. The board's deliberations shall be open to the public. 
(g)  Compensation. Members of the board are volunteers and shall serve without compensation. The city council shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(h)  Staff support. The city council shall provide such staff support for the board as the city council determines to be necessary for the board to fulfill its duties and responsibilities. The city clerk, or assistant city clerk if the city clerk is the subject of the ethics complaint, shall serve as recording secretary to the board. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-72. - Appointment of hearing officer. 
Whenever the procedures herein require a review by or hearing in front of a hearing officer, such hearing officer shall: 
(1)  Be a competent attorney at law of good standing in his or her profession; 
(2)  Be a member of the Georgia Bar; 
(3)  Have at least five years' experience in the practice of law; and 
(4)  Shall not maintain an office nor shall he reside within the city. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint an attorney with the above qualifications yearly as the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-73. - Custodian of records. 
The city clerk shall serve as legal custodian of the board's records, and accept, file, maintain and administer, in accordance with all applicable laws, any information related to the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-74. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints filed under this article, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be filed with the city clerk, provided, however, to discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted against a person seeking election as a member of the city council or the mayor, whether currently serving or not, from the date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints shall not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
(b)  No action may be taken on any complaint which arises out of substantially the same facts or circumstances which have previously served as the basis for a complaint pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Any complaint shall be in writing, shall be signed by the person filing the complaint and sworn in the presence of a notary. Each complaint shall state: 
(1)  A separate count for each alleged violation; 
(2)  The specific section of this article alleged to have been violated; 
(3)  With specificity, the facts which are alleged to constitute the violation; and 
(4)  The documentary evidence which the complainant possesses. Copies of said documentary evidence shall be attached to the complaint as exhibits. 
(d)  All complaints shall contain an oath that the facts set forth therein are true and correct to the best of the complainant's knowledge in substantially the following form: 
(1)  "STATE OF GEORGIA  COUNTY OF DEKALB  AFFIDAVIT 
(2)  Personally appeared before the undersigned officer duly authorized to administer oaths, (name of person filing complaint), who on oath deposes that the statements in the foregoing complaint are true and correct to the best of his/her knowledge and belief. The affiant further acknowledges that false statements made in this complaint may result in a prosecution against them for false swearing, a felony under O.C.G.A. 16-10-71. 
(3)  _____________________________________  (Signature of person filing Complaint) 
(4)  Sworn to and subscribed 
(5)  Before me this _____ day of ________ 20_____;. 
(6)  _______________  Notary Public" 
(e)  Complaints against the city clerk, city manager, or city attorney shall be filed directly with the mayor, who shall forward said complaint to all councilmembers. The mayor and council shall discuss the complaint at a regular or special meeting and either: 
(1)  Dismiss said complaint; 
(2)  Choose to treat said complaint as a personnel matter and determine any consequences against the city clerk, city attorney or city manager for violations complained of; or 
(3)  Determine that a full ethics investigation is warranted and forward said complaint to the city clerk (or assistant city clerk if the complaint alleges violations by the city clerk) to move forward with the complaint process outlined in this article, with the exception that if the complaint is against the city attorney, the city clerk shall forward same directly to the hearing officer, who shall, in addition to substantive determination of the complaint, shall determine if the complaint has been filed in accordance with the procedures outlined in this section. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-75. - Service of complaints/city attorney review. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a filed complaint, the city clerk shall cause the complaint to be served on the public servant charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. The city clerk shall also forward the complaint to the city attorney for review. 
(b)  The public servant charged in the complaint shall have 15 days from receipt of complaint to file an answer to the complaint; provided, however, the public servant charged shall have no obligation to file an answer to any complaint. On due cause shown, the hearing officer or the city attorney may extend said deadline up to an additional 15 days. 
(c)  Within seven days of receiving a filed complaint, the city attorney shall review said complaint for conformity with the requirements of section 31-74 of this article. If the city attorney finds that the complaint is not in conformance with the requirements of section 31-74, the city attorney shall dismiss the complaint and serve said dismissal in writing to the complainant and the public servant charged. Said dismissal shall be without prejudice once and, if refiled and still not in conformity with section 31-74 upon second filing, which shall be within 30 days of the letter of dismissal, shall be with prejudice. The complainant shall have the right to appeal the city attorney's determination to the appointed hearing officer by filing a written appeal with the city attorney no later than five days following receipt of the letter of dismissal. The hearing officer's review of the city attorney's decision in such appeal shall be de novo. If the hearing officer concurs with the city attorney's dismissal, the hearing officer shall dismiss said complaint and said dismissal shall be with prejudice and there shall be no right to re-file the complaint. If the hearing officer disagrees with the city attorney's dismissal, he shall proceed with substantive review of the complaint pursuant to the procedures in this article. 
(d)  Complaints found to be in conformance with the requirements of section 31-74 of this article, by either the city attorney or appointed hearing officer, will be further reviewed by the hearing officer as set forth in section 31-76 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-76. - Procedures for review and hearing of complaints. 
(a)  Upon being forwarded a complaint pursuant to section 31-75, the hearing officer shall review same to determine if the complaint is unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded. A frivolous, unjustified or patently unfounded complaint shall mean a complaint clearly unsupported by evidence or law which is brought for no other reason than to waste time and be a nuisance to the accused and/or convoluted in reasoning to a point where a reasonable person is unable to clearly establish how the actions alleged by the complainant serve as a violation of this article. The hearing officer may take into consideration any relationship between the complainant and the accused, previous allegations by complainant against the accused, the timing of the complaint and any political or other improper motive for filing said complaint. If the hearing officer determines that the complaint is frivolous, unjustified or patently unfounded, the hearing officer shall dismiss the complaint and notify the complainant and accused of said dismissal in writing within 15 days of receiving the complaint. 
(b)  Upon a determination that a complaint should not be dismissed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section 31-76, the hearing officer shall be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of his investigation to the file containing said complaint. In furtherance of this investigation, the hearing officer may: 
(1)  First, seek such further information from the complainant or the public servant charged through inquiry or written questions; provided, however, the public servant charged shall have no obligation to answer any inquiries. Upon collection of such additional evidence, if the hearing officer determines that the complaint demonstrates facts sufficient to invoke disciplinary jurisdiction, the hearing officer shall conduct a hearing. 
(2)  During said hearing which is conducted to determine whether a violation of this article has occurred: 
a.  The person under investigation, or the accused, shall receive written notice of the hearing at least 14 days in advance of the first hearing from the city clerk (or assistant city clerk if the city clerk is the subject of the complaint) and may be represented by counsel of his or her choosing; and 
b.  The accused or his representative, if any, shall have an opportunity to: 
1.  Challenge the sufficiency of any complaint which has been filed against him; 
2.  Examine all documents and records obtained or prepared by the hearing officer in connection with the matter heard; 
3.  Bring witnesses; 
4.  Establish all pertinent facts and circumstances; 
5.  Question or refute testimony or evidence, including the opportunity to confront and cross examine adverse witnesses; 
6.  Exercise, to the extent the hearing officer, in his discretion, determines to be just and reasonable, any pretrial discovery procedure usually available in civil actions; and 
7.  During said hearing, the statutory rules of evidence shall not strictly apply. 
(3)  During said hearing, the hearing officer shall serve as the magistrate of the proceeding and the ethics board shall serve as the "jury," and shall have the right, at the conclusion of the hearing, to ask the hearing officer questions concerning the law to be applied and clarification on any evidence presented at the hearing. 
(4)  The burden shall be on the complainant to show, by clear and convincing evidence, that the accused public servant has violated the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Within ten days of the hearing, the ethics board shall meet to determine whether the complainant has proven, by clear and convincing evidence that the accused public servant has violated the provisions of this article. The hearing officer shall be present at said meeting to answer any questions of the board regarding any aspect of the hearing. If the board determines by majority vote that the burden has not been met, the board shall dismiss the complaint with prejudice. 
(d)  If the board determines, by majority vote, that the accused public servant violated the provisions of this article, the board shall recommend punishment for said violation to the mayor and city council by stating so on the record, which shall be transmitted to the mayor and city council within five days of the conclusion of the board's determination. 
(e)  The report of the board, as well as all documentation gathered by the hearing officer as part of each complaint and as presented in any evidentiary hearing, shall be subject to the requirements of the Georgia Open Records Act and all meetings of the board, including the evidentiary hearing where the board serves as "jury," shall be subject to the requirements of the Georgia Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-77. - City council action. 
(a)  Within 30 days following the receipt of the findings of the hearing officer and recommendations of the board, the mayor and council shall, at their next regularly scheduled meeting, either: 
(1)  By simple majority accept the recommendations of the board; 
(2)  By simple majority, accept the findings of the hearing officer and reject the recommended discipline, instead substituting its own discipline; or 
(3)  By simple majority, dismiss the complaint. 
(b)  If the subject of the complaint is the mayor or any councilmember, he or she will not be allowed to vote pursuant to this section or participate in any discussion related thereto, nor shall such position be counted for the purpose of establishing a quorum for this particular purpose. 
(c)  Upon final determination by the city council pursuant to this section, the city clerk (or assistant city clerk if the city clerk is the subject of the complaint) shall serve the accused with certified copies of the findings and recommendations of the hearing officer and the board, as well as certified minutes of the final action of city council, by personal service, certified mail, Federal Express or other overnight delivery service. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-78. - Right to appeal. 
A complainant aggrieved by a dismissal of the complaint by the hearing officer or board of ethics, or public servant adversely affected by the final decision of the city council, may appeal said decision by petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-79. - Statute of limitation. 
No action may be taken on any complaint which is filed later than one year after a violation of this article is alleged to have occurred, and any complaint alleging a violation must be filed within six months from the date the complainant knew or should have known of the action alleged to be a violation; such limitation periods shall be measured from the date of the last act occurring in furtherance of such violation. No proceeding under this article shall be instituted or prosecuted after the earlier of: 
(1)  The expiration of the term of office of the person complained against; or 
(2)  The resignation, death, vacancy, disqualification withdrawal or termination from office of the public servant against whom a complaint is filed. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-80. - Bar against subsequent complaints. 
Where a complainant files a complaint for which the ethics committee fails to make a "referral to city council" or for which the city council fails to determine that any penalty is appropriate, the complainant shall be barred from filing any subsequent complaint against the same respondent public servant(s) for a period of six months after termination of the original complaint proceeding. Where a complainant files a complaint for which the ethics committee fails to make a "referral to city council" or for which the city council fails to determine that any penalty is appropriate, the complainant shall be barred from filing any subsequent complaint against the same respondent public servant(s) alleging substantially the same facts and circumstances as the basis for the subsequent complaint. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 31-81. - Limitation of liability. 
No member of the ethics committee, any clerk, attorney, or city employee or any person acting on behalf of the ethics committee, shall be liable to any person for any damages arising out of the enforcement or operation of this ethics code except in the case of willful, malicious, or wanton conduct. This limitation of liability shall apply to the city, the members of the ethics committee, and any person acting under the direction of the ethics committee, including the clerk, attorney and/or any other city employee acting under the direction of the ethics committee. 
(Ord. No. 660, pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Chapter 35 - FILM PRODUCTIONS 

Sec. 35-1. - Purpose. 
It is the public policy of the State of Georgia to market the state as a location for film productions, recognizing the economic impact this industry provides, as well as the tourism it generates for local jurisdictions, such as the City of Chamblee. The city is further fortunate to have a diverse number of unique locations to attract movies, television, and other productions to the city. 
Despite the many positive benefits a film production may offer, certain inconveniences may result if the production company and city cannot work in concert to assure minimum standards are met and to assure a thoroughly-planned production schedule is followed. These concerns are best addressed through a regulatory permit. 
(Ord. No. 693 , pt. I, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 35-2. - Scope of coverage. 
The permit required by this chapter shall be required for all movies, television or video series, pilots, feature films and documentaries, commercials, music videos, photo shoots, infomercials and public service announcements, whether the final product is intended for commercial use or not, unless the activity shall wholly occur on private property within an otherwise licensed facility (such as a film or television studio). Regulation by this chapter shall not apply to amateur photographers, reporters or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, radio or television broadcasting station engaged in on-the-spot broadcasting, reporting or photographing of news of general public interest (this exception is not to include magazine or documentary programs), or productions which are conducted by the city or any city board or commission. Any film production on public property, intended to be closed to participation by the public, or restricting access to public property or facilities normally accessible by the public, shall require a permit. For purposes of this chapter, film production activity shall include areas designated for parking of trucks and equipment on public or private property, base camps used during the production activity, and food service areas. No public highway, street or road shall have its public access restricted or limited except by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 693 , pt. I, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 35-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means the individual applying for a permit who is legally authorized to bind the producer. 
Application means the documents created by the department that must be completed and submitted to the department to request a permit. 
Filming means creating motion picture images and all activity attendant to staging, shooting, and associated basecamp operations associated with the production of commercial motion pictures, independent filmography, documentaries, music videos, television shows, and commercials. Filming also means creating still photography images for commercial use and all activity attendant to staging or shooting such images. 
Permit means the authorization issued by the department necessary to conduct filming. 
Producer means an individual, organization, corporation or any other entity that is responsible for the filming. 
Public property means real property owned by the city, or of which the city is a tenant, including, without limitation, parks, streets, sidewalks, other rights-of-way and buildings. Public property shall not include real property which is being leased by the city to a tenant. 
(Ord. No. 693 , pt. I, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 35-4. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Any producer who wishes to perform filming must obtain a permit prior to filming. 
(b)  Permits shall be issued by the city manager or his designee and shall be issued to a producer. 
(c)  This permit is allowed with conditions in all zoning districts. Whenever a permit is sought for activities in primarily residential neighborhoods, extra consideration shall be given to the conditions imposed to ameliorate as much as possible inconvenience to the residents. 
(d)  General standards. Prior to making application for a permit, it shall be incumbent on the applicant to meet with the city manager, or their designees, to review locations and the general scope of activities planned during the production. A copy of the script shall be made available, upon request, to allow the city staff to better understand the applicant's needs. 
The following general standards shall apply to all permits: 
(1)  Permittees must provide all residents and businesses within a 500-foot radius of the film location notice of the dates, times, location addresses and production company contact at least 48 hours prior to the first film activity. If a permittee requires on-street parking for production vehicles, residents and merchants impacted by the parking requirements must receive notice at least 48 hours prior to the arrival of the vehicles; 
(2)  No tents, temporary sanitary facilities, trash collection or food service facilities shall be located within 100 feet of the property line of any property used for residential use, unless the owner or tenant gives written consent; 
(3)  Tents, depending on their square footage, and other temporary structures may require a separate building permit from the city; any food preparation or food service provided at the location shall require a food service permit from the county health department, or evidence of exemption; 
(4)  Lighting for filming should be oriented away from adjacent or nearby properties as much as possible and shall not interfere with the safe movement of vehicular traffic; 
(5)  Temporary signage must be approved in writing, in advance, prior to erection, by the development director, or his designee; approval of temporary signage is conditioned restoration of permanent signage following completion of the film activity; 
(6)  No regulatory traffic control signage within a public right-of-way shall be removed without the prior written consent of the chief of police; 
(7)  No modification to any existing traffic signage, street light, traffic control device or other officially-installed facility or improvement shall be made without prior consent of the chief of police; 
(8)  No street, road, alley, or sidewalk shall be closed, barricaded or other obstruction erected within a public right-of-way, including the laying of mats across cables, and no access shall be denied or restricted to public or private property or facilities unless the closure or restriction is approved as a condition of the permit; reasonable alternative access shall be arranged whenever possible; 
(9)  No trees, vegetation (including grasses), or ornamental shrubs shall be cut or removed from public property without prior written consent of the city in the permit, based upon an agreed landscape restoration plan. A land disturbance permit may be separately required depending upon the nature and extent of the activity; 
(10)  Traffic management plan. The applicant shall submit to the chief of police and public works director a traffic management plan to address traffic flow in the vicinity of the location where production activity is to occur, even if normal traffic flow is not to be obstructed or interrupted. Detours shall be determined and approved by the chief of police; temporary traffic control devices and signage as required by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) shall be provided at the sole expense of the applicant; the fire marshal shall also review and approve such plan; 
(11)  Fireworks, explosives, etc. No film activity which involves the use of explosives, pyrotechnics, fire, smoke-making machines or other special effects may be undertaken unless specifically approved by the fire marshal; 
(12)  The City of Chamblee shall be listed in the production credits for all permits required. 
(Ord. No. 693 , pt. I, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 35-5. - Permit modification, suspension or cancellation. 
(a)  After receiving a permit, a producer may request a modification of the permit at any time by submitting a change request in writing and the requisite change fee to the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall process the change request in the same manner established for processing initial applications. 
(b)  A permit may be immediately suspended where the city identifies an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to property caused by or resulting from the filming; or an actual or imminent violation of the material terms of the permit, the ordinance codified herein, or any other federal, state or local law. 
(c)  A permit may be cancelled where: 
(1)  The city manager or his designee determines that an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons or to property caused by or resulting from the filming cannot be reasonably eliminated; 
(2)  The city manager or his designee determines that the producer has intentionally or recklessly violated material terms of the permit or the ordinance codified herein; 
(3)  The city manager or his designee determines that the producer does not have or has lost insurance coverage. 
(d)  If a permit is suspended or cancelled, the city manager or his designee shall give written notice to the applicant setting forth the reasons for permit suspension or cancellation. The applicant or producer shall have an opportunity to respond to a suspension or cancellation notice within seven business days after receipt of the notice by presenting written or oral evidence to the city manager or his designee. A final written decision will be issued by the city manager or his designee within 15 business days after the applicant or producer has appealed the suspension or cancellation. 
(e)  If the producer is otherwise in compliance with the permit, the city shall make reasonable efforts to find alternative means to accommodate the producer's filming and to eliminate said health or safety risk. 
(f)  If the producer is not in compliance with the permit or suspends or cancels the permit prior to filming, no refund will be issued. 
(g)  If the department suspends or cancels a permit prior to filming, the city will refund the permit fee upon written request. 
(Ord. No. 693 , pt. I, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 35-6. - Permit denial. 
(a)  The city may deny a permit if any one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  Filming poses an unreasonable risk of injury or damage to persons or property not associated with the filming; 
(2)  Filming poses an unreasonable risk of irreversible damage to public property; 
(3)  The date and time requested conflicts with other filming or other scheduled events or activities; 
(4)  Filming unreasonably interferes with city functions or operations; 
(5)  Producer owes an outstanding debt to the city; 
(6)  Producer cannot procure insurance; 
(7)  Producer previously violated the ordinance codified herein on two or more occasions within the last three years; or 
(8)  Producer made a material misrepresentation on the application. 
(b)  If a permit is denied, the city manager or his designee shall give written notice to the applicant setting forth the reasons for permit denial. The applicant or producer shall have an opportunity to respond to a denial within seven business days after receipt of the denial notice by presenting written or oral evidence to the city manager or his designee. A final written decision will be issued by the city manager or his designee within 15 business days after the applicant or producer has appealed the denial. 
(Ord. No. 693 , pt. I, 11-17-15) 
Sec. 35-7. - Film production activity standards. 
In addition to the general standards, the following minimum standards shall be met in order to be permitted. Due to the varying requirements of film productions and nature of the industry, these standards are not intended to be all inclusive and additional conditions may be reasonably imposed, as warranted, to minimize anticipated adverse effects: 
(1)  No permit shall be effective for more than 14 consecutive days from its date of issuance. Permits may be extended by the city manager, for reasonable cause, provided a daily filming fee shall apply. A single application shall include all locations for the same production within the city. Application shall be made no less than five business days prior to the first scheduled event or day of filming. The permit shall be available, on location, at all times while production activity is occurring and shown to city inspectors upon request. 
(2)  Normal hours of activity shall be 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. daily; all preparation and wrap-up shall occur within one hour of this time frame. Noise shall be kept to a minimum and shall not violate the provisions of Chamblee Code section 34-27, Sound level limitations. 
(3)  Street closure(s), obstruction or interference with normal traffic flow, including pedestrian use of sidewalks and public rights-of-way shall be detailed in the application, including any use of on-street parking spaces and/or parking in alleys or side streets. 
(4)  Facilities and locations to be used for base camp, food service, and parking shall be approved as a condition of the permit; any other required permit(s) shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit under this chapter. 
(5)  The city will not intervene on behalf of any permittee or negotiate access rights to private property with property owners; the permittee is expected to deal directly with private property owners for required permission and consent. An applicant is required to obtain the property owner's permission, consent, and/or lease for use of property not owned or controlled by the city. Written permission of the property owner must be presented at time of permit application. An applicant is required to minimize interference with the normal activities of a neighborhood or commercial area, including access to private or public property. 
(6)  In the event that the applicant desires to locate their production event at a facility owned or managed by the city, or on the public right-of-way, the city shall charge a daily fee in an amount determined by city manager or his designee not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. If an existing facility charge has been established by the city at a facility owned or managed by the city, that fee will be charged to the applicant. 
(7)  Based upon the proposed scope of production activity and in consideration of any potential danger to the safety, health and welfare of the community, particularly private property and residents near the location, the chief of police and/or fire marshal may require on-site security (qualified private security or use of off-duty law enforcement officers) and/or may require personnel and equipment be placed on standby for portions of the production activity at the expense of the applicant. The application shall detail the planned time, place and manner of any of the following production activities: pyrotechnics, demolition, discharge of firearms or other weapons, motor vehicle chases, physical stunts, and similar actions. 
(Ord. No. 693 , pt. I, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 755 , pt. I, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 35-8. - Application and permit procedure. 
(a)  Applications. All applications shall be made electronically on forms provided by the city. Applications shall be submitted in duplicate originals. No application shall be deemed accepted unless accompanied by payment of the requisite application fee in U.S. funds. 
(b)  Every application shall state the name and contact information of a responsible representative of the applicant, who shall be available at all times during actual production activity within the city and for a period of not less than one year thereafter; more than one point of contact may be specified. 
(c)  The application shall contain a detailed narrative of the scope of production activities, and include drawings, maps or plats to illustrate locations, property boundaries, existing material improvements, planned temporary improvements, curb cuts and driveways, adjoining streets, traffic patterns, and similar information helpful to assess the impact of the proposed activity. 
(d)  When activity is to occur in or near residential areas, personal notice of intent to secure a permit and the place, date and time of the proposed film activity shall be provided by the applicant within three days of filing the application; to the extent feasible, written acknowledgment of the notice shall be obtained from the resident or resident's agent. For purposes of this section, all residential properties within 500 feet of the outside boundaries of the location(s) where production activity is to occur shall be notified. 
(e)  A signed indemnification and hold harmless agreement, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, shall accompany the application, together with a certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured. The minimum limits of insurance coverage shall not be less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
(f)  All applications shall be filed with the city manager, or his designee, who may require such additional information as needed to assess the proposed extent and intensity of the production within the city. 
(g)  Permits. All applications shall be approved with specific terms and conditions, or denied, by the city manager, or his designee, in writing. If approved, the city shall issue a permit to the applicant, in writing, with all terms and conditions clearly set forth therein. Applications shall be approved within five business days of receipt by the city a completed application. If the application is denied, the city manager, or his designee, shall state, in writing, the reason(s) for denial. An aggrieved applicant may appeal to the city council at the next regular meeting occurring more than five days following receipt of a written denial. 
(h)  Permits may be denied, in whole or in part, due to prior scheduled events or activities sanctioned or permitted by the city under other provisions of this Code. 
(i)  Any material variation from the approved scope of work permitted shall be grounds for permit revocation, unless the permit is modified in advance by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 693 , pt. I, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 755 , pt. II, 10-16-18) 
Sec. 35-9. - Fees and waivers. 
(a)  Application fees for film production permits shall be set by resolution of the mayor and city council. Application fees are nonrefundable and must be paid, in full, at time of application. 
(b)  Daily permit fees are required for each calendar day on which production activity physically occurs within the city shall be paid upon the last day of scheduled activity; if a production is scheduled for a duration in excess of a calendar month, the accrued daily fee shall be due and payable on the last day of each month in which production activity occurred. Daily permit fees shall be set by resolution of the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Additional fees and charges may be assessed based upon specific requirements, including fees for the monitoring of public safety or special services by a city department, based upon labor, time and equipment necessary to provide the service. When using city-owned buildings or property other than public road rights-of-way, for production activities, a separate rental fee or charge may be negotiated. 
(d)  Application fees and daily permit fees for use of city services or facilities may be reduced or waived for charitable or nonprofit organizations holding § 501(c) status from the I.R.S., or for other governmental agencies. All waivers shall require approval of the city manager. 
(e)  Reduction or waiver of daily permit fees may be approved by the city council for commercial productions providing a greater than normal economic benefit to the community, as determined on a case-by-case basis. 
(f)  A rush fee may be assessed if an applicant fails to submit the application at least five business days prior to the first scheduled event or day of filming. 
(g)  If a producer fails to obtain the proper permits, the city manager or his designee may assess additional fines. 
(Ord. No. 693 , pt. I, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 755 , pt. III, 10-16-18) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; civil emergencies, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 50; zoning, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(1); statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-2 et seq.; authority to enact ordinances or fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-2 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; electronic security systems installed and serviced by counties or municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12. 

Sec. 38-1. - International Fire Code adopted. 
The International Fire Code and subsequent editions and revisions of such code, with county amendments, are hereby adopted as a minimum standard for fire prevention in the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, and are hereby made a part of this chapter as fully and to the same extent as if copied in this section in full. A copy of such code shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk, said code shall be a public record and shall be available for inspection by the public. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the International Fire Code and the provisions of this Code, state law, or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code, state law, or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1982, § 4-2-21; Ord. No. 515, pt. I, 1-15-02; Ord. No. 584, pt. I, 2-19-08) 
Sec. 38-2. - Life Safety Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city the Life Safety Code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, for the purpose of providing rules and regulations for the construction, erection, use and occupancy of buildings within the city with minimum standards for fire safety necessary in the public interest. A copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the Life Safety Code is hereby made a part of this chapter as fully and to the same extent as if copied in this section in full. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the Life Safety Code and the provisions of this Code, state law, or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code, state law, or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1982, § 4-2-22; Ord. No. 515, pt. I, 1-15-02) 
Sec. 38-3. - Adoption of state and county fire safety standards; enforcement of fire safety standards by county fire prevention bureau. 
The minimum fire safety standards of the state and the fire prevention ordinances of the county, and any future amendments or additions thereto, are hereby incorporated by reference in this section and adopted as the ordinances of this city. The county is hereby requested to extend the services of the fire prevention bureau to the citizens of the city, and the personnel of the bureau are authorized to enforce such ordinances wIthin the limits of the city, and are hereby made deputy marshals thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 4-2-23) 
Chapter 46 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; solid waste, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4(4); rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6; promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373. 

Sec. 46-1. - County health code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing health conditions within the city, the county health code, more particularly known as chapter 13, Board of Health Regulations, DeKalb County Code, as amended. One copy of the said county health code shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk, and such health code is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if set out at length in this section. 
(Code 1982, § 4-4-1; Ord. No. 526, pt. I, 2-18-03) 
Chapter 50 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 22; civil emergencies, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; municipal court, ch. 54; offenses, ch. 58; parks and recreation, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; vehicles for hire, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise police power, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(1); law enforcement officer appreciation day, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-6; peace officer memorial day, police week, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-7; Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; training requirements for police chiefs, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-20; special policemen, O.C.G.A. § 35-9-1; county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-1; torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; definition of police officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1; impersonating law enforcement officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-395. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Composition of police department. 
The police department shall consist of a chief and such officers and employees of such ranks and positions as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 50-2. - Responsibilities of police department. 
The police department shall be responsible for patrol, traffic control, investigation of accidents, investigation of crimes, apprehension of offenders, court appearances, security of business establishments, and any other matters of public safety and law enforcement as directed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-2) 
Sec. 50-3. - Fees for reproduction of police records, fingerprinting, criminal record checks and other police services. 
In all cases where fees are charged to the public for police services, including, but not limited to, reproducing copies of reports, fingerprinting and providing criminal history record checks, said fees shall be charged to such person as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 364, 7-10-92; Ord. No. 410, 12-19-95; Ord. No. 512, 12-18-01) 
Secs. 50-4—50-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY IN POSSESSION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 384, adopted Nov. 12, 1993, set out provisions that, for purposes of classification and at the editor's discretion, have been codified as Art. II of Ch. 50. 

Sec. 50-21. - Sale authorized. 
The police department shall have the authority to sell at public auction to the highest bidder for cash any and all articles of personal property that have come into the possession of the police department and which, after a reasonable effort has been made to ascertain the true and lawful owner thereof without success, remain unclaimed for a period of at least three months. 
(Ord. No. 384, 11-12-93) 
Sec. 50-22. - Record; identification of property. 
The police department shall maintain a separate catalog record of all property coming into its possession, such property to be identified in detail by its usual name, make and model, manufacturer's name and serial number, if any, and if no identifying name or numbers, to be fully described on such catalog record as to its physical properties and appearance. Such record shall also show the date such property came into the possession of the department and the disposal thereof. 
(Ord. No. 384, 11-12-93) 
Sec. 50-23. - Attempt to find owner. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to make a reasonable effort to find the true owner of any article of personal property coming into its possession and if such owner can be found to deliver such property to him. If the true owner of any such article cannot be found and the property remains unclaimed for a period of not less than three months next preceding the date of sale as hereinafter provided, the department may proceed to sell such article as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 384, 11-12-93) 
Sec. 50-24. - Location, manner of sale. 
The police department may hold a public sale of all unclaimed articles of personal property held by it for at least three months immediately preceding the date of sale at the headquarters of the police department or at such other place as designated by the mayor and council. The date, time and location of such sale shall be established by the mayor and city council. All articles sold shall be sold for cash to the highest bidder on an "as is" basis, and no warranties of any nature, either express or implied, either as to merchantability, title, quality, or performance, or fitness for a particular purpose, shall be made by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 384, 11-12-93) 
Sec. 50-25. - Notice of sale. 
The governing authority of the city shall cause notice to be published once in the official legal organ of the county in which the city is located or in a newspaper of general circulation in the community, not less than 15 days nor more than 60 days preceding the day of the auction. The legal notice of sale shall include a general description of the property to be sold. The notice shall also contain the conditions of the proposed sale and shall state the date, time, and place of the proposed sale. The notice shall also state that the sale shall be open to the public and that all sales are to be made to the highest bidder for cash. Such notice shall also state that only unclaimed property which has come into possession of the police department is being sold; that the police department makes no warranties whatsoever either expressly or implied as to merchantability, merchantable title, quality or performance, or fitness for a particular purpose, and all articles are sold "as is." 
(Ord. No. 384, 11-12-93) 
Sec. 50-26. - Auctioneer. 
The police department shall appoint a licensed auctioneer, a member of its own force or any other individual, to conduct the sale authorized by0this article under the guidance of an employee of the police department and more than one such person may act at any sale, either alternately or at the same time as the circumstances may dictate and in the discretion of the employee of the department who is in charge of the sale. The auctioneer or other individual acting shall be the sole arbiter in the case of a disputed sale and he shall not make a sale until all bidding on the article offered has ceased; however, there shall be no required number of bids before a sale is made. 
(Ord. No. 384, 11-12-93) 
Sec. 50-27. - Sales not warranted. 
It shall be the duty of the auctioneer or other person holding a sale under this chapter to make public announcement before opening such sale that the police department does not warrant title to any article, nor is there any other warranty, either as to merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose, either expressed or implied as to any article sold, that all sales are final and all articles are sold "as is." It shall be the duty of such auctioneer or other person in charge to make this announcement at intervals during the progress of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 384, 11-12-93) 
Sec. 50-28. - Accounting, disposition of receipts. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to make a true accounting to the city of all the property sold under this article and money collected from the sale conducted as provided herein, which money shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 384, 11-12-93) 
Chapter 54 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court judge, § 3.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 50; offenses, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Establishment and jurisdiction of municipal courts, Ga. Const. art. 6, sec. 1, par. 1; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 54-1. - Court authorized; jurisdiction. 
The city shall have a municipal court, which shall be called the "Municipal Court of the City of Chamblee" and shall have jurisdiction over all violations of the ordinances and resolutions of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-1) 
Sec. 54-2. - Election, qualifications and oath of judge, assistant judges and solicitor. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall elect a judge and make such judge presiding officer of the municipal court. The judge so elected shall be a duly licensed attorney and a member of the State Bar of Georgia, with at least ten years experience in the active practice of law. Such judge shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council and judge's compensation shall be fixed by the mayor and council. The mayor and council may appoint assistant judges as the mayor and council deem necessary. Any such assistant judge shall be a duly licensed attorney and a member of the state bar with at least two years experience in the active practice of law. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall elect a solicitor of the municipal court of the city. The solicitor so elected shall be a duly licensed attorney and a member of the State Bar of Georgia with at least four years experience in the active practice of law. The solicitor shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council and his compensation shall be fixed by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Before accepting the duties of office, any judge of the municipal court shall take and subscribe the following oath: "I do in good faith claim that I am eligible under the law to hold the office of municipal court judge in the City of Chamblee; and that I will truly and faithfully perform my duties as such officer to the best of my ability and according to the laws and ordinances under which I perform said duties; I will in all cases undertake to act impartially, and to do justice in all respects; so help me God". 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-2; Ord. No. 367, § 2-3-2, 12-11-92; Ord. No. 414, 3-19-96; Ord. No. 425, 10-15-96; Ord. No. 449, § 1, 3-17-98) 
Sec. 54-3. - Powers of court and judge; maximum penalty; contempt. 
The judge of the municipal court shall have jurisdiction to try all offenses against the laws and ordinances of the city and to punish violators of such laws and ordinances. The court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; to punish witnesses for nonattendance; and also to punish for contempt. The judge of the municipal court shall have power and authority to impose fines or imprisonment for the violation of any law or ordinance of the city passed in accordance with its Charter. The judge shall have the power and authority to impose any one or more of such punishments when in the opinion of the court the facts justify it. The court shall have the power to preserve order; compel the attendance of witnesses; compel the production of books and papers to be used as evidence; to issue subpoenas for these purposes; to issue such other processes as may be necessary to the proper administration of the court and to punish for contempt, as provided in chapter 1, section 1-6 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Chamblee, Georgia. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-3; Ord. No. 599, pt. I, 6-16-09) 
Sec. 54-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 387, § 7(1), adopted Dec. 10, 1993, set out provisions repealing § 54-4, which pertained to the judge having authority of justice of the peace as well as the duty of the judge in cases of state law violations and derived from the Code of 1982, § 2-3-4. 
Sec. 54-5. - Appellate review. 
Appellate review of judgments of municipal court shall be as provided by state law. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-5; Ord. No. 646, pt. I, 9-24-12) 
Sec. 54-6. - Time and place for holding court. 
The municipal court shall be held at such times and places as the judge of the municipal court may designate, with approval of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-6) 
Sec. 54-7. - Arrest by police officers; right to bail or recognizance. 
All police officers of the city shall have the power and authority to arrest persons when there is probable cause to believe that such persons have violated any ordinance of the city or law of the state, and to confine them in the city prison or the common jail of the county. If there exists probable cause to believe that an offense has been committed and that the defendant committed it, the judge of the municipal court shall bind the defendant over for trial, and shall grant him bail or recognizance if the offense is bailable under ordinance or state law. If probable cause does not appear, the judge shall discharge the defendant. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-7; Ord. No. 387, § 7(2), 12-10-93) 
Sec. 54-8. - Acceptance of cash or property in lieu of surety bond. 
The judge of the municipal court may, in his discretion, accept cash or real or personal property as surety for the happening of an event or act concerning matters before the municipal court. The property or cash shall be deposited with the appropriate person, official or other depository as prescribed by ordinance, in an amount or equivalent cash value to be determined by the judge. If property offered and accepted for the security is realty, or immovable or cumbersome personal property, the municipal court may exercise its authority and control over such property by posting written notice to all persons in or on such property that it is in the custody of the court. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-8) 
Sec. 54-9. - Forfeiture of bond or other security on failure to appear. 
Whenever any defendant shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for the trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge of the municipal court, and an execution thereon issued by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi, at least two days before the hearing on the rule nisi. If cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of offenders at trial and if such offenders fail to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be, on order of the judge of the municipal court, declared forfeited to the city, and shall become the property of the city unless otherwise set aside by the court. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-9) 
Sec. 54-10. - Court costs. 
In all cases in the municipal court, the costs incurred and allowable pursuant to this section may be computed by the judge to defray the costs of operation. Any such costs as computed and imposed shall be subject to review and modification by the mayor and council as they may see fit. The city shall be entitled to reimbursement of the costs of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to the superior court for violations of state law. The mayor and council may also provide a uniform scale of costs of the clerk and police officers of the city for all services in the arrest and prosecution of offenders in the municipal court and in the issuance and collection of tax and other executions, and for their collection and payment into the city treasury. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-10) 
Sec. 54-11. - Administrative rules. 
With the approval of the mayor and council, the judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the business of the court. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-11) 
Sec. 54-12. - Bailiff. 
The bailiff of the municipal court shall be appointed by the chief of police. The duties of the bailiff shall consist generally of seeing that the courtroom is in proper condition for sessions of court, of assisting in keeping order while court is in session, and of doing such other acts of assistance as may be required of him by the judge of the court. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-12) 
Sec. 54-13. - Clerk. 
The clerk of the municipal court shall be appointed by the judge of the municipal court. It shall be his duty to maintain all records of the court and perform such other duties and acts as may be required by the judge. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-13) 
Sec. 54-14. - Record of cases. 
A record of all cases heard in the municipal court for violation of this Code or other municipal ordinances shall be kept in a suitable bound volume by the court clerk. The record shall contain the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense charged, the final disposition of the case, and the date of final disposition. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-14) 
Sec. 54-15. - Service of summons. 
Any person charged with violating any city ordinance shall receive notice by service of a summons as provided in this section. Such summons may be issued by any police officer of the city or the municipal court judge. The summons shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged, the time and place, as far as practicable, of the offense charged, and the day, hour and place of trial, and shall require the accused to appear before the judge of the municipal court to answer the accusation made. Service of the summons shall be made by any person authorized to issue such summons, either by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his most notorious place of abode, by certified or registered mail, or by any reasonable manner or method as prescribed by the judge. In the case of a summons issued for violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles, such summons may be directed to an unknown person as owner of an automobile designated in the summons, and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-15) 
Sec. 54-16. - Service of subpoenas. 
Any person authorized to issue a summons shall also be authorized to issue subpoenas for the appearance of all witnesses necessary for the prosecution or for the defense in any case pending before the municipal court. All subpoenas shall be served in the same manner as a summons. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-16) 
Sec. 54-17. - Failure to obey summons or subpoena. 
Any person who fails to appear at the time and place set out in any summons or subpoena served upon him may be subject to punishment for contempt of court, and upon conviction thereof may be punished for such contempt at the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-17) 
Sec. 54-18. - Technology surcharge. 
There shall be imposed by the Chamblee Municipal Court a technology surcharge in the amount of $15.00 per offense. Said technology surcharge shall be in addition to all other fines and fees imposed by the Chamblee Municipal Court. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this additional surcharge shall not apply to citations exempt from add on fees by state law, nor shall the surcharge cause the total amount of fines to exceed that allowed by state law or the Charter for the City of Chamblee, Georgia. All revenues derived from the technology surcharge shall be used by the City of Chamblee to provide for the technology needs of the Chamblee Police Department and the Chamblee Municipal Court. 
(Ord. No. 599, pt. II, 6-16-09) 
Chapter 58 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; animals, ch. 14; nuisances, § 34-46 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 50; municipal court, ch. 54; parks and recreation, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; vehicles for hire, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Limitations on home rule powers of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Pawnbrokers. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a pawnbroker in the city without complying with the provisions of the laws of this state relative to pawnbrokers and provisions of this Code and ordinances of the city. Pawnbrokers are further required to make a daily report to the chief of police of all articles pawned with them. Such daily report shall include fingerprinting of the right index finger of each person who pawns any article on the date for which the daily report is made. Each pawnbroker shall collect the sum of $0.50 from each person who pawns any article in any one day, and such sums as are collected for each calendar month shall be remitted to the city no later than the tenth day of the following month. Such fees shall be used to defray the administrative expense of the city incurred in determining whether any articles pawned with a pawnbroker are stolen. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of subsection (a) of this section may be punished, upon conviction, as given in section 1-6. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-10; Ord. No. 368, §§ I, II, 12-11-92) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
Sec. 58-2. - Drinking alcoholic beverages in public place, vehicle or public area. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverages or any other intoxicating beverage at any public place within the city, or for any person to have in his possession any unsealed or opened container with such intoxicating beverage in it, at any public place within the city, except as provided under the terms and conditions of special permits issued by the city. 
(b)  It shall further be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverage in any automobile located on the public streets of the city, whether the automobile is moving or parked. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-1; Ord. No. 381, 10-8-93; Ord. No. 605, pt. I, 6-16-09) 
Sec. 58-2.1. - Exception for city-sponsored events. 
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in subsection 58-2(a) of this chapter, concerning consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places or public areas, the city council may, for city-sponsored events only, designate certain defined public areas within the city where alcoholic beverages may be purchased and consumed; provided that such alcoholic beverages shall be purchased only from licensees within the defined public area who are licensed by the city and who are authorized to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises by the city. Except for the provisions concerning consumption of alcohol as set forth in this section, any such sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages in designated public areas in the city shall be in compliance with the provisions of chapter 6, "Alcoholic Beverages" of this Code of Ordinances and the statutes and regulations of the State of Georgia with respect to sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 587, 5-20-08; Ord. No. 605, pt. II, 6-16-09) 
Sec. 58-3. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or endanger the public peace or decency by any disorderly conduct. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Acting in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of the safety of such person's life, limb or health; 
(2)  Acting in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Causing, provoking or engaging in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  Assembling or congregating with another or others for the purpose of gaming; 
(5)  Being in or about any place, alone or with others, with the purpose or intent to engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device to obtain any money or valuable thing, or to aid or abet any person doing so; 
(6)  Being in or about any place where gaming or illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated, for the purpose of or intent to engage in gaming or the purchase, use, possession or consumption of such illegal drugs, narcotics or alcohol; 
(7)  Directing fighting words toward another, that is, words which by their very nature tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(8)  Interfering, by acts of physical obstruction, with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(9)  Congregating with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and failing to clear that public way after being ordered to do so by a city police officer or other lawful authority; 
(10)  Standing or remaining in or about any street, sidewalk, overpass, or public way so as to impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and failing to clear such street, sidewalk, overpass or public way after being requested or ordered to do so by a police officer or other lawful authority; 
(11)  Disrupting by actions which tend to cause an immediate breach of the peace of the undisturbed activities of any business establishment, tenants of multifamily housing, a house of worship, a hospital, or a home for the elderly or a private residence; or 
(12)  Throwing bottles, paper, cans, glass, sticks, stones, missiles, or any other debris on public property. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-3; Ord. No. 391, 3-11-94; Ord. No. 430, 11-19-96; Ord. No. 744 , pt. I, 2-20-18) 
Sec. 58-4. - Fortunetelling. 
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of palmistry, fortunetelling or crystal reading, or in any other method of predicting future occurrences. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-6) 
Sec. 58-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 662 , pt. I, adopted Mar. 18, 2014, deleted § 58-5, entitled "Distribution of handbills", which derived from Code 1982, § 11-1-7; and Ord. No. 387, § 7(5), adopted Dec. 10, 1993. 
Sec. 58-6. - Peddling ice cream and similar refreshments. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, sell or offer to sell at retail upon the streets, alleys, lanes, roads or highways within the city from any automobile, truck, pushcart or other vehicle within the city any ice cream, ice cream product in modified form, or other cold or frozen food, refreshment, soft drink or delicacy. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any sort of musical instrument upon the streets, roads, lanes, alleys and highways within the limits of the city for the purpose of advertising and soliciting and attracting sales and customers with respect to such articles, foods and refreshments, whether the musical instrument is attached to or used in connection with a truck or vehicle which is used for making such sales. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-11) 
Sec. 58-7. - Accumulation of junk. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any property in the city, other than a person who is a licensed junk dealer, to permit to accumulate on such property any dilapidated furniture or appliances, machinery or equipment, including automobiles, which is either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition, unless such items are completely enclosed within a building. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to notify, in writing, the owner or occupant of any premises upon which junk is permitted to accumulate in violation of this section that such material must be removed within ten days from the date of the notice. 
(c)  Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to remove such junk within the designated time period, the superintendent of sanitation is authorized and empowered to arrange for the removal of such material by the city or by a private individual or firm through contract with the city. 
(d)  The actual cost of such junk removal shall be assessed against the property owner from whose premises the junk is removed, and, if the bill for such charges remains unpaid for 30 days after it has been rendered, it shall become a lien upon the premises enforceable in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-15) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide by ordinance for the removal and disposal of discarded, dismantled or junked motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 58-8. - Loitering for purpose of engaging in drug-related activity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public, or near any public or private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in drug-related activity contrary to any of the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are: 
(1)  Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For purposes of this section, a "known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller" is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any controlled substance as defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, or such person has been convicted of any violation of any substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any other state; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as "needle tracks," burned or callused thumb and index fingers, underweight, nervous and excited behavior. 
(2)  Such person is currently subject to a court order prohibiting his or her presence in a high drug activity geographic area. 
(3)  Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including by way of example only, such person acting as a "lookout," hailing or stopping cars, or repeatedly beckons to, stops, or attempts to stop or engage in conversation with passersby whether such passersby are on foot or in a motor vehicle. 
(4)  Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of a "gang" or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity. 
(5)  Such person transfers small objects or packages in a furtive fashion. 
(6)  Such person takes flight or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself upon the appearance of a police officer. 
(7)  Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity. 
(8)  Such person possesses any instrument, article, or thing whose customary or primary purpose is for the sale, administration or use of controlled substances such as, but not limited to, crack pipes, push wires, hand scales, hypodermic needles, razor blades, or other cutting tools. 
(9)  The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of unlawful drug use and trafficking. 
(10)  Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. 
(c)  No arrest shall be made for a violation of subsection (a) of this section unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain his conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 402, 5-12-95) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 402, adopted May 12, 1995, repeaded the former § 58-8, which pertained to loitering for purpose of illegal use, possession or sale of controlled substances and derived from Ord. No. 358, § 1, 4-10-92. 
Sec. 58-9. - Smoking on city property. 
(a)  Smoking of tobacco in any form shall be prohibited in any building or building enclosure owned by the city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in paragraph (e) of this section, smoking may occur outdoors but no less than 20 feet from any entrance to any city-owned or city-leased building. 
(c)  Smoking shall include cigarettes and other legal and illegal substances, any controlled substances, and smoking in any manner, including any pipes and materials, whether organic or inorganic, utilized for lighting and inhaling thereof. 
(d)  Every location where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance into the city-owned building a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to smoke in any recreational facility, whether indoors or outdoors as provided in section 62-2. 
(f)  A person convicted of violating subsections (a), (b) or (e) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 363, 7-10-92; Ord. No. 721 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
State Law reference— Smoking in public places, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2. 
Sec. 58-10. - Trees or shrubs obstructing view or interfering with use of street or sidewalk. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying or in any wise controlling property in the city shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of the city so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or other person controlling property in the city, to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of the city after ten days' notice by the city to do so. 
(Code 1982, § 10-1-6) 
Sec. 58-11. - Loitering for purpose of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in public for the purpose of soliciting or procuring others to engage in any sexual acts for hire. 
(Ord. No. 402, 5-12-95) 
Sec. 58-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 580, adopted Dec. 18, 2007, deleted § 58-12, which pertained to impoundment of used vehicles displayed for sale at unlicensed facilities and derived from Ord. No. 422, adopted Aug. 20, 1996. 
Sec. 58-13. - Day-labor prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Pick up or hire day laborers on private property without the permission of the property owner; 
(2)  Assemble on private property for the purpose of soliciting work as a day laborer without the permission of the property owner and after having been directed to cease such action by the property owner or other lawful authority. 
(Ord. No. 429, 11-19-96) 
Sec. 58-14. - Defecating or urinating on public property or in public areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate on the streets or sidewalks, or in the halls or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view in the city. 
(Ord. No. 433, 3-18-97) 
Sec. 58-15. - Urban camping and improper use of public places. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Camping means residing in or using a public street, sidewalk, or park for private living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for any substantial prolonged period of time, regularly cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities. 
(2)  Public park means and includes all municipal parks, public playgrounds, public plazas, attractions and monuments. 
(3)  Public street means and includes all public streets, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots and medians. 
(4)  Storing personal property means leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for any substantial prolonged length of time. This term shall not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(b)  Public parks. It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any park owned by the city as defined above. 
(c)  Public streets. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any public street, as defined above. 
(d)  Other public property—Blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any public property so as to interfere with the ingress or egress from buildings. 
(e)  Warning. No person may be arrested for violating this section by simply sleeping, sitting or lying down in a prohibited location or for a prohibited period of time without having first received an oral or written warning regarding the requirements of the ordinance codified herein to cease such unlawful conduct. In addition, city officials shall have the right to remove any debris or property that creates a legitimate concern for health and safety or that creates an immediate and substantial danger to the environment. 
(f)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything in this Code section to the contrary, this Code section shall not apply to nor be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons sitting in wheelchairs while using sidewalks; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing outdoor cafes; 
(5)  Persons sitting down, lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals, concerts, fireworks or other special events taking place in any park or on any street or sidewalk closed by permit for such purpose; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; 
(9)  Persons sitting or lying down while in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provision of meals; or 
(10)  Children under the age of 13 years sleeping in parks, or sleeping anywhere else while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(Ord. No. 435, 4-18-97; Ord. No. 480, 12-21-99; Ord. No. 742 , pt. I, 10-17-17) 
Sec. 58-16. - Certain acts prohibited in transit. 
(a)  A person who commits or attempts to commit any of the following acts in a public transit bus, a rapid rail car, or a rapid rail station or intermodal bus station shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Spits, defecates, or urinates; 
(2)  Discards litter, except into receptacles designated for that purpose; 
(3)  Smokes tobacco in any form; 
(4)  Consumes food or beverage or possesses any open food or beverage container, provided that this paragraph shall not apply to an operator of a public transit bus at an authorized layover point or to a person providing food or beverage to any child under age five; 
(5)  Plays any radio, cassette, cartridge, or tape player, or similar device unless such device is connected to an earphone that limits the sound to the hearing of the individual user; 
(6)  Carries or possesses any explosives, acids, other dangerous articles, or live animals, except for the following: 
a.  A guide dog or service dog as described in O.C.G.A. § 30-4-1; provided, that such guide dog or service dog is accompanied by a physically disabled person, blind person, person with visual disabilities, deaf person, or a person who is responsible for training a guide dog or service dog; and 
b.  Small pets confined to rigid pet carriers with locks or latches; 
(7)  Obstructs, hinders, interferes with, or otherwise disrupts or disturbs the operations, operator, or passengers of a public transit bus or rapid rail car; 
(8)  Boards any public transit bus through the rear exit door, unless so directed by an employee or agent of the carrier; 
(9)  Remains aboard any public transit bus or rapid rail car after such vehicle has completed its scheduled route and passengers have been advised to exit the vehicle or remains aboard any public transit bus or rapid rail car after having been warned and after such vehicle has entered a garage or other restricted area not open to the public; 
(10)  Enters, exits, or passes through any emergency door of any rapid rail car or public transit bus in the absence of a bona fide emergency; 
(11)  Enters the operator's cab or driver's seat of any rapid rail car or public transit bus in the absence of a bona fide emergency; or 
(12)  Appears in an indecent condition or performs an indecent act. 
(b)  Employees of a public transportation authority or carrier while at work performing the duties of their employment shall be exempted from the restrictions of subsections (a)(8), (9), (10), and (11) of this section. 
(c)  A person convicted of a first offense of violating subsection (a) of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $100.00. Upon a second or subsequent conviction, a person shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $250.00 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 456, § 1, 7-21-98) 
Sec. 58-17. - Designation of drug-free zones. 
(a)  Designated drug-free recreation zones: Shall be defined and depicted on official maps as that area 1,000 feet within the locations described below: 
(1)  Dresden Park located at 2301 Dresden Drive, Chamblee, Georgia. 
(b)  The map or series of maps produced by the city for the purpose of depicting the location and boundaries of the area or areas on or within 1,000 feet of the real property set apart by the governing authority for use as a park, playground, recreation center, or for any other recreation purposes are hereby adopted, confirmed and ratified as "Drug-Free Recreation Zones". 
(c)  The city clerk is hereby designated as the custodian of the record for the purpose of having possession of and maintaining such maps and any such map shall, if certified as a true copy by such custodian, be admissible and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the location and boundaries of the area or areas approved hereby by the governing body of the city as an official record of the location and boundaries of any such area. 
(d)  The original of every map approved or revised pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-32.5 shall be filed and maintained as an official record of the city and as provided therein may be relied upon for purpose of defining, depicting and locating the boundaries of any such drug-free area or zone. 
(e)  The chief of police, in consultation with the parks and recreation director, along with the public works director, shall erect appropriate signage at the locations described in subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 720 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
State Law reference— Drug-free zones O.C.G.A. 16-13-32.5. 
Secs. 58-18—58-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CURFEW FOR MINORS 

Sec. 58-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Custodian means any person over the age of 21 years who is in loco parentis to a juvenile. 
Guardian means any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a minor. 
Minor means any person under the age of 18 years. 
Parent means the natural or adoptive parent of a minor. 
Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. The term "public place" includes but is not limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drugstore, pool room, shopping center or other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It also includes the front or immediate area of such places. 
(Code 1982, § 11-5-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-37. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any minor violating the provisions of this article shall be dealt with in accordance with the juvenile court law and procedure. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor violating this article shall, after having been previously notified under subsection 58-38(a), be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1982, § 11-5-8) 
Sec. 58-38. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  Any police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 58-39, shall ascertain the name and address of such minor and warn the minor that he is in violation of curfew and shall direct the minor to proceed at once to his home or usual place of abode. The police officer shall report such action to the chief of the police department, who in turn shall notify the parents, guardian or person having custody or control of such minor. 
(b)  If such minor refuses to heed such warning or direction by any police officer or refuses to give such police officer his correct name and address, or if the minor has been warned on a previous occasion that he is in violation of curfew, he shall be taken to the police department, and the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor shall be notified to come and take charge of the minor. If the parent, guardian or other adult person cannot be located or fails to come and take charge of the minor, the minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities. 
(Code 1982, § 11-5-7) 
Sec. 58-39. - Curfew established; hours. 
It is unlawful for any minor to remain, idle, wander, stroll or play in any public place either on foot or by cruising about without a set destination in any vehicle in, about or upon any place in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday; and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., Friday through Saturday, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having custody or control of such minor, or unless the minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed or permitted by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the presence of such minor is connected with or required by some legitimate employment, trade, profession or occupation. 
(Code 1982, § 11-5-3) 
Sec. 58-40. - Responsibility of owners of public places. 
It is unlawful for any person operating or having charge of any public place to knowingly permit or suffer the presence of minors under the age of 18 years in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., Friday through Saturday. 
(Code 1982, § 11-5-4) 
Sec. 58-41. - Responsibility of parent or guardian. 
It is unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having custody or control of any minor under the age of 18 years to suffer or permit or by inefficient control to allow such person to be on the streets or sidewalks or on or in any public property or public place within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., Friday through Saturday; however, the guardian, custodian or other adult person having the care, custody or"control of the minor shall not be deemed in violation of this section if the minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person, or if the parent, guardian or other adult person has made a missing person notification to the police department. 
(Code 1982, § 11-5-5) 
Sec. 58-42. - Exception for minors attending special functions; registration of special functions. 
Any minor attending a special function or entertainment of any church, school, club or other organization that requires such minor to be out at a later hour than that called for in section 58-39 shall be exempt from the provisions of section 58-39, provided the church, school, club or other organization shall register in advance with the chief of police or his designate to have the minors stay out to this later hour. The registrant shall state the time the function or entertainment shall end, and the minors who attend the function shall be required to be in their homes or usual places of abode within one-half hour after the function is ended. 
(Code 1982, § 11-5-6) 
Secs. 58-43—58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREARMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Firearms and Weapons Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-61. - Discharging in city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than law enforcement officers in actual discharge of their duties as such, or persons in actual defense of life, limb or property of themselves or others under their lawful protection, to discharge any sort of gun, pistol, rifle or other firearm, or BB gun, air gun or spring gun, within the corporate limits of the city, whether the gun is loaded with a bullet, shot, shell or missile or a mere explosive blank cartridge or shell or other explosive device. In all cases, until the contrary is made to appear, it shall be presumed that any discharge of a weapon within the corporate limits is in violation of this section. This section shall not apply to the discharging of a BB gun or air gun by any person, or group of persons, who has first obtained the written permission for this from the police chief or his designee. Said permission may be granted upon a showing that the public safety will not be endangered. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-13; Ord. No. 636, pt. I, 6-21-11) 
Secs. 58-62—58-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SALES 

Sec. 58-81. - Statutory authority. 
Pursuant to authority provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20, for the purpose of protecting and preserving the public health, safety and welfare, the city provides for the sale and disposition of firearms in the manner set out in this division. 
(Code 1982, § 11-6-1) 
Sec. 58-82. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer means any person regularly engaged in the business of selling firearms. The intent of this division is that sales of antique weapons, sales to law enforcement officers and sales to persons regularly engaged in the manufacture, repair or sale of firearms are not subject to the requirements imposed by this division. 
Firearm means any pistol, revolver, derringer, or short-barreled firearm less than 15 inches in length, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive, and a firearm muffler or a firearm silencer, or any part of such weapon. 
Identification means any driver's license or photo identification authorized in lieu thereof, U.S. military identification card, U.S. passport or employee's identification card, provided the card contains the photo, signature, age and home address of the employee. 
(Code 1982, § 11-6-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-83. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-6, or revocation of the city business license by which the dealer is authorized to deal in firearms in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 11-6-4) 
Sec. 58-84. - Identification of purchasers; waiting period. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any dealer in firearms, or for any employee, servant or agent of such dealer, to sell, transfer, deliver or dispose of, in any way, any firearm, unless the person obtaining the firearm furnishes identification to the dealer setting forth the person's name, present address and age. No dealer in firearms or any employee, servant or agent of such dealer shall sell, transfer, deliver or dispose of, in any way, a pistol, revolver or short-barreled firearm, the barrel of which is less than 15 inches in length, to any person within the city unless there shall first have been compliance with each of the provisions of this division. For the purpose of this section, a dealer in firearms includes any person engaged in the business of operating a pawnshop or other place where money is advanced on goods or other effects, or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn. 
(b)  No dealer in firearms or any employee, servant or agent of such dealer shall sell, transfer, deliver or dispose of, in any way, a pistol, revolver or short-barreled firearm less than 15 inches in length, as provided in this division, unless the prospective purchaser has first provided identification and registered with the dealer for purchase of the firearm 15 days prior to sale, transfer or disposal of the firearm to the purchaser. 
(c)  The issuance of a pistol permit to the applicant under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-11-129 shall waive the 15-day waiting period requirement imposed by this section. 
(Code 1982, § 11-6-3) 
Secs. 58-85—58-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 593, adopted Dec. 16, 2008, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 58-101—58-112, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 389, adopted Feb. 11, 1994; and Ord. No. 468, adopted Feb. 2, 1999. 

Sec. 58-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the chief of police to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this article. 
Alarm company means a person subject to the licensing requirements, and/or a company engaged in selling, leasing, installing, servicing or monitoring alarm systems; this person shall be licensed in compliance with city, county and state laws. 
Alarm permit means a permit issued by the police department allowing the operation of an alarm system within the City of Chamblee. 
Alarm signal means a detectable signal, either audible or visual, generated by an alarm system, to which the police are requested to respond. 
Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which the police department is requested to respond, but does not include alarms motor vehicles or boat alarms, fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. 
Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning, leasing or operating an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms. 
Automatic dial protection device means an automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which upon being activated, automatically initiates to the Chamblee Police Department, a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for police response. 
Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the Chamblee Police Department that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no penalty will be assessed. 
Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the Chamblee Police Department or his designee. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, and signals activated to summon police personnel unless law enforcement response was canceled by the alarm user or his agent before police personnel arrive at the alarm location. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection by the Chamblee Police Department, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent conditions of nature, nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. 
Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user. 
Runaway alarm means an alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. The Chamblee Police Department may in its discretion discontinue police responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway alarm. 
SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by a nationally recognized testing organization, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction". 
Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this article, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-102. - Alarm permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall use an alarm system, as described in section 58-101, without first obtaining a permit for such alarm system from the Chamblee Police Department. No person shall use an alarm system when the alarm permit for that system has been revoked pursuant to section 58-112 of this article. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the user shall provide the permit number to the alarm company to facilitate law enforcement dispatch. 
(b)  Application. The permit shall be requested on an application form provided by the Chamblee Police Department. An alarm user has the duty to obtain an application from the police department. 
(c)  Transfer of possession. When the possession of the premises at which an alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person (user) obtaining possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm permit within 30 days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm permits are not transferable. 
(d)  Reporting updated information. Whenever the information provided on the alarm user permit application changes, the correct information must be provided by the alarm user to the Chamblee Police Department within 30 days of the change. In addition permit holders may periodically receive from the Chamblee Police Department a form requesting updated information. The permit holder shall complete and return this form to the Chamblee Police Department indicating any information that has changed. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-103. - Multiple alarm systems. 
If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses, a separate permit will be required for each structure. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-104. - Response to alarm; determination of validity. 
(a)  Police response. Whenever an alarm is activated in the city and the police department does respond, a police officer on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area and shall determine whether the police response was in fact necessary as indicated by the alarm system or whether the alarm was a false alarm. 
(b)  Notification. If the police officer at the scene of the activated alarm system determines the alarm to be false, the officer shall make a report of the false alarm. An alarm user shall be notified of each false alarm determination. Said notification may be accomplished by the police officer at the scene leaving notice at the time of response. 
(c)  Inspection. The chief of police shall have the right to inspect any alarm system on the premises to which a response has been made at any reasonable time thereafter to determine whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-105. - Duties of the alarm user. 
(a)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms. 
(b)  Provide the alarm company the permit number, (the number must be provided to the communications center by the alarm company to insure dispatch). 
(c)  Must respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within 60 minutes when notified by the Chamblee Police Department to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system. 
(d)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report or to perform routine maintenance as prescribed by alarm system provider. 
(e)  Obtain a new permit and pay any associated fees if there is a change in address or ownership of a business or residence. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-106. - Duties of the alarm company. 
(a)  Any person engaged in the alarm business in the City of Chamblee shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain any required state and city license(s). 
(2)  Be able to provide name, address, and telephone number of the license holder or a designee, who can be called in an emergency, 24 hours a day. 
(3)  Be able to provide the most current contact information for the alarm user. 
(b)  Ninety days after enactment of the ordinance from which this article derives, the alarm installation companies shall, on all new installations, use only alarm control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01. 
(c)  Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company must provide instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user. 
(d)  Provide written information of how to obtain service from the alarm company for the alarm system. 
(e)  An alarm company performing monitoring services shall: 
(1)  Attempt to verify, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, except in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime-in-progress has been verified by video and/or audible means. 
(2)  Provide alarm user registration number to the communications center to facilitate dispatch and/or cancellations. 
(3)  Communicate any available information about the alarm. 
(4)  Communicate a cancellation to the law enforcement communications center as soon as possible following a determination that response is unnecessary. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-107. - New alarm systems. 
Alarm companies shall not make a dispatch request in response to a burglar alarm signal, excluding panic, duress and holdup signals, during the first seven days following an alarm system installation. The alarm administrator may grant an alarm user's request for an exemption from this waiting period based upon a determination that special circumstances substantiate the need for the exemption. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-108. - Maximum decibel level of alarm system. 
No alarm system which is installed on residentialiy zoned property or that is installed within 500 feet of a residentialiy zoned property shall be allowed to emit sound at levels greater than 95 decibels when measured at a distance often feet from the source of the emission. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-109. - Alarms to automatically shut off after activation of ten minutes. 
All alarms having an audible signal at the premises shall be equipped so as to automatically shut off the audible signal after a period of ten minutes of activation except those systems required by law to have a longer period of activation, in which case such systems shall be so equipped so as to automatically shut off the audible signal at the conclusion of the longer time. Owners of alarm systems existing on or before the effective date of this article shall have 90 days from the effective date of this article to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-110. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It is unlawful for anyone to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning police officers when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an automatic dial protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the Chamblee Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-111. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Excessive false alarms. It is hereby found and determined that three or more false alarms within any calendar year is excessive and constitutes a public nuisance. Civil penalties for false alarms within a calendar year will be assessed against an alarm user as follows: 

 
(b)  A civil penalty in the amount of $100.00 will be assessed for failing to register an alarm. 
(c)  All other violations of this alarm ordinance will be enforced through the assessment of civil fines in the amount of $100.00. 
(d)  All civil fines shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the invoice. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-112. - Permit revocation and suspension of response. 
(a)  When an alarm user has more than ten false alarms during the calendar year or when the alarm user fails to pay any civil fine within 30 days from the date of invoice, the alarm user's permit will be revoked in the following manner: 
(1)  The alarm user shall be given ten days' advance written notification that the alarm user's permit will be revoked. This written notice shall set forth the reasons for such revocation. 
(2)  The notice shall specify the specific date of revocation and that police response to the alarm user's permitted location will only be initiated in response to a 911 call or upon verification by the alarm company or user that the alarm was activated as a result of criminal activity. 
(3)  If the alarm user's permit is reinstated pursuant to section 58-115, law enforcement response to the site may again be suspended by revoking the permit if it is determined that there have been additional false alarms at the site subsequent to the reinstatement within the same calendar year. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he/she operates an alarm system during the period in which the alarm permit is revoked. 
(c)  An alarm company commits an offense if it continues alarm dispatch requests to an alarm site after notification by the alarm administrator that the alarm permit has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-113. - Review of false alarm determinations. 
The alarm administrator shall, when requested by an alarm user, review the assessment of a fine for a false alarm. Such review shall be conducted only if the alarm user requests in writing such a review within ten days of the date that the false alarm occurred. The written request for review of a false alarm determination shall include the following information: 
(1)  Alarm user name; 
(2)  Address at which alarm is installed; 
(3)  Date of false alarm that is being contested; 
(4)  Alarm user permit number; 
(5)  Facts upon which the request for review of the false alarm determination is made. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-114. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals process. The alarm user may appeal the decision of the alarm administrator regarding the assessment of a fine, refusal to issue a permit, revocation of a permit or refusal to reinstate a revoked permit to the chief of police. Said appeal must be filed in writing within ten days of notification of the decision being appealed. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision. Appeals shall be heard through an administrative process established by the City of Chamblee. 
(b)  Appeal standard. The chief of police shall conduct an appeal hearing and review the appeal from the assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decisions using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Not withstanding a determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision, the chief of police shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalty(ies) or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted. The chief of police must render a decision within 15 days after the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Stay of action. Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the alarm administrator until the chief of police has completed the review. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-115. - Reinstatement. 
An alarm user whose alarm user permit has been revoked may, at the discretion of the alarm administrator, have the alarm user permit reinstated if the individual: 
(1)  Provides satisfactory evidence to the alarm administrator that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm company; and/or that additional training in the proper use of the alarm system was provided by the alarm company for all alarm users. 
(2)  Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding citations and fines. 
(3)  Pays a reinstatement fee in the amount of $500.00 if the revocation was the result of having more than ten false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-116. - Confidentiality. 
In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered through the alarm registration applications, applications for appeals and any other alarm records shall be held in confidence by all employees and/or representatives of the City of Chamblee. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 58-117. - Government immunity. 
Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of a police response to an alarm. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the Chamblee Police Department response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response histoiy. 
(Ord. No. 593, 12-16-08) 
Chapter 62 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 722 , pt. I, adopted Sept. 20, 2016, amended ch. 62 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 62, §§ 62-1—62-11, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1982, §§ 7-1-1, 7-1-2; Ord. No. 581, adopted Dec. 18, 2007; and Ord. No. 688 , pt. I, adopted Oct. 20, 2015. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; law enforcement, ch. 50; offenses, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(5); authority to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; state commission on physical fitness created, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq. 

Sec. 62-1. - Alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any ballpark, tennis court or recreational park or facility maintained and operated by the city, other than during a permitted rental event or permitted special event, or as otherwise permitted under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 722 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 62-2. - Smoking prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to smoke in any recreational facility, whether indoors or outdoors. For the purposes of this section, smoking shall include cigarettes, e-cigarettes and other legal and illegal substances, any controlled substances, and smoking in any manner, including any pipes and materials, whether organic or inorganic, utilized for lighting and inhaling thereof. 
(Ord. No. 722 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 62-3. - Riding motorcycle, motorbike or minibike. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a motorcycle, motorbike or minibike on, upon or across ballparks, tennis courts and recreational parks which are maintained and operated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 722 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 62-4. - Use of tennis courts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy or play upon the city tennis courts for any period of time in excess of one consecutive hour when other players are in fact waiting to play and use the facilities. 
(b)  No person shall be allowed or permitted to use roller skates, minibikes, wagons, tricycles, wheelbarrows or any other equipment that may damage the pavement of the tennis courts. 
(Ord. No. 722 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 62-5. - Hours for public parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or vehicle to enter or be within a recreation facility outside of the posted hours of operation unless approved by permit, by the director or unless such person is participating in authorized and scheduled programs, classes, special events or meetings. 
(b)  Park hours of operation are 6:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m., unless posted otherwise or as authorized by the director. 
(Ord. No. 722 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 62-6. - Personal conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, vulgar, wanton, obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct that would disturb a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities, or engage in any activity that could cause injury to other persons while on or in connection with a recreation facility. When a facility or structure has been rented or reserved for the use of certain persons, to the exclusion of others, by written permit of the director, no person shall interrupt or interfere with any duly permitted activity or unreasonably intrude into any reserved areas or structures. 
(Ord. No. 722 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 62-7. - Vehicles restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motorized or electric vehicle in a recreation facility except upon roadways designated and maintained for vehicular traffic at the speed limit as posted by the director or designee, and except upon walkways when permitted and approved by the director. Law enforcement and city officials whose duties require them to drive maintenance vehicles and equipment shall be exempt from the limitations set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 722 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 62-8. - Parking restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park any motorized or electric vehicle in a recreation facility except in those areas designated by the appropriate signs as vehicle parking areas or in marked parking spaces. It shall be unlawful to leave a vehicle standing or parked in a recreation facility during hours when the recreation facility is closed, unless otherwise permitted to do so by the director or designee. In such instances, the vehicle may be towed from the recreation facility at the owner's expense. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park in a recreation area or facility if the owner of the vehicle is not utilizing the recreation facility unless authorized by the director or the director's agent. It shall be unlawful for persons to congregate within a parking area of a recreation facility so as to disrupt traffic or other persons, or so as to create a safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. 722 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 62-9. - Commercial activity restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group, organization or combination acting as a unit to sell or offer for sale any merchandise or operate or attempt to operate a concession or engage in any commercial or charitable activity in a recreation facility unless approved by permit by the director or the director's agent. 
(Ord. No. 722 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 62-10. - Animals restricted. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian whose animal is in a recreation facility to have physical control of the animal by leash or lead line at all times unless in designated dog park areas where off leash is permitted or approved by permit by the director or the director's agent. It shall be unlawful for any person with an animal, other than service dogs, as necessary, to access areas of a recreation facility which are off limits to animals. It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian of any animal whose animal is in a recreation facility to immediately and properly dispose of waste deposited by the animal. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian of any animal whose animal is in a recreation facility to have in their possession proof of current registration and a current rabies vaccination for their animal. 
(Ord. No. 722 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 62-11. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity in city recreation facilities which requires a permit and/or a ticket without first obtaining such permit and/or a ticket. 
(Ord. No. 722 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 62-12. - Recreation facility restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to enter any locked or closed (by field closed signage) sport field for recreational use unless approved by permit issued by the director or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 722 , pt. I, 9-20-16) 
Chapter 67 - PUBLIC PAYPHONES 

Sec. 67-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ground wire specification means the listing of the conductor(s) used to connect the grounding electrode to the equipment-grounding conductor, to the grounding conductor, or to both, of the circuit at the service equipment or the source of a separately derived system. 
Illuminated, direct means a public payphone structure illuminated by an internal light source. 
Mast specifications means the measurements of the vertical structure rising from the public payphone housing that supports any wiring and rigging. 
Permits and inspections director means the permits and inspections director of the city or his designated representative. 
Public payphone means any telephone, coin operated or coinless, and its accessory structure, that is intended for the purpose of public usage, situated upon or attached to real property. 
Public service commission means the Georgia Public Service Commission, regulating agency for all coin/coinless operated telephones within the State of Georgia. 
Voltage use means the total voltage range used, measured in both watts and amps, to power the public payphone and any accessory structure. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 1, 8-19-97) 
Sec. 67-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable, upon conviction, as provided by section 1-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 1, 8-19-97) 
Sec. 67-3. - Remedies. 
In case any public payphone or related structure covered by this chapter is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, altered, converted or used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the permits and inspections director may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the appropriate person, issue a citation for violation of this Code requiring the presence of the violator in municipal court, or institute injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion or use or to correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 1, 8-19-97) 
Sec. 67-4. - Exemptions. 
The following types of public payphones are exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Any public payphone located inside a business, office, or mall. 
(2)  Any public payphone that contracts with a government agency. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 1, 8-19-97) 
Sec. 67-5. - Authority of the permits and inspections director. 
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the permits and inspections director or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 1, 8-19-97) 
Sec. 67-6. - Permit required. 
Except as specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect or attach any public payphone in the city without first having obtained a public payphone permit. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 1, 8-19-97) 
Sec. 67-7. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Applications for public payphone permits required by section 67-6 shall be filed by the payphone owner or his agent in the office of the permits and inspections director upon forms furnished by this office. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The street address of the property upon which the subject public payphone is to be located, and the proposed location of the subject public payphone on the subject property. In the absence of a street address, a method of location acceptable to the permits and inspections director shall be used; 
(2)  The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the subject public payphone is to be located; 
(3)  The written consent of the owner or his agent granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the subject public payphone; 
(4)  A listing of the voltage use, mast specifications and ground wire specifications; 
(5)  The name, address, telephone number, occupation tax certificate number, and public service commission certificate number of the public payphone company installing the subject public payphone; 
(6)  The number of public payphones, if any, already located at the requested street address; 
(b)  All applicants requesting direct illuminated public payphones must obtain an electrical permit. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 1, 8-19-97) 
Sec. 67-8. - Permit fees; registration of existing public payphones. 
(a)  No public payphone permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the permits and inspections director and fees have been paid as provided in this section. All public payphones defined or otherwise covered under this chapter shall require a permit. The fee for such permits shall be a registration/inspection fee of $25.00. The permit fee as provided in this section shall be payable only with the initial application for a public payphone permit. 
(b)  Each public payphone, coin-operated or otherwise, which exists on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be registered by the owner with the permits and inspections director within 90 days of such effective date. Any public payphone, coin-operated or otherwise, which exists on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall not be subject to payment of public payphone permit fees as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 1, 8-19-97) 
Sec. 67-9. - Public payphone identification labels. 
(a)  With each public payphone permit, the permits and inspections director shall issue a sticker bearing the same number as the permit with which it is issued. It shall be the duty of the permittee or his agent to affix such sticker to the side of the payphone structure so it will be easily seen. The absence of a proper sticker shall be prima facie evidence that the public payphone has been or is being erected or operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The permits and inspections director shall inspect all existing public payphones in the city to determine if such structures conform to the provisions of this chapter. Identification stickers shall be provided for all public payphones in order to identify existing conforming and nonconforming signs. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 1, 8-19-97) 
Sec. 67-10. - Placement in right-of-way; creation of traffic hazard. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place or maintain within the right-of-way of any public road in the city any public payphone. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place or maintain in a place or position visible from any public road any unauthorized public payphone which: 
(1)  Obstructs a clear view from any public road to any other portion of such public road, to an intersecting or adjoining public road, or to property abutting such public road in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to traffic on such roads; 
(2)  Because of its nature, construction or operation, constitutes a dangerous distraction to or interferes with the vision of drivers of motor vehicles. 
(c)  Any public payphone structure erected, placed or maintained on the right-of-way of any public road in violation of subsection (a) or (b), above, is declared to be a public nuisance, and the permits and inspections department may remove or direct the removal of the public payphone and its structure. Where any public payphone structure is erected, placed or maintained in violation of subsection (b), above, but not on the right-of-way of any public road, the permits and inspections department may order the removal of such structure by written notice to the owner of the structure or the owner of the land on which the structure is located. If such public payphone structure is not removed within 30 days after the giving of such order of removal, officials of the permits and inspections department are authorized to remove or cause to be removed such structure and to submit a statement of expenses incurred in the removal to the owner of the structure or to the owner of the land on which the structure is located. If payment or arrangement to make payment is not made within 60 days after the receipt of such statement, the department shall certify the amount thereof for collection to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 1, 8-19-97) 
Sec. 67-11. - Maintenance. 
(a)  All public payphones and their corresponding structures shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The permits and inspections director may cause any public payphone to be removed, after due notice, if the public payphone or its corresponding structure shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated. 
(b)  The permits and inspections director will give the owner of the structure ten days' written notice to correct the deficiencies or to remove the public payphone structure. If the owner of the structure refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the public payphone structure, the permits and inspections director shall have the structure removed at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 1, 8-19-97) 
Chapter 74 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; health and sanitation, ch. 46; offenses, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 94; environment, app. A, ch. 310. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1—74-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 663 , pt. I, adopted Mar. 18, 2014, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 74-26—74-30, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1982, §§ 5-2-1—5-2-5. 

Sec. 74-26. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the City of Chamblee of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the City of Chamblee; and 
(3)  Prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including prevention of communicable disease and degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
( Ord. No. 663 , pt. I, 3-18-14) 
Sec. 74-27. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Egregious litter means all litter, as such term is defined in this article, exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume; any discarded or abandoned substance in any weight or volume if biomedical waste, hazardous waste, or a hazardous substance; or any substance or material dumped for commercial purposes. 
Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, flyer or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature which: 
(1)  Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, service, business, opportunity or thing; or 
(2)  Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or 
(3)  Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged; or 
(4)  While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominately and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and economic gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor; and 
(5)  Handbills for political, charitable and other nonprofit purposes are exempt from this article. 
Litter means any discarded or abandoned: 
(1)  Refuse, rubbish, junk, or other waste material; or 
(2)  Dead animals that are not subject to the provisions of the O.C.G.A. § 4-5-4. 
Private property means any dwelling house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling house, building or other structure. 
Property open to the public means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any public park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, institutional, commercial or industrial properties. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. 
( Ord. No. 663 , pt. I, 3-18-14) 
Sec. 74-28. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all property open to the public and to all private property within the City of Chamblee. 
( Ord. No. 663 , pt. I, 3-18-14) 
Sec. 74-29. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
( Ord. No. 663 , pt. I, 3-18-14) 
Sec. 74-30. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in Chamblee or any waters in Chamblee, unless: 
(1)  The area is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of litter and such person is authorized by the city to use such area; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a nondisposable litter receptacle or container designed for the temporary storage of litter and located in an area designated by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally dump egregious litter unless authorized to do so by law or by a duly issued permit: 
(1)  In or on any city road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; 
(2)  In or on any private property, unless prior consent of the owner has been given and unless such dumping will not adversely affect the public health and is not in violation of any other city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
( Ord. No. 663 , pt. I, 3-18-14) 
Sec. 74-31. - Provision of litter receptacles. 
All commercial businesses and institutions patronized by the public shall place and maintain on the exterior of their premises in places easily accessible by the public receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations where the property is frequented by the public and to post signs directing people to the receptacles. 
( Ord. No. 663 , pt. I, 3-18-14) 
Sec. 74-32. - Distribution of handbills. 
(a)  Private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, leave, place or cause or permit the throwing, depositing, leaving or placing of any handbill, unless exempted by this article, upon any private property if the mailbox is specifically marked with the identifying insignia (City of Chamblee green sticker) which signifies that the occupant does not wish to receive handbills. The identifying insignia is to be posted on the bottom right corner of the mailbox door. The insignia will be green, state: "HANDBILLS" with the universal insignia for "NO" superimposed over "HANDBILLS," and identify the enforcing ordinance. 
(b)  Vacant property. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, place or cause or permit the throwing, depositing, leaving or placing of any handbill, upon any private property which is vacant and which could be reasonably ascertained to be vacant. 
(c)  Property not posted or marked; or vacant. Unless private property is posted as provided in subsection (a), or vacant as provided in subsection (b), or unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, whether such private property is posted as provided in subsection (a) or not, the person distributing the handbills may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private property as provided in this subsection (c): 
(1)  Such handbill may be placed in doorknob hangers provided by the person distributing the handbill; or 
(2)  Such handbill may be placed or deposited on inhabited private property if such handbill is placed or deposited in a manner that is reasonably designed to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such private property or property open to the public, including streets, storm water catchment and conveyance systems and other public places. 
(d)  Prohibition by federal law or postal regulations. Nothing in this article authorizes placing handbills in mailboxes when such use is prohibited by federal law or by postal regulations. 
(e)  Property open to the public. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, place or cause or permit the throwing, depositing, leaving or placing of any handbill, unless exempted by this article, upon any property open to the public, provided, however, it shall not be a violation of this article for any person to hand out or to distribute without charge to the receiver thereof any handbill to any person willing to receive it. 
(f)  Vehicles. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, place or cause or permit the throwing, depositing, leaving or placing of any handbill, unless exempted by this article, upon any vehicle; provided, however, it shall not be a violation of this article for any person to hand out or to distribute without charge to the receiver thereof any handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to receive it. 
(g)  Public utility poles, trees and other structures. No person shall throw, post or affix any handbill upon any public utility pole, tree, lamppost or upon any other public structure except as may be authorized or required by law. 
( Ord. No. 663 , pt. I, 3-18-14) 
Sec. 74-33. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping, or shifting in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Create a safety hazard; or 
(2)  Deposit litter on public or private property while such vehicle is on a public road. 
( Ord. No. 663 , pt. I, 3-18-14) 
Secs. 74-34—74-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned automobiles as solid waste, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(11); authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 

Sec. 74-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junked motor vehicle means any vehicle which is not operable, or any vehicle which does not bear a current license plate. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground, and shall include but not be limited to automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailers. 
Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property. 
Public property means any street or highway, which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-32) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-47. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-38) 
Sec. 74-48. - Parking or storage in excess of 30 days prohibited. 
No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the city for a period of time in excess of 30 days. The presence of a junked vehicle on private or public property is hereby declared a public nuisance, which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-33) 
Sec. 74-49. - Responsibility for removal. 
Upon proper notice, the owner of the junked vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the vehicle is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. 
(Code 1982, § 11-1-35) 
Sec. 74-50. - Notice to remove. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever it comes to the attention of the chief of police that any nuisance as defined in section 74-48 exists in the city, a notice, in writing, shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or, in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his agent, notifying him of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal within the time specified in this article. 
(b)  Service. The chief of police of the city or his designee shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property where the nuisance is located, at least 30 days before the time specified for compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of such notice is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent by registered mail to the owner or occupant of the private property at his last known address. 
(c)  Contents. The notice shall include: 
(1)  A statement of the condition which is in violation of this article; 
(2)  A specified period of time, being 30 days, within which the violation of this article shall be remedied; and 
(3)  A statement adequate to notify the person served that a failure to comply with the provisions of this article within the time specified in the notice is unlawful, and the penalty for such failure. 
(Code 1982, §§ 11-1-34, 11-1-36, 11-1-37) 
Secs. 74-51—74-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISPOSAL OF REFUSE AND GARBAGE—IN GENERAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 629, § pt. I, adopted Dec. 21, 2010, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 74-70—74-78, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code of 1982, §§ 5-2-11—5-2-14, 5-2-17—5-2-22; and Ord. No. 426, adopted Oct. 15, 1996; Ord. No. 494, § I, adopted Nov. 21, 2000. 

Sec. 74-70. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words are defined. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved receptacle for residential solid waste means a galvanized metal container or durable plastic container or durable plastic bag with the capacity of not less than 20 gallons and no more than 32 gallons, with the containers having two durable handles on the sides thereof and a removable tight-fitting top. All containers shall be waterproof. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar salvaged containers shall not be acceptable. 
Approved receptacle for yard debris trimmings means a biodegradable paper bag, empty cardboard box, clean galvanized metal container or durable plastic container with a capacity of not less than 20 gallons and no more than 40 gallons. Containers shall have two durable handles on the sides thereof or a bail by which it may be lifted. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar salvaged containers shall not constitute an approved receptacle for yard debris trimmings. 
Collector means a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and/or similar locations or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from the individual's own single-family dwelling unit. 
Commercial container means a manufactured container suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment and approved by the director. The following general standards are prescribed for commercial containers: 
(1)  All containers must be steel, continuous welded and properly reinforced. 
(2)  All lids will be flanged and reinforced for strength. 
(3)  Pickup side of container shall be reinforced inside and outside at point of torque tub contact. 
(4)  Inside reinforcement shall be pressed steel angle. 
(5)  Bottoms shall be reinforced with 1½-inch drain plug installed flush to bottom. 
(6)  All containers shall be primed and finished with enamel and epoxy paint. 
(7)  Body dimensions as to length and height of container can vary with the size of container; however, all container widths will be 70 inches. Minimum gauges of steel shall be as follows: 

 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment house, rooming house, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a single dwelling unit/residential unit and condominiums. 
Commercial front loader container means a manufactured container suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment and approved by the director. 
Commercial/industrial solid waste means solid waste from commercial establishments that includes but is not limited to, material from industrial processes, manufacturing canneries, slaughterhouses, packing plants, poultry processing plants or similar industries, and food waste. 
Compactor container means a manufactured commercial container of any size with a self-contained compacting mechanism or an external compactor which is designed to be used in conjunction with the individual home appliance. 
Compactor roll-off container means a manufactured commercial container of any size with an internal or external mechanical compacting system that either detaches or is fully self-contained and is serviced by backing up to the container and hoisting it onto a commercial roll-off container vehicle. 
Condominium means individual ownership units in a multifamily structure with a front and back entrance to each unit on the ground level. 
Construction and demolition solid waste means solid waste from construction and demolition projects that include but is not limited to, remodeling, repair operations on houses, commercial buildings, multiple dwellings and other structures such as concrete, bricks, plaster, stone, earth, lumber, roofing materials, gutters, shavings and sawdust. 
Conveyance means any automobile, plane, train, bus, bicycle, motorcycle or other method of transporting persons from one place to another. 
Department means the public works department or its successor for purposes of this chapter. 
Director means the director of public works department or designee. 
Discard means to throw, abandon, place, deposit, discharge, dump, bury, burn or dispose of a substance. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Finance director means the director of the department of finance as established by the City Charter. 
Garbage means waste including but not limited to, food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste that does not meet the toxic characteristic leachate procedure requirements and includes, but is not limited to, highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; industrial sludge; and other waste material that the director determines to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety or environment, except radioactive waste materials. 
Incinerator means the high temperature waste combustion unit designated to dispose of pathological matter. 
Landfill means a method of disposing of solid wastes, other than putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Litter means, but is not limited to, any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, yard debris, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally discarded materials of every kind and description but the term litter does not include "waste" as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6), as amended. 
Multiple dwelling means a building designed for and containing two or more dwelling units. 
Municipal solid waste means, but is not limited to, any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard debris not separated for recycling and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Noncombustible trash means, but is not limited to, materials which are unburnable in the incinerator or at incinerator temperature of 800 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit such as mineral water, metal furniture, large metal scraps and wires, auto bodies or parts, and other similar materials. 
Owner means any person or entity that generates solid waste on real property in the city and who is designated by the records of the office of the county tax commissioner as the owner of such real property within the city. 
Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation standard of at least 1½ mils and not exceeding a 32-gallon capacity. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and land use for business, residential, commercial, industrial, or farm purposes. 
Putrescible waste means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include, but are not necessarily limited to, kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes and garbage. 
Recycle means any process by which material that would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish or commercial refuse. 
Residential unit means any freestanding structure or shelter or any part thereof, used or constructed for use as a residence for one family. 
Sanitary landfill means a method of disposing of putrescible waste on land for final disposition and/or management. 
Sanitation or sanitary district means designated service areas established by this Code. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded materials including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operation materials; solid or dissolved matter in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject under 33 U.S.C. § 1342; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended and as defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(33), as amended. 
Special industrial waste container means any container such as a metal box, bucket, an open bed container or special container used for transporting chemicals, paint, metals, glass, oil products, plastics or any type of material that requires special handling and cannot be incinerated. 
Stationary compactor means an object of a refuse container system which compacts refuse at the site of generation into a pull-on detachable container. 
Tax commissioner means the constitutional officer in DeKalb County charged with collecting both state, county and special taxes as established by Ga. L. 1927, p. 558, § 2. 
Yard debris means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-71. - Applicability. 
This article applies to the preparation and storage, collection, transportation and disposal of all refuse in the city, including all public and private property. This article prescribes rules and regulations therefore, regulates the collection of garbage and refuse, provides for the licensing and regulation of private garbage and refuse collection, prescribes rules and regulations for hauling garbage, refuse and other waste material within or through the city, and prohibits the unlawful deposit of litter within the city. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person including city refuse collectors and sanitary contractors to haul, convey or cause to be conveyed any refuse, including discarded building material or discarded furniture, upon or along the public streets and roadways except when the material transported is adequately secured in such a manner as to prevent it from falling, leaking or being blown from transporting vehicles. The operator or owner of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any violation of this section. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person not licensed by the city to collect and haul any refuse other than that arising from such person's own accumulation within any areas of the city in which refuse collection service is maintained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-72. - Disposal of refuse and garbage generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or to cause to be dumped any garbage, refuse, litter, junk, appliances, equipment, cans, bottles, paper, lumber, trees, tree limbs, brush or parts thereof anywhere in the city except as may be permitted by city regulations at the incinerator or sanitary landfills operated by the city without the expressed approval by action of the city council under such terms and conditions as may be invoked from time to time by the council. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section do not apply to the dumping on private property with the owner's permission of sand, dirt, broken dirt, blocks, broken pavement or other suitable material for use as a fill to raise the elevation of the land, provided it is not maintained in an unsightly condition and provided the owner or owners or the property on which such material is dumped agrees to level such dumped material with appropriate grading equipment and assess the cost thereof against the real property on which such material was dumped. 
(c)  If any of the matter or material dumped in violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section can be identified as having last belonged to, been in the possession of, sent to or received by, or to have been the property of any person prior to its being dumped as prohibited therein, this identification shall be presumed to be prima facie evidence that the owner dumped or caused to be dumped such matter and material in violation of this article. 
(d)  For information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person violating the provisions of this article or the provisions of any state law prohibiting the dumping of garbage, refuse or litter on any public or private property within the city, the city shall pay a reward in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, to the person furnishing such information leading to such arrest and conviction and such monies as may be a necessary cost of the operation and administration of the city government. 
(e)  All compactors containing combustible materials emptied at a city or county disposal facility will pay the price per ton established in section 22-33 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-73. - Operation of private landfills. 
(a)  No sanitary landfill or dump shall be operated within the city without written approval of the city and the state. 
(b)  Sanitary landfill hours of operation shall be limited to 18 hours each day, from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m., unless daily cover is applied and utilized in the manner described in the sanitary landfill's or landfill's design and operating plan approved by the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Secs. 74-74—74-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 629, § pt. I, adopted Dec. 21, 2010, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. V, §§ 74-90—74-96, entitled "Commercial Refuse Collection", pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 421, adopted July 16, 1996; and Ord. No. 546, pt. I, adopted Apr. 18, 2006. 

Sec. 74-100. - Notice to owner, occupant of unacceptable container or area. 
The city, upon determining that a can, container or area is becoming or has become unserviceable or likely to cause an unsanitary condition, shall issue a notice to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the can, container or condition exists to inform such person of the condition existing. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-101. - Pickup routes and districts established. 
The city shall divide the areas of the city into pickup routes, which routes shall be plainly outlined on a map of the city and numbered numerically. The city shall prepare a list of the names of all the streets, roads, alleys, drives, highways and other public thoroughfares within each route; shall keep the map and lists for public inspection; and shall furnish a copy of the map showing any particular route along with a list of the names of the public thoroughfares therein to any person who requests them upon the payment of the actual cost for the reproduction of the map and list by either a city or commercial facility, whichever is available. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-102. - Preparation and storage of residential refuse for collection; placement; unacceptable refuse. 
It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any premises to keep all refuse pending collection and disposal as follows: 
(1)  All garbage shall be free from liquid and initially placed in watertight plastic bags with the tops of such bags securely closed. The owner shall then place the closed plastic bags in an approved receptacle for residential solid waste to be collected and removed by the appropriate city employee. 
(2)  Other household refuse will be containerized in disposable containers (box, watertight or plastic bag) except that tree branches and heavy brush which will not fit into containers shall be cut in lengths not exceeding four feet in length and stacked in a compact pile on the parkway in front of the residence adjoining the curb, but these piles shall not extend into the street. Sticks, hedge clippings and small brush shall be gathered into bundles and tied securely so that each bundle does not exceed four feet in length, nor weigh more than 50 pounds. The city will not collect logs and limbs over four inches in diameter or over four feet long. 
(3)  Noncombustible trash and liquids will not be collected by the city and shall be disposed of by other means. 
(4)  All refuse receptacles, except single-use paper or plastic bags, single-use paper or cardboard boxes, shall be kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be treated with an effective insecticide if necessary to prevent nuisance. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the occupant of any single residential unit, condominium or multiple residential unit not serviced by a commercial container to place refuse receptacles, watertight paper or plastic bags securely tied, rubbish and bundles, on assigned collection days, at a front curbside location in such a manner as not to obstruct passage; except that the residential superintendent may require it to be placed on any side of a property for the reasons of topography or efficiency. It shall also be the duty of the occupant to place the refuse at an appropriate curbside location at or before 8:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the sanitation trucks; this placement shall not be made before 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to the collection day. Any refuse placed on the curb after the departure of the pickup crew shall be at the peril of the owner and the owner shall be subject to prosecution for violation of this article should the street become littered from the refuse. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the occupant to remove containers from the curbside location to the storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the residential unit located on the premises than to any street abutting the premises; the removal shall be accomplished not later than 7:00 p.m. on the day the contents are emptied and collected. 
(7)  Each owner shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon the property such person occupies or the public thoroughfares adjoining the property. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be placed in any refuse can or container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquid or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(9)  Inoperative, privately used or worn out household appliances (refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, dryers, discarded furniture) will be collected at the curb on an on-call basis to the department. 
(10)  Commercial waste generated from the conduct of business or commercial enterprise carried on from residential units will not be collected except on a special fee basis. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-103. - Preparation and storage of commercial and multiple dwelling refuse for collection. 
(a)  Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a commercial establishment, condominium or multiple dwelling, arrangements for the storage of refuse and location of containers must be approved by the city. 
(b)  Commercial containers at existing commercial establishments and multiple dwellings shall be placed at locations approved by the city for collection by the city. The city will not collect refuse from commercial establishments or multiple dwellings unless it is placed in commercial containers, properly located. Cardboard boxes shall be flattened and placed in containers. 
(c)  Where the occupants of two or more commercial establishments share the use of a refuse can or commercial container, it shall be the joint responsibility of the users to maintain the area surrounding such cans or containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
(d)  The occupant, or occupants, of commercial establishments and the management of multiple dwellings serviced by commercial containers shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding such commercial containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
(e)  All garbage and rubbish shall be free of liquid and placed in watertight paper or plastic bags with the tops secure prior to placing in commercial containers. 
(f)  Commercial containers containing any of the following items will not be emptied: 
(1)  Large household or industrial appliances. 
(2)  Furniture. 
(3)  Tires. 
(4)  Wooden crates. 
(5)  Logs or limbs over four feet in length or four inches in diameter. 
(6)  Bed springs. 
(7)  Rock, dirt, concrete blocks, etc. 
(8)  Uncontainerized garbage, yard debris and household trash. 
(g)  Normal household appliances will be collected on a special fee basis at multiple dwellings served by commercial containers, when placed adjacent to the commercial container and reported to the department. 
(h)  It is unlawful to place or cause to be placed in any refuse can or container for collection any acid. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-104. - Collection of refuse generally; conditions for collection by city. 
(a)  Refuse may be collected for disposal by the city, by the county or by persons for commercial sanitation firms operating in the city. 
(b)  The city and its licensed scavengers will collect refuse under the following conditions: 
(1)  Refuse will be collected once each week from residential units except for exceptionally large piles of limbs which may require an excessive period of time to load. 
(2)  Refuse will be collected as often as six times a week from commercial establishments. 
(3)  Dead animals (other than dogs or house pets) will not be collected, and dead dogs and house pets will be collected only from animal hospitals, curbsides and public rights-of-way. Dead house pets shall be in a plastic bag and placed at the curb. They will be collected on a special fee basis and on an on-call basis by the city. Large dead animals shall be disposed by incineration at the DeKalb County Animal Control facility or by cremation at a pet crematorium at the sole expense of the owner of the animal. 
(4)  Collection service shall be discontinued where garbage or trash cans or commercial containers are inadequate or have been condemned as unfit by an inspector and notice has been given to the owner or occupant of the premises who has refused to correct the situation then existing. 
(c)  The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building material, dirt, rock or discarded furniture and appliances from private property, nor shall it be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers or building contractors except on a special fee basis. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10; Ord. No. 675 , pt. I, 3-17-15) 
Sec. 74-105. - Garbage collection for disabled persons. 
(a)  Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential unit who is disabled to the extent of being incapable of moving refuse and shall obtain a physician's certificate as to this disability shall not be required to place the refuse at curbside. This section does not apply unless all of the persons in a residential unit are disabled and obtain a physician's certificate. These certificates will be mailed to the director for appropriate notification and pickup crews. This subsection also applies to temporary disability not to exceed 90 days (extensions are required). 
(b)  Residential cans shall not be placed more than 150 feet from the curb or road edge, nor will refuse cans be picked up if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Gates are locked. 
(2)  Gates are wired or tied shut. 
(3)  Dogs are loose in yard. 
(4)  Cans are in carports or garages. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-106. - Billing for sanitary services, sanitary docket. 
(a)  Commercial establishments. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the finance director or authorized designee to prepare and mail to each owner or lessee of a commercial establishment in the sanitary districts of the city a monthly billing for sanitary services. These monthly payments shall be paid in advance by the owner or lessee of the commercial establishment property. It shall be the duty of the finance director to enforce the collection of commercial establishment fees and assessments imposed by this article. Failure by the owner or lessee of a commercial establishment to pay any amount due for the collection and disposal of refuse and/or fee imposed pursuant to section 74-107 may be treated by the city as a debt for which an action at law may be brought in the same manner as any other charge, assessment or debt, including payment penalty and interest thereon. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the finance director or authorized designee thereof to prepare, maintain and keep for public inspection a complete record of the name of each commercial establishment owner, the address or by tax map reference if no street address is available, the amount due for the calendar year, the amount of each monthly payment and an entry showing when each payment was made. This record shall be called the commercial establishment sanitary docket and shall be prepared monthly in advance. Each monthly docket shall be cumulative of all unpaid monthly installments. 
(3)  Upon the request of any person interested in examining the title of any parcel of real estate in the sanitary districts of the city, the person in charge of the maintenance of the commercial establishment sanitary docket under the supervision of the finance director or authorized designee thereof shall furnish to such person a form statement showing the information required in this section, which form statement shall be signed by the person maintaining the docket and the finance director or an authorized designee as to the correctness of the information contained therein. 
(4)  On-premises being served by the department where there is a delinquent sanitary installment, after the owner or lessee of a commercial establishment thereof has been notified by the inclusion of the amount of the past due installment in a current statement or on a separate bill or other notice and the owner or lessee of a commercial establishment refuses to promptly pay it, the city may refuse sanitary pickup at those premises and sanitary service shall not be restored until these delinquent and current installments are paid in full. 
(b)  Residential units. 
(1)  All fees for sanitary services assessed against residential units shall be assessed upon the tax commissioner's books for each year and shall be collected by the tax commissioner. After collection, the tax commissioner shall transfer the sanitary fees to the city treasury according to the same schedule as city taxes. In collection of these sanitary fees, the tax commissioner shall be allowed to resort to any remedy or right allowed by law for the collection and payment of city taxes. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to prepare and mail to each owner of a residential unit in the sanitary districts of the city an annual billing for sanitary services. This sanitary billing will appear as a separate line item assessment on the owner's annual property tax bill and shall become due and payable at the same time that city taxes are due and payable. If such sanitary billing remains unpaid, the tax commissioner or authorized designee, shall have the authority to issue a fi fa or execution against the property served, which fi fa or execution shall have the same lien dignity and priority as fi fa's or executions issued for city taxes. Each annual installment shall become a lien against the property served on January 1 of each year in the same manner that a lien attaches for city taxes, and such lien shall cover the property of the owner until such billing for sanitary services is paid. Any sanitary billing amount that remains unpaid shall accrue penalty, interest and fi fa charges in the same manner and at the same rate as delinquent city taxes. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-107. - Fee. 
The fees for the collection and disposal of refuse and providing such services and to construct and maintain facilities therefor shall be as established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-108. - Burning combustible materials in containers owned or used by city. 
No person shall burn or attempt to burn or cause to be burned in any container belonging to or used by the city for refuse collection purposes any combustible material of any nature. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-109. - Yard trimmings disposal restrictions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, all yard trimmings shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with municipal solid waste. 
(c)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at municipal solid waste disposal facilities having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion. 
(d)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling. 
(e)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch, or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any premises to separate yard trimmings from all other municipal solid waste. 
(g)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in a plastic bag but shall be placed in an "approved receptacle for yard trimmings" as defined in this chapter. All other requirements of this chapter regarding containing yard trimmings and refuse shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Secs. 74-110—74-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRIVATE SERVICES 

Sec. 74-140. - Definition. 
In this article, "commercial sanitation firm" includes any person engaged in the business of operating a sanitary compactor. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-141. - License. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of operating a commercial sanitation firm without a license issued by the city. A license application in compliance with this section shall be submitted to the department for approval or other disposition. 
(b)  Applications are available and may be submitted at the public works department during working hours. 
(c)  Each application shall have attached a list showing the type, size and location of stationary compactors, stationary compactor containers and/or industrial waste materials to be serviced by the applicant. A commercial sanitation firm applying for a permit to operate stationary compactors, stationary compactor containers or industrial waste containers shall certify at the time of application that the applicant or any corporate officer of the firm is not engaged in any illegal servicing of any commercial containers or refuse collection of any type in the sanitation district. 
(d)  Approved licenses shall become effective on the first day of the calendar year. The fee to be paid to the city for each approved application shall be as established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. The fee shall be prorated for the remainder of the calendar year from the day this license is approved. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-142. - Performance bond. 
Each authorized commercial sanitation firm shall post a performance bond with the city in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-143. - Monthly charge for each container in use. 
In addition, each authorized commercial sanitation firm shall pay a monthly charge in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, for each stationary compactor container or industrial waste container in use on the last day of each month. This fee shall be paid on or before the 15th day of each succeeding month for which the service was rendered. A schedule of the location of each stationary compactor shall accompany the payment of the fees. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-144. - Decals on trucks. 
Each truck used by a commercial sanitation firm to collect and transport combustible solid waste shall bear a decal issued by the department. The issuance and placement of the decal must be accomplished at the public works building. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-145. - Decals, identification on compactors, containers. 
Each stationary compactor and industrial waste container shall carry in a conspicuous spot a decal issued by the city which shows it has been properly permitted to operate in the city. In addition each stationary compactor, stationary compactor container or industrial waste container shall carry in a conspicuous spot the name, telephone number and address of the firm permitted to service the stationary compactor, stationary compactor container of industrial waste container. Any arrangement between firms to service another's units must receive written approval from the city. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-146. - Installation of stationary compactor unit; prior approval of plans. 
Plans and specifications for installing a stationary compactor unit shall be approved by the city prior to the installation. All stationary compactor shredders and stationary compactor containers shall be installed on class A, 3,000 psi concrete pads of not less than six inches thickness. All installations shall comply with the requirements of the city mechanical code, fire code and health regulations. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-147. - Special permit for handling special industrial waste. 
Special permits shall be granted to firms holding stationary compactor permits for the installation of special industrial waste containers to handle refuse requiring special handling or special equipment. No special industrial waste container shall be emptied at the incinerator. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-148. - Establishment contracting services exempt from city sanitary assessment. 
A commercial establishment which contracts with a firm licensed to operate a stationary compactor service shall not be required to pay a city sanitary assessment while it uses the stationary compactor service, provided additional service is not supplied by the city. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-149. - Disposal of collected refuse. 
Licensees under this article may dispose of their stationary compactor refuse and all acceptable industrial waste container refuse at the city or county disposal facilities at a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Secs. 74-150—74-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SCRAP TIRE ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 74-180. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Chamblee Scrap Tire Enforcement Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-181. - Intent and purpose. 
The mayor and city council find that protection of the environment is vital to the health, safety, welfare and economic progress of the City of Chamblee and its citizens. Therefore, it is the intent of this article to develop regulations and procedures that govern scrap tires from the point of generation to the point of disposal. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-182. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined: 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
End user means the last person who uses the scrap tires, chips, crumb rubber, or similar materials to make a product with economic value, or in the case of energy recovery, the person who utilized the heat content or other forms of energy from the incineration or pyrolysis of waste tires, chips or similar materials. 
Environmental code enforcement officer means an officer of the city authorized to write official warnings and citations to insure compliance with the City of Chamblee Scrap Tire Management Ordinance and Solid Waste Code. This definition shall include anyone designated by the city as a sanitation inspector. 
Manifest means a document used to identify the quantity and composition and the origin, routing and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, hereinafter referred to as EPD. 
Mixed tires means a heterogeneous group of tires consisting of used, retreadable casings and scrap tires. 
Recycle means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Retreadable casing means a tire suitable for retreading. 
Reused tire means a tire used for purposes, approved by the EPD, other than intended, such as playground equipment, offshore reefs and erosion control. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its originally intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires, not otherwise exempted, for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end use, or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages and service stations. 
Scrap tire processing means any method, system, or other treatment designated to change the physical form, size, or chemical content of scrap tires and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, building, and other elements) and includes processing by: Shredding, chopping, chipping, baling, splitting, recycling or sorting of scrap tires. 
Scrap tire processor means any person, other than the original scrap tire generators, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casing from scrap tires. 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generators, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casing from scrap tires. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operation materials; solid or dissolved matters in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended and as defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(33) as may hereafter be amended. 
Tire means a continuous, solid or pneumatic covering designed for encircling the wheel of a vehicle that is not permanently attached to the vehicle or a part of the vehicle as original equipment. 
Tire handling business means any person that derives 15 percent or more of its gross income from the sale, processing, transporting or disposal of tires. 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
Tire retreader means any person actively engaged in the business of retreading scrap tires by scarifying the surface to remove the old surface tread and attaching a new tread to make a usable tire. 
Ultimate consumer means the last person who receives and uses a new replacement tire. Ultimate consumers may be, but are not limited to, individual, leasing and private companies purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleets and government agencies. 
Used tire means a tire which has a minimum of two-thirty-seconds-foot of road tread and which is still suitable for its original purpose. It must be inventoried and marketed in substantially the same fashion as a new tire, and the dealer must be able to provide satisfactory evidence to the city that a market exists, and that the used tires are in fact being marketed. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-183. - General. 
It shall be unlawful to dump scrap tires or cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in the City of Chamblee including the following: 
(1)  Any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; and 
(2)  Any river, canal, stream, creek, or freshwater lake; and 
(3)  Any public property or private property not owned or maintained by the alleged violator. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-184. - Scrap tire storage, handling and disposal. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., as amended, are hereby incorporated in this section as if set forth herein. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of property to store all scrap tires in a manner that will not adversely affect the public health and safety. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of property to store all scrap tires in a manner that is consistent with federal, state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-185. - Accumulation. 
(a)  No person may store more than 100 scrap tires anywhere in the city. Any person storing in excess of 100 scrap tires shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. The following exceptions shall apply: 
(1)  A solid waste disposal site permitted by the division, if permitted by the EPD, if the permit authorizes the storage of scrap tires prior to their disposal; 
(2)  A tire retailer with not more than 3,000 scrap tires in storage; 
(3)  A tire retreader with not more than 1,500 scrap tires in storage so long as the scrap tires are of the type that the retreader is actively retreading; 
(4)  An auto salvage yard with not more than 500 scrap tires in storage; and 
(5)  A scrap tire processor approved by the division so long as the number of scrap tires in storage do not exceed the quantity approved by the EPD. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store scrap tires except in a container, located outside of an authorized business, enclosed on all four sides by a solid screen and having a secure top cover to prevent the accumulation of water in the container. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-186. - Compliance. 
(a)  Scrap tire generator. Any person who generates scrap tires shall obtain a scrap tire generator identification number issued by the EPD and shall maintain copies of manifests for any scrap tires that have been shipped or removed from the business location within the past 36 months. Separate identification numbers are required for each generator having multiple generation locations. 
(1)  The manifests shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and identification number of the generator; 
b.  Number and total tonnage (accurate to within ten percent of actual number) of scrap tires to be transported; 
c.  Name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier; 
d.  Date of transport; 
e.  Destination of scrap tires; and 
f.  Signatures of the scrap tire generator, scrap tire carrier and scrap tire processor. 
(2)  The completed manifest(s) and scrap tire generator identification number shall be made available to the environmental code enforcement officer upon request. 
(3)  Scrap tire generator identification numbers are not transferable; and each generator shall insure that the scrap tire section of the EPD approves the carrier being used to transport scrap tires. 
(b)  Scrap tire carrier. It shall be the responsibility of the carrier to return a completed copy of the manifest to the scrap tire generator within 30 days from the date on which the scrap tire carrier takes possession of the scrap tires. The date the scrap tire carrier takes possession of the scrap tires shall be indicated on the manifest. 
(c)  Tire handling businesses. All tire handling businesses shall maintain an accurate inventory of all new and used tires received at the place of business, sold to a consumer, sent to another tire handling businesses, or shipped to an approved processor. Inventory and quarterly transport reports shall be kept on-site and made available for inspection by environmental code enforcement officers. Quarterly reports shall be sent to the City of Chamblee Director of Public Works and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of company that transported tires; 
(2)  Name of owner of company and driver of transport vehicle; 
(3)  Telephone number of transport company; 
(4)  Valid environmental protection division scrap tire program transportation identification number; 
(5)  Type of vehicle used to transport tires; and 
(6)  Quarterly tire transport report shall be mailed to the address below: 
City of Chamblee  Director of Public Works  3210 Cumberland Drive  Chamblee, Georgia 30341 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-187. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the City of Chamblee Director of Public Works or his or her designee. 
(b)  The environmental code enforcement officers are authorized to enforce this article on behalf of the City of Chamblee, and shall be empowered to enter private property, with the owner's consent, at reasonable times in order to inspect the property for violation of this article. If the owner does not consent to such entry on private property for inspection, such officer shall obtain a warrant to enter upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 74-188. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in section 1-6 of this Code, or as follows: 
(1)  First offense: A fine not less than $100.00, or more than $1,000.00, or up to 30 days imprisonment, or both. 
(2)  Upon conviction, the court may also order the convicted person to remove any scrap tires that have been accumulated in violation of this article from the property. 
(Ord. No. 629, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Secs. 74-189—74-210. - Reserved. 
Chapters 75—77 - RESERVED 
Chapter 78 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; civil emergencies, ch. 26; offenses, ch. 58; signs, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; zoning, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Authority to construct and maintain streets and roads, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Posting of street address. 
Each dwelling unit and place of business shall have posted and maintained, in a prominent place on the property, visible from the street providing general public access, the address of the dwelling unit or place of business, in figures at least three inches high on a contrasting background for residences and six inches high on a contrasting background for commercial establishments. 
(Code 1982, § 8-2-18) 
Secs. 78-2—78-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 736 , pt. I, adopted Apr. 18, 2017, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 78-36—78-103 was entitled "Parades and Demonstrations," and derived from Code 1982. 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City manager means the City Manager of the City of Chamblee, Georgia. The city manager may delegate his authority or be assisted by other employees as required. 
Event means any parade, public assemblage, or special event as defined within this article. 
Organization or group of private persons means a group of three or more persons, or their representatives, acting as a unit. 
Parade means a group or number of people or vehicles, or the combination thereof, consisting of ten or more vehicles, 20 or more persons, five or more vehicles and ten or more persons, or a combination of three or more vehicles and five or more persons, proceeding or moving in a body or in concert along the streets or sidewalks of the city. Specifically excepted from this definition are funeral processions. 
Producer means any person responsible for planning, producing and conducting an event. An event permit shall be issued only to an individual person. Therefore, if a group, organization, association, or other entity is producing the event, a designated producer shall be named for purposes of the permit, and this individual shall be solely and fully responsible for compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements of this article and other applicable laws. 
Public assemblage means any march, demonstration, picket line, procession, motorcade, rally, or gathering for a common purpose, consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a combination thereof upon or in the streets, parks, or other public grounds within the city that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of vehicular traffic or that endangers or has the reasonable possibility of endangering the public's health, safety, or welfare. 
Special event means a gathering of people, generally lasting from a few hours to a few days, designed for entertainment, recreation, and/or education. Special events either affect the ordinary use of parks, public streets, rights-of-way, or sidewalks, disrupt the flow of traffic on public streets or sidewalks, or include alcohol service or sales where it is not normally permitted. Common special events in Chamblee are 5K races and festivals. Filming by a film production company does not require an event permit but does require a film production permit which is handled by a separate process in chapter 35. 
Vendor means any person or persons or entity who engages in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary itinerant basis on any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way as an authorized participant of a permitted event. 
(Ord. No. 736 , pt. I, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 78-37. - Required. 
(a)  Any person or organization planning, producing, or conducting a parade, public assemblage, or special event is required to first obtain a permit from the city for the privilege of engaging in the event within the city, unless such permit is prohibited under state law or the event is otherwise protected from this requirement by federal or state law. 
(b)  Every person or organization wishing to sell or serve food, alcohol, and/or merchandise as a component of an event or within 100 yards of the event shall work with the producer of said event but shall not be required to obtain a separate event permit to operate during the event. 
(Ord. No. 736 , pt. I, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 78-38. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates, or fails to comply with, any provision of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 736 , pt. I, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 78-39. - Exceptions. 
This article shall specifically not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Neighborhood parades and block parties, provided activities remain solely within the boundaries of such neighborhood and do not interfere with normal flow of vehicular traffic or such activities have obtained a street closing permit from the city; 
(3)  Private gatherings or activities that take place on city park property that do not significantly affect the customary and ordinary use of the park, such as a birthday party, and do not include any temporary structures; 
(4)  Sporting events; 
(5)  Regularly scheduled events occurring on city park property, including park and recreation facilities, by organizations with on-going agreements with the city if prior notification of events is given to the city in writing within a reasonable period of time prior to the event; 
(6)  School students going to or from classes or participating in properly supervised and sponsored activities; 
(7)  Garage sales, lawn sales, rummage sales or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property; 
(8)  Events on private property which will make no use of city streets other than for lawful parking; 
(9)  Filming by a film production company; 
(10)  Governmental entities acting within the scope of their functions; and 
(11)  Other activities as provided for by law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 736 , pt. I, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 78-40. - Application. 
(a)  Required. Every person or organization required to procure a permit under the provisions of this article shall submit an application to the city manager. 
(b)  Format. The producer of a special event shall make application for a permit for the event on a form prescribed by the city. As part of each application, the city may request the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the producer; 
(2)  Date(s), time(s) and location(s) for the event including proposed routes of travel for non-stationary events, such as races or parades; 
(3)  Schedule and description for activity involved with the event; 
(4)  An approximate number of event participants; vendors; including food, merchandise, and alcohol vendors; and projected attendance; 
(5)  Site plan for the event including all existing and temporary buildings, structures, parking, and points of egress for the site; 
(6)  A description of any sound amplification equipment that will be utilized outdoors in conjunction with the event; 
(7)  A special event sign application and detailed sign schedule specifying all signs to be used both at the event as well as advertising the event in the city. The sign schedule shall detail all sign dimensions, materials, durations, and locations; 
(8)  Description of plans for disposal of waste disposal, recycling collection, and clean-up of the event area after the conclusion of the event; 
(9)  Description of plans for first aid provision; 
(10)  Description of plans for storage and security of event materials, vehicles, and trailers if the event lasts multiple days; 
(11)  Description of plans for providing toilet facilities for event participants; 
(12)  Description of plans for parking that show the special event is not overly disruptive to neighboring businesses and residences; 
(13)  Dimensions of any proposed temporary structures, including but not limited to, tents, buildings, or other similar structures; 
(14)  Description of plans to provide notification, in a written form, to neighboring residences and businesses surrounding the hub of the event of the producer's intent to host the event: 
a.  For events without a stationary hub, such as parades or processions without festival areas, this notification requirement may be waived by the city manager; and 
b.  The city manager may modify the method of notification in the case that written notification would be unreasonable because of a large number of businesses and residences. 
(15)  The producer of any event shall sign a written agreement in a form satisfactory to the city, providing the producer shall defend, pay, and save harmless the city, its officers, employees, and agents from liability of all personal or property damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from an event and from any and all claims, attorney fees or lawsuits for personal injury or property damage arising from or in any way connected to the event. The agreement shall be filed with, and made a part of, the application form; 
(16)  Any additional information which the city manager may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article which may include a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the producer and every partner, officer or director of the organization for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, county, state, or federal government, other than minor traffic violations. 
(c)  Application fee. Each application for an event permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as may be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  Filing. 
(1)  Completed event applications should be submitted to the city manager within a reasonable time prior to the planned event for security purposes, verifications, and arrangements. 
(2)  Special events and parades. An application for a special event or parade permit shall be filed at least 60 days prior to the date the special event or parade is scheduled to take place; provided, however, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the special event or parade. 
(3)  Public assemblages. An application for a public assemblage permit shall be filed at least 15 days prior to the planned public assemblage is scheduled to take place; provided, however, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the public assemblage. 
(e)  If an unforeseen circumstance arises requiring an application to be submitted with less than the reasonable time periods provided, the city manager shall have discretion to determine if an emergency exists and, subject to this article, grant or deny review of such an application in his sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 736 , pt. I, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 78-41. - Procedure for application review. 
(a)  Internal review. Upon receipt of a complete application for a permit, the city manager shall have it reviewed by the city departments, the services of which may be impacted by the event. The following issues shall be considered in reviewing the application: 
(1)  Event location. Given any provided information about the schedule, description of the activity, and projected attendance the city departments will consider if the proposed event location and site plan are adequate. 
(2)  Event type. Should the event be an activity not previously held within the boundaries of the city and not similar in scope or scale to an event previously held within the boundaries of the city, the city manager may bring the event to city council for review and approval. The city council's review and approval shall follow the standards of review of this division. 
(3)  Sound amplification. Given the provided information about the schedule and time of the event, city departments will consider if the proposed use of sound amplification will comply with the noise ordinance. 
(4)  Signage. Given the provided information about temporary signs, city departments will consider if the proposed signs comply with the administrative guidelines for special event signage and advertising. The issuance of an event permit does not preclude the need to obtain special event sign permits and does not guarantee approval of special event sign permits. 
(5)  Waste disposal and recycling collection. Given the provided information about projected event attendance, event activities, and event location, city departments will consider if the plans for waste disposal and recycling collection are adequate. 
(6)  Clean-up. Given the provided information about plans for clean-up after the event area, city departments will consider if the clean-up plans are adequate to clean the event area of rubbish and debris, returning it to its pre-event condition within 24 hours of the conclusion of the event. If the event is to be held on public streets or public right-of-way, the producer shall remove all structures, trash, and debris from the designated area no later than the time stated under the permit for the re-opening of all streets. If the producer fails to clean-up such refuse, clean-up shall be arranged by the city, and the costs incurred for this service shall be charged to the producer. 
(7)  First aid. Given the provided information about projected event attendance and activities, city departments will consider if the plans for first aid provision are adequate. 
(8)  Toilet facilities. Given the provided information about projected event attendance, event location, and activities, city departments will consider if the plans for toilet facilities are adequate. 
(9)  Parking. Given the provided information about projected event attendance, city departments will consider if the plans for parking are adequate. 
(10)  Notification of neighbors. Given the event area, city departments will consider if the producer provided adequate plans to notify neighboring residences and businesses in writing. 
(11)  Alcohol permits. Given the provided information about alcohol sale or service, has the producer (and/or vendor) secured appropriate permits for sale or service of alcohol. 
(12)  Security. Given the provided information, including any plans for overnight storage for multi-day events, city departments will consider if the plans for security of event is adequate. 
(13)  Vehicular traffic flow. Given the provided information and plans for parking, event activities, estimated event attendance, and regular flow of vehicular traffic, city departments will consider if the event will unreasonably disrupt or otherwise obstruct the necessary flow of vehicular traffic around the event area. 
(14)  Crowd and traffic control. Given the provided information about the event activities, location, and estimated event attendance, the police department will consider if the event has an adequate plan to provide crowd and traffic control. 
(15)  Health, safety and welfare. Given the provided information about the event, the police department will consider if the event will endanger or has the reasonable possibility of endangering the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(16)  The city departments will provide reports to the city manager as to whether or not the provided plans for the event are adequate and if the event will unreasonably disrupt and obstruct the necessary flow of vehicular traffic or endanger the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  External review. Upon receipt of a complete application for a permit, the city manager shall determine if proposed temporary structures or event elements require review by DeKalb County based on the city's existing service delivery strategy agreement and adopted intergovernmental agreements. 
(c)  City-cosponsored events. The city council may cosponsor an event. City-cosponsored events are events the city council has determined, pursuant to an adopted policy, to be in the general interest to the public and advance the promotion of the community. The city may provide financial and in-kind support to these events. These events must meet the requirements of this division including providing personnel and services deemed necessary and in excess of this level of support as authorized by the city council at the time of their co-sponsorship of the event. 
(Ord. No. 736 , pt. I, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 78-42. - Permit approval and conditions. 
(a)  Consideration. The city manager will consider issuing a permit for an event following the completion of internal review, as described in section 78-41, and any necessary external review. 
(b)  Issuance. 
(1)  The city manager shall issue a permit for an event if the event plans are adequate for the event location, waste disposal and recycling collection, clean-up, first aid, toilet facilities, parking, security, crowd, and traffic control and the event will not unreasonably disrupt or otherwise obstruct the necessary flow of vehicular traffic or endanger the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(2)  No permit may be issued prior to payment of all applicable fees. 
(3)  No event shall be allowed to exceed six days in any 30-day consecutive period of time. 
(4)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, an event is subject to and must comply with any and all other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(5)  All permits issued pursuant to this article shall be temporary and shall not vest in the holder any permanent property rights. 
(6)  No Saturday event may begin earlier than 7:00 a.m. or end later than 11:00 p.m. in residentially zoned locations and no event may begin earlier than 7:00 a.m. or end later than 12:00 midnight in commercially zoned locations. 
(7)  No Sunday event may begin earlier than 8:00 a.m. or end later than 11:00 p.m. in residentially zoned locations and no event may begin earlier than 8:00 a.m. or end later than 12:00 midnight in commercially zoned locations. 
(8)  The City Hall grounds may not be used for holding a parade, assembly, demonstration, or other event on any weekday prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. or on any Sunday prior to 1:00 p.m. or after 5:00 p.m. 
(9)  Parades, marches, foot races, cycling races, and processions shall follow routes approved pursuant to the application process. Such designated route or routes may be on file with the city manager. 
(10)  Prior to the beginning of the event, the producer shall provide to the city proof of comprehensive liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured. The insurance requirement is a minimum of $300,000.00 personal injury per person, $1,000,000.00 maximum, and $100,000.00 property damage against all claims arising from permits issued pursuant to this article. 
a.  For public assemblages, the city manager may waive the requirement for liability insurance if he reasonably finds that it would be a substantial burden to the producer's First Amendment rights and would be significantly prohibitive of the event. 
(c)  Conditions. As part of the permit issuance, the city manager may make conditions to the permit including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  For alternate routes and locations of the event to ameliorate issues of traffic flow and public safety; 
(2)  Providing for the city to close designated streets and intersections to allow use of the public right-of-way for the event during designated hours and days; 
a.  Should state routes be disrupted or obstructed, the producer must obtain permission from the state department of transportation for the closing of state routes. 
(3)  For the employment of off-duty uniformed and P.O.S.T. certified police officers to provide for adequate crowd, traffic control, and/or security; 
(4)  For the employment of off-duty uniformed fire personnel to provide for adequate fire inspection/prevention and/or fire code enforcement; 
(5)  For the employment of off-duty medics who are state certified EMT or paramedics to provide for adequate first aid; 
(6)  For the use of shuttles to provide access to additional parking areas outside of comfortable walking distance from the event; 
(7)  For a police vehicle to precede parades, marches, and/or processions; 
(8)  For the event permit, as well as any other permits required in conjunction with the event, to be posted on site during the event. 
(Ord. No. 736 , pt. I, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 78-43. - Fees. 
(a)  Applicability. No producer of any event, except as may otherwise be provided herein, shall be exempt from the payment of the fees and charges required under this article. 
(b)  Fee payment. All fees shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of the event permit. If the event is to be held at a public park or park pavilion, the park or park pavilion is not officially reserved until all event-related fees are paid. 
(c)  Application fee. Each application for an event permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as may be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. The application fee may be tiered based on factors including the event type, event characteristics, and event duration. 
(d)  Permit fee. Approved events shall be assessed an event permit fee in such amount as to be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. At the discretion of the city council, the event fee may be tiered based on factors including the event type, event characteristics, and event duration. Public assemblages shall be exempt from the event permit fee. 
(e)  Sign deposit. A deposit for event signage based on the number of signs to be erected shall be in such amount as set from time to time by resolution of the city council. The deposit is due at the time an event permit is issued and is refundable upon submittal of an affidavit that all signs associated with the event have been removed. Such signs must be removed and such affidavit must be submitted within seven days of the conclusion of the event or the deposit shall be forfeited. 
(f)  Equipment rental fees. 
(1)  Should a city-cosponsored event desire to have use of any equipment owned by the city, such as sound equipment and the like, an additional fee and/or damage deposit, as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council, shall be paid so as to cover the reasonable cost for use of the equipment, as well as the delivery and return of the items to the city. 
(2)  Should a producer desire to have use of equipment owned by companies providing service to the city, such as barriers, traffic cones, and the like, a producer would need to enter into a private agreement with such company. 
(g)  Park and pavilion rental fees. Should the producer desire to hold their event at a public park or park pavilion, to reserve said facilities, a rental agreement, on a form prescribed by the city, must be remitted to the city and the deposits and rental fees as set from time to time by resolution of the city council must be paid. 
(h)  City support service fees. 
(1)  Should a producer desire to hire city staff to provide support services at their event, such as police officers providing services including security, the fee and time minimums for such services will be in such amount as to be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  In no event shall the city require public assemblages to pay for functions such as traffic control and police protection. 
(i)  Alcohol permit fees. The dispensing of alcoholic beverages, by sale or otherwise, shall be allowed as a component of an event provided the producer and/or the alcohol vendor(s) have been duly licensed by the state and the city or another local governing authority and shall further have complied with all provisions of this Code relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages off-premises at an authorized function or event including payment of any and all fees related to the sale or serving of alcohol. 
(j)  Cash bond. A cash bond may be determined to be appropriate by the city manager, and in this event the city manager shall advise the producer of the amount, and this bond shall be remitted to the city before the event permit is issued. Criteria to be considered in determining the appropriateness of requiring a bond shall include the impact of the event on the cost of services to be provided by the city and on the general public health, welfare or safety of the city. 
(k)  Other fees. The fees required in this article shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other applicable ordinances or regulations. 
(l)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Application fees. 
a.  The producer of any event associated with and benefiting the cause of a charitable organization, recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, may be excused by the city manager from the application fee requirement if, in his reasonable discretion, the event benefits the community at large. 
b.  The producer of any event donating event proceeds to the city may be excused by the city manager from the application fee requirement. 
c.  For events that have been co-sponsored by the city and designated by the city council as "signature" or "premier" pursuant to an adopted policy related to special event co-sponsorship, the producer of the event may be excused by the city manager from the application fee requirement. 
(2)  Permit fees. 
a.  The producer of an event donating event proceeds to the city may be excused by the city manager from the permit fee requirement. 
b.  For events that have been co-sponsored by the city and designated by the city council as "signature" or "premier" pursuant to an adopted policy related to special event co-sponsorship, the producer of the event may be excused by the city manager from the permit fee requirement. 
(3)  Park and pavilion rental fees. 
a.  The producer of an event donating event proceeds to the city may be excused by the city manager from the park and pavilion rental fee requirement. 
b.  For events that have been co-sponsored by the city and designated by the city council as "signature" or "premier" pursuant to an adopted policy related to special event co-sponsorship, the producer of the event may be excused by the city manager from the permit fee requirement. 
(4)  City support service fees. 
a.  All public assemblages shall be exempt from paying for police support services deemed necessary by the chief of police for approved events, including but not limited to, police support services such as traffic control and police protection. 
b.  Events that have been co-sponsored by the city and designated by the city council as "signature" or "premier" pursuant to an adopted policy related to special event co-sponsorship are eligible for cost sharing of city support services such as police department support services. "Signature" and "premier" events must still meet the requirements of this article including providing personnel and services deemed necessary and in excess of this level of support as authorized by the city council at the time of their co-sponsorship of the event. 
(5)  Alcohol licensing fees. A nonprofit civic organization, recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service as demonstrated with a nonprofit authorization letter (Federal Form 501-C), may be excused by the city manager from the administrative application fee for an alcohol license. Such organizations are not exempt from the temporary or annual alcohol permit fees or the permit fees for pouring alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 736 , pt. I, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 78-44. - Liability. 
The city, its officials, employees and agents shall not incur any liability or responsibility for any injury or damage to any person in any way connected to the use for which the permit has been issued. The city, its officials, employees and agents shall not be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reasons of inspections performed, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any use of the right-of-way or other public property. 
(Ord. No. 736 , pt. I, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 78-45. - Permit denial or revocation. 
(a)  Reasons for denial of an event permit include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The event will unnecessarily disrupt traffic within the city beyond practical solution; 
(2)  The event will interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants; 
(3)  The location of the event will cause undue hardship to adjacent businesses or residents; 
(4)  The event will cause unnecessary disruption of public services which would unreasonably impact the remainder of the city; 
(5)  The application contains incomplete or false information; 
(6)  The producer's plans presented for services required on the application, including but not limited to event location, waste disposal and recycling collection, clean-up, first aid, toilet facilities, parking, security, crowd, and traffic control, are inadequate; 
(7)  The producer has requested the event to occur on a date which the city has already approved another event; 
(8)  The producer fails to comply with any terms required by this article including failing to provide any information that is reasonably requested by the city manager for review due to the type of event; or 
(9)  The producer of an event on city-owned property has a criminal record with conviction(s) and/or no contest plea(s) that could have a negative effect on the use of city property such as vandalism, other property crime, or violent crime. 
(b)  Notification of denial. Should a permit be denied, the producer shall be notified in writing. 
(c)  Revocation or suspension. Reasons for revocation or suspension of an event permit include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  False or incomplete information on the application; 
(2)  Failure to comply with all terms and conditions of the permit; 
(3)  Failure to arrange for or adequately remit all fees, deposits, insurance or bonds to the city; and 
(4)  Existence of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency as the city determines, in its sole discretion, to be an impact upon the public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  Grounds for subsequent permit denials. Should the producer fail to meet the conditions of their permit, including any additional requirements placed on the producer in accordance with their permit, and those requirements are not met despite assurances by the producer, then such failure to comply with such requirements shall be grounds for denial of any subsequent permit requested by the producer and for any other claims for funds expended by the city for those extraordinary expenses agreed to but not provided by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 736 , pt. I, 4-18-17) 
Sec. 78-46. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any producer whose event permit application has been denied or revoked may request in writing a review of this decision by the city council. This request must be in writing and received by the city clerk within five days of the permit denial or revocation. 
(b)  The city council shall set a hearing date within 30 days of receiving an appeal. At the hearing, evidence may be submitted by the producer addressing why the permit should have been granted or not revoked and by the city manager addressing why the permit was denied or revoked. The city council shall determine whether the denial or revocation of the permit is justified, or it may reverse the previous decision and grant or reinstate the permit with such additional conditions as deemed justified by the evidence. 
(Ord. No. 736 , pt. I, 4-18-17) 
DIVISION 3. - SIGNAGE 

Sec. 78-47. - Signage and advertising. 
(a)  Pursuant to administrative guidelines for event signage adopted by the city council, producers may apply for signs to advertise and direct activity within their event. 
(b)  Applicants must have permission from any property owner upon whose property the producer proposes to post a sign. 
(c)  Applications for event signage should be submitted to the development director or his designee for approval. 
(d)  Upon approval by the development director or his designee, recommendations and allowances made shall become conditions of the permit to be followed and carried out by the producer. 
(e)  Applicants may not be approved for signs that exceed the provisions in the administrative guidelines. 
(f)  Applicants may not appeal to the city council for relief as to the signs that exceed the provisions in the administrative guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 736 , pt. I, 4-18-17) 
Secs. 78-48—78-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 78-131. - Permit. 
No person shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the city manager or his designated representative. A permit shall not be required where that work is performed under a contract with the city, but if work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city manager and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-1; Ord. No. 369, § 5-1-1, 12-11-92) 
Sec. 78-132. - Breaking or destroying curbing; permit required for entrance to property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, deface or destroy the curbing of any street, or to construct any entrance into property on any of the paved streets, unless the person shall have first obtained a permit in writing to do so from the city manager or his designated representative. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-6; Ord. No. 369, § 5-1-6, 12-11-92) 
Sec. 78-133. - Use of gravel near streets, sidewalks. 
(a)  No person conducting a business adjacent to a highway or sidewalk shall maintain a yard or lot pavement or covering of stones, pebbles or like substances in such manner that the stones, pebbles or other substances are movable upon being walked upon or driven over by vehicles going to and from the place of business, and to and from the street or sidewalk, unless so placed and maintained that the stones or substances will not get into or upon the adjacent sidewalk or street. 
(b)  Whenever a condition such as is mentioned in subsection (a) is found to exist, either the owner or his agent in charge shall be notified, and if not corrected within the time directed by the city manager, it shall be sufficient cause for revoking the permit and/or license under which the business is conducted, after notice and hearing before the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-9; Ord. No. 369, § 5-1-9, 12-11-92) 
Secs. 78-134—78-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 736 , pt. II, adopted Apr. 18, 2017, deleted art. IV §§ 78-151—78-168, entitled "Special Event Permit," which derived from Ord. No. 602, pt. I, adopted June 16, 2009. See art. II of this chapter for similar provisions. 

Secs. 78-151—78-175. - Reserved. 
Chapters 79—81 - RESERVED 
Chapter 82 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 22; vehicles for hire, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal governments, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; limitation on taxing power of municipalities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 8; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-2; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Ad valorem tax rate. 
An annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city is hereby levied. The millage rate therefor shall be established each year by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-1; Ord. No. 412, § 1, 3-19-96) 
State Law reference— Municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 
Secs. 82-2—82-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX 

Sec. 82-36. - Time for filing return; contents of return. 
The DeKalb County Tax Commissioner shall open the city books for returns of taxes on business personal property on January 1 of each year, by and for the individual returns to be made by the property owners and tax payers to the tax commissioner for all business personal property owned, held and subject to a tax return to and for taxation by the city on January 1 of the year as required to be returned; and each person liable and subject to such a tax return in the city and for taxes by the city, between January 1 and March 1 of each year, shall fill out completely and answer fully all pertinent and applicable questions under oath administered by the county tax commissioner or by any person authorized to administer an oath or attest deeds in the state as contained in the tax return form furnished by the county tax commissioner. Among other answers thereon and information required thereby, the property owner and taxpayer shall set forth in the tax return the value, as required by the laws of the state, of all business personal property owned, held or controlled by him which is subject to a tax return to the city and which is subject to taxation by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-2; Ord. No. 412, § 2, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 82-37. - Assessment of tax on failure to file return. 
The tax commissioner shall open the books for tax returns pursuant to this article on January 1, and close them on March 1, or as soon thereafter as possible. Should any taxpayer fail or refuse to make his return during such period, the tax commissioner shall, from the best information he can secure, ascertain the amount and value of such property not returned and assess the tax against such taxpayer. The tax commissioner shall thereupon mail to such taxpayer, at his last known address, a written notice of the assessment and the amount thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-3; Ord. No. 412, § 3, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 82-38. - Penalty for failure to file return. 
In all cases where unreturned business personal property is assessed by the county, a penalty equal to ten percent of the value of such unreturned property shall be added to the amount of taxes due. The penalty provided in this section shall be collected under any provision of city ordinances providing for the collection of city taxes or by the provisions of any applicable law providing for the collection of such taxes and penalty, and, in all cases, such collected amounts shall be paid into the general fund of the city to be used for general purposes and expenses of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-4; Ord. No. 412, § 4, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 82-39. - Time for collection; notice of collection. 
One-half of the taxes shall be due and payable on July 1 of each year and shall become delinquent if not paid by August 15 in each year. The remaining one-half of the taxes shall be due and payable on October 1 of each year and shall become delinquent if not paid by November 15 of each year. A penalty not to exceed five percent of the amount of each installment shall be added to each installment that is not paid before the installment becomes delinquent. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-5; Ord. No. 412, § 5, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 82-40. - Notice of delinquency. 
All taxes remaining unpaid as of the close of business on December 31 of each year shall bear interest at the rate specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40, but in no event shall an interest payment for delinquent taxes be less than $1.00. The tax collectors shall issue executions for delinquent taxes, penalties, and interest against each delinquent taxpayer. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-6; Ord. No. 412, § 6, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 82-41. - Interest on delinquent tax. 
If taxes on business personal property are paid subsequent to the date due, there shall be added to such taxes interest at the maximum rate allowed by state law. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-7) 
Secs. 82-42—82-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ROOMS, LODGINGS AND ACCOMMODATIONS TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County and municipal excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq. 

Sec. 82-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Guestroom means a room occupied or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy by one or more occupants, other than meeting rooms intended, designed and used for that purpose. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention building or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to use or possession of any guestroom or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any guestroom in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including but not limited to the owner or proprietor of the premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, person licensed to operate the hotel, or any other person otherwise operating the hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding that date. The right of occupancy for at least ten consecutive days is clearly established through the advance payment of ten days' rent or when a lease has been signed for a period in excess of ten days. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Tax means the tax imposed by sections 82-70 and 82-71. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-1A) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-67. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-15(a)) 
Sec. 82-68. - Failure to register or file return; false or fraudulent returns or reports. 
Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this article or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report who makes any false or fraudulent report with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due required by this article to be made shall be deemed guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-15(b)) 
Sec. 82-69. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of clerk. The clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax. 
(b)  Administrative rules and regulations. The clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes under this article. 
(c)  License fee review board. The mayor and council shall constitute the license fee review board referred to in this article. It shall be the duty of the license fee review board to accept questions or disputes concerning the administration and implementation of this article, and to advise the clerk of its opinion on the various questions brought before it. 
(d)  Required records. Every operator renting guestrooms in the city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the clerk may require. 
(e)  Examination of records; audits. The clerk or any person authorized in writing by the clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(f)  Authority to require reports relating to tax. In administration of the provisions of this article, the clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in the person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the clerk when required by the clerk, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy, and such other information as the clerk may require. 
(g)  Confidentiality of information. The clerk or any other person having an administrative duty under this article shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having that administrative duty under this article, except in case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax levied and assessed by this article. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-14) 
Sec. 82-70. - Levy; applicability; maximum rate. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b), there is hereby levied an excise tax at the rate of eight percent upon the furnishings for value to the public of any room, lodging or accommodations furnished by any person licensed by or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. No tax shall be levied as provided in this section on: 
(1)  Charges made for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty; 
(2)  The use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or any rooms, lodgings or accommodations provided without charge; 
(3)  Any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by Georgia state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the persons as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations with a state or local government credit or debit card, such rooms, lodgings or accommodations shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by a Georgia state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this subsection. For purpose of the exemption provided under this subsection, a local government official or employee shall include officials or employees of counties, municipalities, consolidated governments or county or independent school districts; or 
(4)  Charges made for continuous use of any rooms, lodgings or accommodations after the first 30 days of continuous occupancy. 
(b)  No tax levied pursuant to this section shall be levied or collected at a rate exceeding eight percent of the charge to the public for the furnishings. The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b). 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-1; Ord. No. 640, pt. I, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 595, pt. I, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 617, pt. I, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 739 , pt. I, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 82-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 540, pt. I, adopted May 17, 2005, repealed section 82-71 in its entirety. Former section 82-71 pertained to authorization of a higher tax for use in promotion of tourism, conventions and trade shows, and derived from the Code of 1982, §§ 3-5-2, 3-5-3. 
Sec. 82-72. - Persons liable for tax; extinguishment of liability. 
Every person occupying a guestroom in a hotel in the city is liable for the tax. His liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the city, except that a receipt from an operator maintaining a place of business in the city or from an operator who is authorized by the clerk, under such rules and regulations as he may prescribe, to collect the tax, and who is, for the purposes of this article, regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in the city, which receipt is given to the occupant pursuant to section 82-73, is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-4) 
Sec. 82-73. - Collection by operator; receipt; collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the city as provided in section 82-72, and renting guestrooms in the city, not exempted under section 82-75, shall, at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant and on demand, give to the occupant a receipt therefor. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that those credits are incurred, in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The clerk shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-5) 
Sec. 82-74. - Unlawful advertising regarding tax. 
It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guestroom, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-6) 
Sec. 82-75. - Exemption for permanent residents. 
No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a permanent resident. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-7) 
Sec. 82-76. - Registration of operators; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the city shall immediately register with the clerk, on a form provided by the clerk. Persons engaging in the business must so register not later than 15 days after the date this article becomes effective and the tax is imposed as set forth in sections 82-70 and 82-71, but the privilege of registration after the imposition of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of the date of registration. 
(b)  The registration shall set forth the name under which the person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business, and any other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the clerk may require. 
(c)  The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; and in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. 
(d)  The clerk shall, after the registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. 
(e)  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(f)  Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable, and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and to come readily to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. 
(g)  The certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, and shall be returned immediately to the clerk upon the cessation of business at the location named, or upon the sale or transfer of the business at that location. 
(h)  Should the clerk deem it necessary, in order to facilitate initial registration under this article of persons engaged in business on or prior to the date of imposition of tax as set forth in this article, he may prescribe administrative provisions therefor other than those provided in this section. These provisions shall be made to effect the purposes of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-8) 
Sec. 82-77. - Payment by occupant; filing of return; remittance to city. 
(a)  Date for payment and remittance. The tax shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of any hotel in the city. All amounts of such taxes collected by any operator shall be due and payable to the clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  Filing of return. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the clerk, in such form as the clerk may prescribe, by every operator liable for the payment of tax under this article. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the clerk. 
(d)  Address for delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due, to the city clerk, City of Chamblee, 5468 Peachtree Road, Chamblee, Georgia 30341. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-9) 
Sec. 82-78. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Computation of tax by clerk. If the clerk is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or any fraction of a month from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the clerk may offset overpayments for a period against underpayments for another period, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 82-79(c). 
(d)  Penalty for negligence or disregard of regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provisions of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)  Notice of determination. The clerk or his designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If notice is given by mail, the service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the clerk. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time limit for service of notice. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-10) 
Sec. 82-79. - Determination of tax if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return, and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the clerk. Upon the basis of this estimate, the clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or more periods. 
(b)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the clerk may offset overpayments for a period against underpayments for another period, against penalties, and against the interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or any fraction of a month from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in section 82-80. 
(e)  Notice. Promptly after making his determination, the clerk shall give to the person written notice, to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-11) 
Sec. 82-80. - Penalty for failure to pay tax; interest on unpaid tax. 
Any person who fails to pay the tax to the city, or fails to pay any amount of the tax required to be collected and paid to the city, within the time required, shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in section 82-79(c). 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-12) 
Sec. 82-81. - Authority to require deposit of security; sale of security. 
(a)  The clerk, whenever he deems it necessary to ensure compliance with this article, may require any person subject thereto to deposit with him such security as the clerk may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the clerk, but shall not be greater than twice the person's estimated average liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such a manner as the clerk deems proper, or $10,000.00, whichever amount is the lesser. 
(b)  The amount of the security may be increased by the clerk subject to the limitations provided in this section. The clerk may sell the security at public auction, with the approval of the mayor and council, if it becomes necessary to do so in order to recover any tax or any amount required to be collected, interest or penalty due. Notice of the sale may be served upon the person who deposited the security personally or by mail. If served by mail, service shall be made in the manner prescribed for service of a notice of a deficiency determination and shall be addressed to the person at his address as it appears in the records of the clerk. Upon any sale, any surplus above the amount due shall be returned to the person who deposited the security. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-13(a)) 
Sec. 82-82. - Legal action to collect tax. 
At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the clerk may bring an action in the courts of this state, of any other state or of the United States, in the name of the city, to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-13(b)) 
Sec. 82-83. - Duty of successor of operator to withhold tax from purchase price. 
If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the tax from the purchase price as required, he becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him, to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the clerk shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the clerk of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out his business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-13(c)) 
Sec. 82-84. - Credit for tax erroneously paid. 
Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset as provided in section 82-78(c). If the operator or other person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the clerk, he will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the clerk, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators or executors. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5-13(d)) 
Chapter 83 - RESERVED 
Chapter 84 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES, FRANCHISES AND LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 750 , § 1, adopted June 19, 2018, amended ch. 84 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 84, §§ 84-1—84-128, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. 508, adopted Oct. 16, 2001; Ord. No. 591, § 1, adopted Oct. 21, 2008; and Ord. No. 606 § 1, 2, adopted July 21, 2009. 

ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 84-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
Affiliated person means each person who falls into one or more of the following categories: 
(1)  Each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; 
(2)  Each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; 
(3)  Each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicant; and 
(4)  Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the applicant; 
Provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant. 
Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act. 
Chapter means this chapter and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
City means the City of Chamblee. 
City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
Control or controlling interest means the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of a person, including, but not limited to, a person's compliance with a franchise or revocable license, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by contract, or otherwise, and the beneficial ownership of shares representing ten percent or more of the votes entitled to be cast by a corporation's voting shares shall create a rebuttable presumption of control. 
Facility services means the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of conduit or related facilities in the streets by a person for sale or lease to third parties, other than affiliated persons, that use such conduit or related facilities for the transmission of telecommunication services, but such person does not itself provide telecommunications service or cable service to such third parties or any locations or other persons in the license area. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets by a telecommunications system to provide telecommunications services. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to provide facility services along licensed routes pursuant to a license, or to construct, install, operate and maintain a telecommunications system as necessary to: 
(1)  Furnish, supply and distribute telecommunications services to any locations or persons in the franchise or license area; 
(2)  Provide private telecommunications services along licensed routes pursuant to a license; or 
(3)  Transport telecommunications services across the city along licensed routes pursuant to a license without terminating or originating any telecommunications services at or from any person or location in the city. 
May is permissive. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Private telecommunications services means the transmission of telecommunications by a person, regardless of the facilities used, for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person, and shall not mean cable services. 
Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in subsection 84-26(b) of this chapter. 
Shall is mandatory, not merely directive. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications means "telecommunications" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. 
Telecommunications service means "telecommunications service" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "telecommunications service" shall mean "telecommunications service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Telecommunications system means the system, plant, equipment or property within the streets in the franchise or license area over which telecommunications service or private telecommunications service is provided, and to be constructed, operated and maintained by a grantee pursuant to a franchise or license ordinance or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Secs. 84-2—84-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 84-26. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to construct, operate or maintain a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services or private telecommunications services are provided, or use or occupy the streets to provide facility services, without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city intends to exercise its authority to franchise or license persons pursuant to this chapter to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, including the 1996 Act. 
(b)  A person shall not use or occupy the streets to operate a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services or private telecommunications services are provided without a franchise, except that such person may use or occupy specific streets without a franchise if the person obtains a revocable license in accordance with the terms of this chapter. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets and: 
(1)  May be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is for the sole purpose of providing private telecommunications services or facility services; 
(2)  Shall be granted to provide telecommunications services only if the use or occupation of such streets, together with the use or occupation of any streets pursuant to revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed 500 linear feet; or 
(3)  Shall be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is by a telecommunications system that is not used by the grantee or any other person to sell, resell or otherwise provide telecommunications services to any person in the city. 
In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a person to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in this subsection 84-26(b), then such person must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. 
(c)  The city council may grant one or more franchises or revocable licenses in accordance with this chapter, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this chapter by amendment hereof. 
(d)  The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(e)  Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises or revocable licenses as it deems appropriate, and/or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services, private telecommunications services or facility services. 
(f)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. A revocable license may only be granted for use of specifically identified streets. 
(g)  The grant of franchises and revocable licenses by the city to persons constructing, operating or maintaining a telecommunications system shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the 1996 Act, as amended, governing telecommunications franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 84-27. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise or revocable license shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or Social Security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)  For the purpose of determining who controls applicant, a detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including the following: 
a.  The names and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names and business addresses of all persons having control over the applicant; 
c.  Financial information sufficient to demonstrate that the applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain the telecommunications system, or to provide facility services, in a safe manner and in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law; and 
d.  For purposes of determining whether the applicant will construct, maintain, operate, and repair the telecommunications system, or provide facility services, in compliance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and in a manner protective of the public health, safety and welfare with respect to the applicant's use of the streets, the names and addresses for telecommunications systems owned or controlled by the applicant and the areas served by such systems. 
(3)  In order to permit the city to manage its streets, a description of the proposed plan of construction and maintenance of the telecommunications system or facility services to be constructed in the streets, which shall include the following: 
a.  A map indicating the location of the system or facility services in the streets, and an estimated construction schedule, if known; and 
b.  A statement describing the proposed and actual location of facilities and equipment to be used in the streets by the applicant; 
(4)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references reasonably pertinent to the city's management of the streets or the compensation to be paid to the city, which shall be required or requested by the council or by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 84-28. - Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises and revocable licenses. 
No application for a new franchise or revocable license shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise or revocable license is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded, except if required by law. 
(1)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(2)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, each applicant for a franchise must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount pursuant to a fee schedule set by the mayor and city council. Said fees shall be submitted by a certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Chamblee, and each applicant for a revocable license must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount pursuant to a fee schedule set by the mayor and city council. In the event the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. In the event the city's reasonable costs are less than the application amount, the city shall reimburse to the applicant the amount in excess of the city's actual cost if required by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 84-29. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 84-30. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises or revocable licenses, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 84-31. - Evaluation criteria. 
An applicant shall be granted a franchise or revocable license to construct, operate or maintain a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services are provided, provided the city council reasonably determines that the applicant has agreed to or meets the following factors: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city; 
(2)  Demonstration of adequate financial and technical ability to construct and maintain a telecommunications system in the streets, which such demonstration may be made by an adequate bond, security fund, and/or such other demonstration that is reasonably acceptable to the city, and a certificate of public convenience or other authorization from the state or Federal Communications Commission permitting the applicant to provide telecommunications services in the city; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The willingness and the ability of the applicant to meet construction requirements and to abide by all conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise (including any terms or conditions imposed pursuant to section 84-33 of this chapter), any public, health, safety and welfare requirements reasonably related to the applicant's use of the streets, and the city's management of streets; and 
(5)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other factors or considerations reasonably deemed pertinent by the city for managing the streets and safeguarding the interests of the city and the public in the streets, and for ensuring the city receives fair and reasonable compensation for use of the streets. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services and in accordance with applicable law, other than section 253 of the Communications Act which is not applicable to persons providing only private telecommunications services or facility services, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation, the foregoing factors to the extent applicable. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 84-32. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises or revocable licenses. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  After considering such information provided pursuant to this chapter as it determines to be appropriate, the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain at which such application(s) shall be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license. 
(d)  The city council shall consider the application for a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services in accordance with this chapter and applicable law, including 47 U.S.C. § 253, and shall grant the franchise or revocable license, provided that the applicant has agreed to the terms on which the franchise or revocable license is to be granted and meets the evaluation criteria set forth in section 84-31 of this chapter. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements in order to grant a franchise or revocable license to an applicant when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby or that such waiver is required by applicable law. 
(e)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services, and may specify the conditions under which the revocable license is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 84-33. - Terms and conditions of franchise and revocable license. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise or revocable license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or revocable license or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects, to the extent not prohibited by law: 
(1)  The term of the franchise or revocable license, provided, however, that the initial term of the revocable license shall not exceed five years and shall not be renewed for terms exceeding five years; 
(2)  The franchise area authorized by the franchise, or the streets that may be used pursuant to the revocable license; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise or revocable license may be terminated or canceled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise or revocable license; 
(6)  For the limited purpose of ensuring that the grantee is complying with the terms of the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions, the city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
(8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records with respect to its obligations under the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods in the streets; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight by the city of the grantee's use of streets and compliance with the franchise or revocable license; 
(12)  Provisions relating to an assignment or other transfer of the franchise or revocable license or the telecommunications system that results in a change in control; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise or revocable license; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all licenses and permits necessary to provide telecommunications services by use of the city's streets from any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city from damage or interruption of city operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements of the telecommunications system, or from the provision of facility services; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the telecommunications system, or the provision of facility services; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city reasonably determines are necessary or appropriate to permit the city to manage its streets or ensure compliance with the franchise or revocable license, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
(b)  The city clerk shall make available to an applicant a model franchise or revocable license, as applicable, containing the terms and conditions the city seeks to impose pursuant to subsection 84-33(a). The city clerk shall have the right to modify from time to time such model franchise or revocable license, so long as such modifications are consistent with this chapter and applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 84-34. - Revocation of revocable license. 
The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause or, if the revocable license is for the provision of private telecommunications services or facility services, for the city's convenience. The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than 500 linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services by the grantee, any affiliated persons or any other persons to or from any person or location in the city, or unless the use or occupation of the streets is for the provision of facility services. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 84-35. - Due compensation from telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 46-5-1(b)(8) and (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first; and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 84-36. - Authorized designee. 
The city manager/or his designee, shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the city council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments as to any matter relating to the amended law and the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Secs. 84-37—84-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 84-51. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this chapter to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this chapter or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or revocable license or grantee. The city council may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 84-52. - Application to existing telecommunications systems and providers of telecommunications services and private telecommunications services. 
This chapter shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for the operation of telecommunications systems used to provide telecommunications services existing on the effective date of this chapter but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 6-19-18) 
Secs. 84-53—84-75. - Reserved. 
Chapter 85 - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY 
ARTICLE I. - DECLARATIONS OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 85-1. - Intent and purpose. 
The City of Chamblee, Georgia (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including, but not limited to, Article 9, Section 1, paragraph 1 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution; O.C.G.A. §§ 36-1-20, (36-34-2) and O.C.G.A. §§ 32-4-42(6), (32-4-92), has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way, as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-3. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Chamblee, Georgia. 
City council means the legislative governing body of the city. 
Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Chamblee, Georgia. 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install wires, install conduit, install pipes, install transmission lines, install poles, install signs, or install facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles, installing signs, or installing facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Director means the City Manager of the City of Chamblee, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety, or of a significant loss of real or personal property. 
Excavation means any work in the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, opening the public right-of-way; installing, servicing, repairing or modifying any facility in or under the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way, and restoring the surface and subsurface of the public right-of-way. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, a utility's poles, wires, optical fibers, cables, electrical conductors, conduits, ducts, innerducts, pipes, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances, appurtenances and future technology authorized in a permit or written service agreement. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Registration means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written service agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. Rights-of-way shall not include buildings, parks, bridges, river, tunnel, viaduct, conduit or other public property or easements that have not been dedicated to compatible uses, except to the extent the use or occupation of such property is specifically granted in a permit or by law. Rights-of-way shall not include private easements or public property, except to the extent the use or occupation of public property is specifically granted in a written approval of registration. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests. 
Underground facilities means all lines, cables, conduits, pipes, posts, tanks, vaults, wires and any other facilities which are located wholly or partially underneath rights-of-way. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means any privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility servicer, contractor, subcontractor or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
Working day means any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday excluding legal holidays observed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Secs. 85-4—85-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 85-26. - Administration. 
The city manager or his/her designee shall be the city official responsible for the administration of this chapter except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-27. - Rights-of-way occupancy registration. 
(a)  Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of the provisions of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Following the effective date of this article, each utility who seeks to have facilities located in any rights-of-way under the control of city, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a notification of construction with the department. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-28. - Registration procedure. 
The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the permit registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility to be installed, maintained or repaired in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner. 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times. 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-29. - Issuance of written acceptance of registration. 
(a)  If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(b)  Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining the permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Secs. 85-30—85-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITY ENCROACHMENT NOTIFICATION OF CONSTRUCTION; CONDITIONS; PROPERTY RESTORATION; DISCONTINUANCE 

Sec. 85-106. - Permit required. 
A right-of-way encroachment permit is required prior to any of the following activities: 
(1)  Before any utility does any work to construct, install, maintain, remove or relocate facilities on, along, over or under the right-of-way in the city; or 
(2)  Construction adjacent to the rights-of-way in the city that require tree trimming within the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-107. - Permit procedure. 
A right-of-way encroachment permit application shall be submitted on a form provided by the city and shall specifically include: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent and location of any work proposed to be done along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; and 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or to any member of the public caused by work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-108. - Locate requests required. 
As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended. No utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next business day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than business days. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-109. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
Failure to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in this article may result in revocation of registration and removal of facilities from the rights-of-way. 
(1)  The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and Supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Chamblee municipal equivalents. 
(2)  Protection of traffic and roadway. In conformance with city policy, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way, or the right-of-way itself. 
(3)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon at least ten business days' notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration or relocation. 
(4)  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-110. - Restoration of property. 
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder or thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-111. - Discontinuance of operations, abandoned and unused facilities. 
(a)  A utility who has discontinued or is discontinuing operation of any facilities in the city shall: 
(1)  Provide information satisfactory to the city that the utility's obligations for its facilities in the rights-of-way under this chapter and any other provision in the codified ordinances or other laws have been lawfully assumed by another utility; or 
(2)  Submit a written proposal to reuse its facilities; or 
(3)  Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities. Said proposal must be approved by the director; or 
(4)  Remove its entire facilities within a reasonable amount of time and in a manner acceptable to the city; or 
(5)  Submit to the city, in good faith and within a reasonable amount of time, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities to the city. If a utility proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option do one or more of the following: 
a.  Purchase the facilities; 
b.  Accept donation of some or all facilities; or 
c.  Require the utility to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for its reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. 
(b)  Facilities of a utility who fails to comply with the above provision shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities; evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Secs. 84-112—84-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENT PERMITTING; CONDITIONS; PROPERTY RESTORATION; DISCONTINUANCE 

Sec. 85-126. - Permit required. 
A right-of-way encroachment permit is required prior to any of the following activities: 
(1)  Before locating any structure within in the public right-of-way; or 
(2)  Before any construction within the public right-of-way; or 
(3)  Lane or sidewalk closure within the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-127. - Permit procedure. 
A right-of-way encroachment permit application shall be submitted on a form provided by the city and shall specifically include: 
(1)  The address of the location of the proposed encroachment, or the address of the nearest parcel for activities entirely within the right-of-way; 
(2)  The nature, extent and location of any work proposed to be done along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  For lane or sidewalk closures, detailed plans showing the location of proposed traffic control measures and signage; 
(4)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(5)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(6)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(7)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or to any member of the public caused by work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(8)  Public notification plan. The requirement for public notification may be waived at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-128. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
Failure to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in this article may result in revocation of registration and removal of facilities from the rights-of-way. 
(1)  Protection of traffic and roadway. In conformance with city policy, no structures or construction activity may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way, or the right-of-way itself. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-129. - Restoration of property. 
The recipient of a right-of-way encroachment permit shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder or thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed that caused such disturbance or damage. If the permit recipient does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the permit recipient shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
ARTICLE V. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 85-130. - Permit. 
No person shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the city manager or his designated representative. A permit shall not be required where that work is performed under a contract with the city, but if work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city manager and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-131. - Breaking or destroying curbing; permit required for entrance to property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, deface or destroy the curbing of any street, or to construct any entrance into property on any of the paved streets, unless the person shall have first obtained a permit in writing to do so from the city manager or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
ARTICLE VI. - TERMINATION OF REGISTRATION; PENALTIES AND OTHER PROVISIONS 

Sec. 85-132. - Termination. 
(a)  The registration statement shall remain in place for one year and renew each subsequent year automatically unless the utility is in default. The director shall give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a registration application or any law of the city, state or federal government; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
(3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon city; or 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation of fact in its application for registration. 
(b)  If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the approval of registration. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the registration terminated. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-133. - Penalties. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 85-134. - Other provisions. 
(a)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(b)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or which may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and laws of the United States, State of Georgia, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written approval of registration, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(c)  Compliance. No utility shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of city to enforce prompt compliance. 
(d)  Appeals. All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 2, 6-19-18) 
Secs. 85-135—85-160. - Reserved. 
Chapter 86 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 46; law enforcement, ch. 50; offenses, ch. 58; signs, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; vehicles for hire, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(4); Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city, with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Code 1982, § 10-1-1) 
Sec. 86-2. - Covering of loads. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of the city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 10-1-4) 
Sec. 86-3. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
Whenever a space is marked off on any highway for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
(Code 1982, § 10-1-5) 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking, § 86-101 et seq. 
Secs. 86-4—86-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Challenges to speed limits and other traffic regulations established or enforced by local governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-9; powers of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-36. - Official traffic control devices. 
(a)  The police chief, traffic engineer, or a designee thereof, upon approval by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council, is authorized to designate and maintain with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices, after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Speed zones; 
(2)  Truck routes and streets to be designated specifically to prohibit various classes of trucks; 
(3)  One-way streets, no left turn, no right turn, and no U-turn; 
(4)  Freight loading zones and regulations; 
(5)  Parking and no parking zones and regulations thereon; 
(6)  Pedestrian crosswalks; 
(7)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; and 
(8)  Traffic lanes; or 
(9)  Providing for any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(b)  The police chief, or a designee thereof, shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of this chapter and these ordinances. The police chief, or a designee thereof, may cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as deemed necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(c)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the manual on uniform traffic control devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this section for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(d)  The police chief shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders set forth in subsection (a) of this section, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. For items listed in subsection (a) of this section, this schedule and any amendments thereto shall become effective only upon approval thereof by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council. This schedule is hereby incorporated in this section, and copies thereof shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this section shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 10-1-3; Ord. No. 627, pt. I, 12-21-10) 
Secs. 86-37—86-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED LIMITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 86-56. - State speed zone order adopted. 
The latest state speed zone order for the county, as effected and issued by the state department of transportation and state department of public safety, is adopted. The state speed zone order is adopted by reference thereto for those sections of state routes inside the city. Signs are to be erected by the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1982, § 10-2-1(a)) 
Sec. 86-57. - Speed limits on certain streets and speed detection devices permitted. 
(a)  Maximum speed limits established. Except as specifically prescribed in this section, speeds shall not exceed 25 miles per hour on any public street. 
(b)  Speed limits enumerated. The maximum speed limits on the public streets or parts of the public streets are set forth in exhibits A and B (attached to Resolution No. 2010-12-21(2) and kept on file with the city) identified as Chamblee Speed Limits, and by this reference incorporated herein. Exhibit A establishes speed limits for roadways currently within the territorial boundaries of the city upon which speed detection devices are authorized to be used. Exhibit B establishes speed limits for those roadways upon which the use of speed detection devices are not authorized. 
(c)  Driving in excess of speed limit unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive within or upon any of the streets in the city at a rate of speed in excess of the speed limits designated in this section. 
(d)  Amendment to exhibits A and B. The city may add to or amend the list of roadways designated in exhibits A and B from time to time by ordinance or resolution and pursuant to the statutes and regulations governing the establishment or alteration of speed limits and zones in the state. 
(e)  Exhibits A and B incorporated by reference. Exhibits A and B referenced in this section, as amended from time to time, are incorporated herein by reference as if set out in their entirety, and the originals shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and available for inspection by the public during city business hours. 
(Code 1982, § 10-2-1(b); Ord. No. 395, 6-10-94; Ord. No. 590, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 627, pt. II, 12-21-10, Res. No. 2010-12-21(2), (exhs. A, B), 12-21-10) 
Note— Previously entitled "State-mandated speed limits". 
Secs. 86-58—86-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 627, pt. III, adopted Dec. 21, 2010, deleted § 86-58, which pertained to twenty-five miles per hour speed zones and derived from: Code 1982, § 10-2-1(c); and Ord. No. 460, adopted Sept. 15, 1998. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—

Secs. 86-81—86-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces, § 86-3. 

Sec. 86-101. - Manner of parking. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within six inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this article; provided, that cars may lawfully be parked at an angle at such places as may be provided by property owners adjacent to the street where the indentations provided by such property owners extend a sufficient distance from the original curb line to allow vehicles parked at an angle in such places to project into such street beyond such curb line a distance no greater than the width of such vehicles, the amount of space occupied in such street thereby being no greater than in cases of parallel parking, or at such places where the roadway is of sufficient width as determined by the city manager and chief of police to allow for such angle parking. 
(Ord. No. 382, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 86-102. - Permit for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb. 
The city manager and chief of police are authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner of lessees of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Ord. No. 382, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 86-103. - Restrictions on parking commercial or oversize vehicles, campers, boats, etc., on residential streets. 
(a)  No person shall park or stand any commercial vehicles such as limousines, flatbed trucks, dump trucks, tow trucks, buses, school buses, transport wreckers, cab-on-chasis trucks, tractor trailers, wheeled attachments, earth-moving machinery, semitrailers, or any vehicles over 20 feet in length, eight feet in height or seven feet in width upon any street within the corporate limits of the city which is zoned "residential" by the zoning ordinance of the city, for any period longer than eight hours, except while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
(b)  No person shall stop or stand any commercial vehicle, truck or bus with a body more than either eight feet wide or ten feet high on any street or public place without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof. 
(c)  No person shall park or stand any truck camper, camper trailer, motorhome, boat, boat trailer or other recreational vehicle on any residential street or public place for more than six hours at any time during the day or night. 
(Ord. No. 382, 10-8-93; Ord. No. 560, 11-21-06) 
Sec. 86-104. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the direction of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of or within three feet of a public or private driveway, or in such manner as to block ingress or egress thereof; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  Within any area marked as a coach or bus stop; 
(6)  Within 30 feet of the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(7)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the city manager and chief of police have indicated a different length by signs or markings; 
(8)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 50 feet to such entrance (when properly signposted); 
(9)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(10)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(11)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; 
(12)  A space of 30 feet in front of each entrance of any hotel, theater, school or church; 
(13)  At any curb marked red or yellow by direction of the city manager and chief of police; 
(14)  At any place prohibited by the city manager and chief of police and indicated by official signs or markings; 
(15)  Between the front building restriction line and the front property line except on a bona fide paved or graveled driveway. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle, not lawfully under his control, either into any such prohibited area or more and leave such vehicle away from a curb such distance as is prohibited by this article. 
(c)  No person shall park at an angle any vehicle 24 feet or more in length on any street or roadway in the city. 
(Ord. No. 382, 10-8-93; Ord. No. 560, 11-21-06) 
Sec. 86-105. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 382, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 86-106. - Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The mayor and city council and the chief of police are hereby authorized to determine, and designate by proper signs, places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay in traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated places. 
(Ord. No. 382, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 86-107. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)  The mayor and city council and chief of police are hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Ord. No. 382, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 86-108. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
(a)  The mayor and city council and chief of police are authorized to erect signs upon either side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles and when such signs are in place no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such street in violation of any such signs. 
(b)  Unless prohibitive signs are erected on one-way streets vehicles may also park on the left-hand side headed in the direction of traffic with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within six inches of the curb or the edge of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 382, 10-8-93) 
Sec. 86-109. - Stopping and parking prohibited on certain streets. 
When not inconsistent with this article or any ordinance, the mayor and city council and chief of police are authorized to prohibit parking or stopping of vehicles on any street or portion of a street when traffic and engineering surveys indicate that such stopping or parking may impede the free flow of traffic on such street. 
(Ord. No. 382, 10-8-93) 
Chapters 87—89 - RESERVED 
Chapter 90 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; law enforcement, ch. 50; offenses, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; taxation, ch. 82; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

Sec. 90-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may, in addition to any suspension or revocation action by the chief of police or his designated representative, be punished, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-10) 
Sec. 90-2. - Applicability of chapter. 
(a)  For purposes of this chapter, taxicabs, limousines and other passenger-carrying vehicles are defined as any motor vehicle or other vehicle for hire designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers for consideration or charges which are determined by agreement, by contract, by mileage or by the length of time the vehicle is used. Excluded from this definition are vehicles regulated by the state public service commission. 
(b)  Any person shall be deemed doing business in the city under this chapter if such person is picking up passengers in the city and accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee which is determined by agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the vehicle is used, or by contract for the use of any motor vehicle or other vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers. Any person shall also be deemed doing business in the city under this chapter if such person has established a business relationship with independent contractors or operates vehicles for hire on his own behalf for the purpose of transporting passengers in the city. 
(Code 1982, §§ 9-4-1, 9-4-3(a)) 
Sec. 90-3. - Business license, driver's permit and inspection sticker generally. 
No person shall conduct the business of operating vehicles for hire in the incorporated area of the city without first meeting the requirements of this chapter and having been issued a city business license for operation in the geographical boundaries of the city. No business licensed for operating vehicles for hire shall use any vehicle that has not been inspected and had a county inspection sticker affixed nor employ any driver that has not first met the requirements of this chapter and been issued a driver's permit. All company licenses, individual vehicle stickers and driver permits are nontransferable and shall expire on December 31 of each year. Such licenses, individual vehicle stickers and driver permits shall be renewed on or before January 31 of each year. The license must be posted in public view at any licensed location; driver permits must be posted on the dash or sun visor of the vehicle being driven so that it is visible from the passenger area. Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 9-4-2, 11-13-92) 
Sec. 90-4. - Application for business license; prerequisites for issuance of license. 
Any applicant for a license to operate a business under this chapter is required to provide information showing qualifications on a form provided by the city police department, to provide any information requested by the city police department, and to submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation or fingerprinting. If the applicant is other than a sole proprietor, all partners, officers, managers and stockholders holding a ten percent or more interest in the company shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. An applicant must: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Have not been convicted, been on probation or parole, or been imprisoned, for a period of five years previous to the date of application, for the violation of any of the following offenses of the state, of any other state or of the United States: homicide; rape; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; child molestation; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; attempts to commit any of these listed offenses; any felony where a motor vehicle was used; any crime of violence or theft; any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs; moral turpitude; homicide by vehicle; manslaughter resulting from the operation of a vehicle; failure to stop, render aid or identify himself as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-271; racing on highways and streets; using a motor vehicle in fleeing or attempting to elude an officer; and hit and run or leaving the scene of an accident. First offender status is recognized. 
(4)  Show on the application a company dispatch location or dispatch terminus located within the geographical boundaries of the county from which business as defined by this chapter will be conducted. Applicants for limousine operations having no more than three vehicles for hire shall be excepted from having a county-based business location. The dispatch location must be staffed by company agents or employees, have a published telephone number and have sufficient parking for accommodating its vehicles for hire when not in use. 
(5)  Maintain an automobile liability insurance policy, appropriate vehicle-for-hire insurance coverage, a vehicle license for use in the city (excluding vehicles for limousine service), and a minimum of insurance coverage on each vehicle as follows: 
a.  Minimum insurance coverage for vehicles other than vehicles to be used as limousines is as follows: 
1.  Coverage in the amount of $15,000.00 for bodily injury, per person; 
2.  Coverage in the amount of $30,000.00 for bodily injury, per occurrence; 
3.  Coverage in the amount of $10,000.00 for property damage; 
4.  Coverage in the amount of $5,000.00 for personal injury protection or medical payment coverage. 
b.  Any and all vehicles for limousine service shall provide a minimum coverage in the following sums: 
1.  Coverage in the amount of $100,000.00 for bodily injury, per person; 
2.  Coverage in the amount of $300,000.00 for bodily injury, per occurrence; 
3.  Coverage in the amount of $50,000.00 for property damage; and 
4.  Coverage in the amount of $5,000.00 for personal injury protection. 
c.  The applicant shall provide a current copy of the insurance policy along with the application evidencing such coverage. The policy shall provide that the insolvency or bankruptcy of the insured shall not release the insurer from the payment of damages for injuries sustained or losses that occurred while coverage is in force. It should also state that if execution against the insured is returned unsatisfied because of insolvency or bankruptcy, an action may be maintained by the injured or his personal representative against the insurer under the terms of the policy for the amount of the judgment not to exceed the policy limits. Before the policy is canceled for nonpayment of premium or other cause, notice thereof shall be given in writing to the police department at least 30 days before the policy lapses. The policy shall further provide that it shall not be canceled or rendered unenforceable because the insured failed to notify the insurer of an accident or injury, or any other condition upon which notice of claim is ordinarily required. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-3(b); Ord. No. 366, § 9-4-3(5), 11-13-92) 
Sec. 90-5. - Application for driver's permit; prerequisites for issuance of permit. 
(a)  No request for a driver's permit under this chapter will be processed unless the permit applicant presents a letter to the city police department requesting issuance of a driver's permit to the named individual. The driver's permit applicant will further furnish the information requested on a form to be provided by the police department, and submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation or fingerprinting. Driver's permit applicants must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Possess a current valid state driver's license. Such license must not be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-58 and 40-5-64. 
(4)  Exhibit a proficiency with the English language so as to be able to comprehend and interpret traffic signs, issue written receipts to passengers and obey lawful orders of police and others in lawful authority. 
(5)  Have not been convicted, been on probation or parole or been imprisoned, for a period of five years previous to the date of application, for the violation of any of the following offenses of the state, of any other state or of the United States: homicide; rape; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; child molestation; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; attempts to commit any of these listed offenses; any felony where a motor vehicle was used; any crime of violence or theft; any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs; moral turpitude; homicide by vehicle; manslaughter resulting from the operation of a vehicle; failure to stop, render aid or identify himself as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-271; racing on highways and streets; using a motor vehicle in fleeing or attempting to elude an officer; and hit and run or leaving the scene of an accident. First offender status is recognized. 
(b)  Drivers are responsible for reporting any change in qualifications or other licensing or permitting information previously supplied to the city police department within ten days of the change. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-4) 
Sec. 90-6. - Fee for business license or driver's permit. 
Each application for a business license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee of $50.00 for each vehicle to be operated in the city. Fees for driver's permits shall be recommended by the city police department for approval by the mayor and council. Fees are nonrefundable and are not prorated. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-3(c)) 
Sec. 90-7. - Suspension or revocation of business license or driver's permit. 
A business license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police or his designated representative, and a driver's permit may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police or his designated representative, for the following reasons: 
(1)  Furnishing of fraudulent or untruthful information by the applicant or omitting information requested in the application for a license or permit. 
(2)  Failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Failure to maintain the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license or driver's permit. 
(4)  Violation of any part of this chapter. 
(5)  Charging a fare in excess of those fares on file with the city police department. 
(6)  Having four or more moving traffic violations in any 12-month period. 
(7)  Refusing to accept a passenger solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, sex or sexual orientation. For purposes of this section, the term "sexual orientation" means the state of being heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual. Operators shall not refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. 
(8)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse, or allowing a vehicle to operate in the city without a county inspection sticker. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-7) 
Sec. 90-8. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decisions of the city police department that adversely affect or aggrieve any applicant or licensee under this chapter may be appealed to the mayor and council. Decisions of the police department that adversely affect or aggrieve any permittee may be appealed to the mayor and council. Any such appeal shall be by written petition filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the final decision by the police department. 
(b)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing the written petition, unless a continuance of such hearing is agreed to by the appellant and the mayor and council. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. 
(c)  The findings of the mayor and council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of such findings by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-8) 
Sec. 90-9. - Service of notices. 
For purposes of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-9) 
Sec. 90-10. - Vehicle inspections; issuance of inspection sticker. 
(a)  All vehicles for hire to be used by a licensee in the city shall be inspected annually and approved by the public safety department of the county. Once a vehicle meets the requirements of the inspection, a county sticker will be affixed to the left side of the windshield. The additional requirements that each vehicle must meet are as follows: 
(1)  Exterior inspection shall ensure that headlights, taillights, brake lights, directional signal lights, license plate lights, windshield wipers, all vehicle glass, window crank or electric windows, doors and door locks, trunk lid, body, tires and other vehicle parts are in good condition and functioning properly. There shall be no tears or rust holes in the vehicle body and no loose pieces hanging from the vehicle body. There shall be no unrepaired body damage or any body condition which would create safety problems or interfere with the operation of the vehicle. 
(2)  Interior inspection shall include the rearview mirror, steering wheel, foot brakes, parking brakes, air conditioning and heating systems, to ensure that each item is in good operating condition. The upholstery, floor mats, headlining, door panels and trunk compartment shall be inspected to ensure that there are no tears, that they are clean and have no offensive odors and that the trunk has sufficient space for passenger luggage. 
(3)  The vehicle shall have a spare tire and jacks, a functional two-way radio and a taximeter. The taximeter is to be positioned so that it is visible from the passenger compartment. Taximeter accuracy shall be verified according to the county public safety department's published rules and regulations for vehicles for hire. Limousines are excepted from having a two-way radio and a taximeter. 
(b)  The inspection sticker for the city is proof that the vehicle met the licensing and insurance requirements at the time of license issuance and that the vehicle passed the last vehicle inspection of the county. Each vehicle operator must have in his vehicle proof of current insurance coverage. Any company or vehicle operator letting insurance coverage lapse shall have the inspection stickers removed by the city police department. Business operations shall not be resumed until proof of insurance is provided to the police department, the license reinstated and the vehicle reinspected and new inspection stickers issued by the police department. 
(c)  Inspection stickers are not transferable from vehicle to vehicle, and fees are nonrefundable if the vehicle is wrecked or taken out of service for any reason. The police department must be notified within ten days of any vehicle taken out of service. Stickers from vehicles taken out of service must be turned in to the police department. Stickers for replacement vehicles or additional vehicles are issued under the same procedures as original inspection stickers. 
(d)  Vehicles shall be subject to random inspections at any time. Vehicles found to be substandard shall be removed from service immediately and shall be subject to immediate removal of the city vehicle inspection sticker by the police department. Additional inspection requirements may be outlined in the county public safety department's vehicle rules and regulations governing passenger-carrying vehicles. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-6) 
Sec. 90-11. - Responsibility of licensee for checking driver's permit and inspection sticker. 
Company licensees under this chapter are responsible for checking drivers to ensure that each driver has a current driver's permit in his possession and posted on the dash or sun visor of the vehicle being operated, along with a visible vehicle inspection sticker. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-5(f)) 
Sec. 90-12. - Responsibility of licensee for violations by drivers. 
Company licensees under this chapter are responsible for violations of this chapter by their vehicle operators, whether such operator is a direct employee or an independent contractor. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-5(i)) 
Sec. 90-13. - Driver's dress and conduct. 
(a)  Drivers operating a vehicle for hire must practice good personal hygiene and wear proper dress while operating a vehicle for hire. Proper dress shall mean the wearing of shoes, ankle length pants, and a shirt or blouse with sleeves and collar. Hats must be of the baseball style or a chauffeur's cap. Clothing must be clean and not visibly soiled. Licensees are responsible for driver dress and conduct. 
(b)  Drivers are not to smoke or play a radio or tape player if objected to by a passenger. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-5(a), (c)) 
Sec. 90-14. - Daily trip sheets. 
Drivers operating a vehicle for hire must maintain daily trip sheets or logs of all passengers, which shall include the time and place of entry and the destination of each passenger, the amount charged, and an itemization of any personal property left in the vehicle for hire. Trip sheets must be maintained in the vehicle for 48 hours, and thereafter transferred to and maintained at the licensed business premises for a period of 30 days. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-5(b)) 
Sec. 90-15. - Vehicle markings and equipment; condition of vehicles. 
(a)  Drivers are not to operate a vehicle and company licensees are not to allow drivers to operate a vehicle without the name under which the licensee does business as a taxicab company permanently marked upon at least two sides of the vehicle in letters or numerals at least three inches high, a statement of rates permanently marked or affixed upon both left and right sides of the vehicle in letters no less than one-quarter inch high and numerals no less than one-half inch high, and an operational two-way radio, a taximeter, a permanently affixed operating top light bearing the word "taxi" and an inspection sticker as outlined in this chapter. Limousines are exempted from having markings, top lights, two-way radios or taximeters; however, limousines are required to have a plate attached to their front or rear bumper indicating the company business name. 
(b)  Drivers and company licensees are responsible for maintaining each vehicle in a clean and mechanically safe condition. The interior and exterior shall meet the requirements set out as inspection requirements in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-5(d); Ord. No. 366, 9-4-5(d), 11-13-92) 
Sec. 90-16. - Cruising. 
Company licensees under this chapter are responsible for ensuring that no driver participates in cruising. For purposes of this section, cruising is defined as moving about the streets of the city for the purpose of picking up and transporting passengers who have not previously requested such service by telephone or by personal command. Company licensees shall ensure that their drivers use open stands on a nonexclusive, first come, first served basis. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-5(g)) 
Sec. 90-17. - Call jumping. 
Company licensees under this chapter shall not participate in or allow their drivers to practice call jumping or the act of intercepting a passenger who has requested service from another company. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-5(h)) 
Sec. 90-18. - Maximum number of passengers. 
No person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city when the vehicle contains more passengers than available seatbelts in the vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-12) 
Sec. 90-19. - Receiving and discharging passengers. 
Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway, but shall drive to the sidewalk or curb on the righthand side of the roadway and there receive or discharge passengers. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-13) 
Sec. 90-20. - Refusal to pay fare. 
Any person using a taxicab in the city without paying the amount of fare or charges requested by the taxicab driver, within the limits prescribed for such fare or charges, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 9-4-11) 
Chapters 91, 92 - RESERVED 
Chapter 93 - RESERVED[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 682 , pt. III, adopted June 16, 2015, repealed ch. 93, §§ 93-1—93-12 entitled "Development Regulations", which derived from: Ord. No. 555, pt. I, adopted Aug. 15, 2006; Ord. No. 568, pt. I, adopted Mar. 20, 2007; Ord. No. 572, pt. I, adopted Apr. 17, 2007; Ord. No. 585, pt. I, adopted Mar. 18, 2008; Ord. No. 597, pt. I, adopted Mar. 17, 2009; Ord. No. 635, pt. I, May 17, 2011; and Ord. No. 653, adopted June 16, 2013. For similar provisions see appendix A, ch. 300 of this Code. 

Chapter 94 - RESERVED[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 545, adopted Aug. 15, 2006, repealed chapter 94, sections 94-1, 94-2, in its entirety. Former chapter 94 pertained to zoning and derived from the Code of 1982, §§ 8-4-1, 8-4-2; Ord. No. 383, adopted Oct. 8, 1993; Ord. No. 486, adopted July 18, 2000. 

APPENDIX A - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Unified Development Ordinance of the City of Chamblee, Georgia, Ordinance No. 682, as adopted by the Mayor and City Council on June 16, 2015. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. For a listing of section numbers contained in former appendix A, and the ordinances from which former appendix A was derived, see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this Code. 

TITLE 1. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 743 , adopted Dec. 19, 2017, amended title 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former title 1, §§ 100-1—120-10 pertained to pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 682 of 6-16-15; Ord. No. 683 of 8-18-15; Ord. No. 687 of 9-15-15; Ord. No. 704 of 6-21-16; Ord. No. 711 of 7-19-16; Ord. No. 712 of 7-19-16; Ord. No. 725 of 10-18-16; Ord. No. 728 of 12-20-16; and Ord. No. 730 of 1-17-17. 

CHAPTER 100. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 100-1. - Title. 
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Chamblee Unified Development Ordinance" or UDO. It consists of three Titles: Title 1, Administration; Title 2, Land Use and Zoning; and Title 3, Development and Permitting. 
Title 1 is intended to implement regulations generally applicable to the City of Chamblee and to specifically address administrative regulations including definitions, enforcement and penalties applicable to Titles 2 and 3. Title 2 will serve as the City of Chamblee Zoning Ordinance and is intended to constitute a zoning ordinance within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. Changes to the text of Titles 1 and 2, as well as Official Zoning Map amendments and other zoning actions addressed therein, shall comply with the public notice and hearing procedures provided therein and in said state statute. Title 3 is intended to regulate development and permitting activities in the City of Chamblee. Title 3 is not intended to constitute a zoning ordinance or zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 100-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the UDO shall be to: 
(1)  Promote the health, safety, order, prosperity, aesthetics, and the general welfare of the present and future residents of the City; 
(2)  Protect the environmental integrity of the City; 
(3)  Encourage an aesthetically attractive environment, both built and natural, and to provide for regulations that protect and enhance these aesthetic considerations; 
(4)  Encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base; 
(5)  Protect the public welfare by protecting approach slopes and other safety areas of licensed airports; 
(6)  Improve the City's appearance; 
(7)  Further traffic safety and a multi-modal transportation network; 
(8)  Protect property against blight and depreciation; 
(9)  Encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and other structures throughout the City; 
(10)  Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, flood protection, schools, parks and other public requirements; 
(11)  Provide for protection of the constitutional rights and obligations of all citizens within the City; and 
(12)  Implement relevant elements of the City's adopted comprehensive plan and other adopted plans and policies. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 100-3. - Authority. 
The UDO is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by Article 9, Section II, Paragraph IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, 1983, the Charter of the City, and O.C.G.A. §§ 36-66-15 et seq., "The Zoning Procedures Law," and other federal, state and local authority applicable hereto. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 100-4. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this UDO shall apply throughout the City of Chamblee. The City may enter into agreements with the County or other regulatory agencies to carry out the purpose of this UDO. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes, and cooperative monitoring and management of the separate storm sewer system and management programs, except as hereinafter provided, as of the date of adoption of this UDO. 
(b)  The regulations of this ordinance shall apply to all buildings, structures, land, and uses within the City. 
(c)  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this UDO, they shall be considered as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, morals and general welfare. 
(d)  All buildings and structures erected, all uses of land, water, buildings, or structures established, all structural alterations or relocations of existing buildings, all enlargements of, additions to, changes in and relocations of existing uses, and all land development is subject to all regulations of this ordinance: 
(1)  Development activity. Any person proposing to rezone property, secure permits, undertake land disturbance activities, construct, demolish, expand, or modify a structure or a building for occupancy, develop or subdivide land within incorporated areas of Chamblee, Georgia, or undertake any other development permission or activity shall comply with all regulations set forth in this UDO, and, where required, shall make application to the City of Chamblee Development Department and pay a fee pursuant to the established fee schedule. 
(2)  Use. No building, structure, premises or land shall be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, remodeled, extended, enlarged, constructed, or altered in a manner except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is or is to be located. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 100-5. - Transitional provisions. 
(a)  The UDO shall take effect and shall be in force upon its adoption by the City Council of Chamblee, Georgia. 
(b)  Any development or building activity for which a valid and complete application for a Land Disturbance Permit or Building Permit has been received prior to the adoption of this UDO may, at the developer's option, proceed to completion, and building permits may be issued as though this UDO had not been adopted, provided that the Land Disturbance Permit or Building Permit is or can be issued within 180 calendar days of the date of adoption. The issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit alone shall not vest a project for any Building Permit not issued at the time of adoption. 
(c)  Any subdivision or other development for which a Land Disturbance Permit or Building Permit has been issued prior to the adoption of this UDO may, at the developers option, proceed to completion and building permits may be issued as though the UDO had not been adopted. 
(d)  The adoption of this UDO shall not be construed to affect the validity of any building permit lawfully issued prior to the adoption of this UDO. 
(e)  The provisions of this section only apply when: 
(1)  Such permit has not by its own terms expired prior to such effective date; 
(2)  Actual building construction is commenced prior to the expiration of such permit; and 
(3)  Actual building construction is carried on pursuant to said permit and limited to and in strict accordance with said permit. 
(f)  No extensions of said permit shall be authorized following the effective date of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17; Ord. No. 748 , 3-20-18) 
Section 100-6. - Severability clause. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared unconstitutional or invalid. The Mayor and City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the ordinance if it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 100-7. - Amendments. 
(a)  This UDO may be amended by the Chamblee City Council. Such amendments shall be effective as of their date of adoption, unless otherwise stated. 
(b)  No amendment to this UDO shall be construed to affect the validity of any unexpired building or development permits or subdivision approval lawfully issued prior to the adoption of said amendment, pursuant to Section 100-5. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 100-8. - Duties to administer, interpret and enforce this UDO. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in any article, chapter, or section of this UDO, it shall be the duty of the Development Director of the City of Chamblee, GA to administer, interpret, and enforce this UDO. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the county fire marshal to enforce all State, County, and City fire codes. The county fire marshal shall also enforce all adopted codes relating to ADA Compliance, as adopted by the State. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 100-9. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees for permits and other approvals required under this UDO shall be established from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and Council. 
(b)  Application and plan review fees shall be submitted with the application, and upon acceptance of said submission for review and consideration, shall not be refundable. Failure to pay a required application fee shall cause the application to be returned to the applicant without acceptance for review or consideration by the City. 
(c)  Permit fees, if any, shall be submitted as a prerequisite to issuance of the permit. 
(d)  Prior to approval of a Final Plat or Certificate of Occupancy, the developer shall pay to the City such fees and performance and/or maintenance bonds as shall be required by this UDO or established by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 100-10. - Adoption of certain codes. 
(a)  Adoption of technical building and construction codes. It is the intent of the City to enforce the latest editions of the following minimum standard codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia State Department of Community Affairs: 
(1)  International Building Code; 
(2)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings; 
(3)  International Fire Code; 
(4)  International Plumbing Code; 
(5)  International Mechanical Code; 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code; 
(7)  National Electrical Code; 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code; 
(9)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code; and 
(10)  International Existing Building Code (2012 version). 
(b)  Georgia Accessibility Code Compliance. In addition to the regulations of the UDO, the Georgia Accessibility Code for buildings and facilities shall also apply. 
(c)  LEED BD+C, Leadership in energy and environmental design (LEED). The City of Chamblee hereby adopts the Green Building Council's (USGBC) Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED BD+C) Rating System, Version 4. The LEED BD+C system (for new construction) establishes several levels of environmental achievement from the certified rating to a platinum rating. Alternatively, compliance with the requirements of this section may be achieved for new construction as set forth herein by certification from Green Globes as promulgated by the Green Building Initiative (GBI) or any other certification program approved pursuant to Section 230-9, Sustainable Certification. 
(d)  Copies of all of the above codes are available for public inspection in the Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 100-11. - Incorporation of UDO Addenda. 
(a)  The UDO Addenda shall provide additional guidance on the intent of UDO regulations. 
(b)  Addenda to the UDO shall be maintained by the Development Director, pending subsequent revisions of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 100-12. - Rules of interpretation. 
(a)  For the purpose of this Unified Development Ordinance (UDO), the following interpretations shall apply: 
(1)  All words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(2)  All words in the plural number include the singular number, and all words in the singular number, include the plural number, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. 
(3)  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(4)  The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
(5)  The word "constructed" includes the words "erected," "built," "altered," "rebuilt," and "repaired." 
(6)  The word "lot" shall mean "lot of record." 
(7)  The word "parcel" shall mean "lot." 
(8)  The words "zoning map" shall refer to the official zoning map of the City of Chamblee, Georgia. 
(9)  The word "district" in Chapter 310 means GSWCC District. 
(10)  The phrase "used for" as applied to any land or building shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" or "occupied for." 
(11)  The word "person" shall include the words "individual," "firm," "partnership," "corporation," "association," "organization," "trust," "company," or any other legal entity. 
(12)  The terms "architectural review board" and "ARB" shall be interchangeable. 
(13)  The term "City Manager" shall mean "City Manager or designee." 
(14)  The term "Director" shall mean "Development Director or designee." 
(15)  The term "UDO" shall mean "UDO and amendments." 
(16)  The term "GDOT" shall mean "Georgia Department of Transportation." 
(17)  For the purpose of interpreting this UDO, certain words or terms are herein defined. Except as defined herein, all other words used in this UDO shall be defined in accordance with the American Planning Association (APA) A Planners Dictionary published April 1, 2004, as interpreted by the Development Director. For terms not found in A Planners Dictionary , words used shall be defined in accordance with Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 11 th Edition, as interpreted by the Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 100-13. - Relationship to other ordinances, statutes and resolutions. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this UDO shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Whenever the provisions of any other ordinance or statute require more restrictive standards than those of this UDO, the provisions of such standards shall govern, unless provided otherwise. 
(b)  Whenever the provisions of this UDO impose standards that are more restrictive than are required in or under any other statute, ordinance or resolution, these standards shall prevail, unless otherwise specified in this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
CHAPTER 110. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 110-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of interpreting this UDO, certain words and terms used herein shall be defined as follows and may be referenced in other titles of this UDO: 
Accessory building or structure: A building or structure which is clearly subordinate and incidental to and is customarily found in connection with a principal building and located on the same lot therewith. 
Acupuncture clinic: A practice that provides a form of therapy, as regulated by the Acupuncture Act of Georgia O.C.G.A. § 43-34-60 et seq., developed from traditional and modern Oriental concepts for health care that employs Oriental medicine techniques, treatment, and adjunctive therapies for the promotion, maintenance and restoration of health and the prevention of disease. 
Adult entertainment establishment: A commercial enterprise that offers 15 percent or more of its trade consisting of sexually oriented material, devices, or paraphernalia or specified sexual activities or any combination or form thereof, whether printed, filmed, recorded or live and which restricts or purports to restrict admission to adults or to any class of adults; or a business establishment advertising and offering for sale and/or rental adult clothing, lingerie, toys, or novelty items. "Adult entertainment establishment" includes, but is not limited to: 
Adult movie theatre: A business establishment open to the public, or to members, that maintains display devices for viewing on the premises files, videos or other viewable material, if a substantial portion of the stock or trade is characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities. 
Adult store: A business establishment open to the public, or to members, that offers for sale or rental any printed, recorded, photographed, filmed or otherwise viewable material, or any sexually oriented paraphernalia or aid, if a substantial portion of the stock or trade is characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities. 
Adult Massage Establishment: Any establishment where a massage technician administers a massage to another person for compensation but does not require licensing as a qualified massage therapist as required by the Georgia Massage Therapy Act, O.C.G.A. title 24A or fails to operate within the parameters of that Act. 
Aggrieved party: An individual or party who is directly affected by a judgement or interpretation of this UDO and is entitled to commence an appeal challenging the decision. 
Airfield: The DeKalb-Peachtree Airport (PDK). 
Alley: A public or private street, which provides access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Appeal of Administrative Decision: A request for a review by Mayor and City Council of a decision by an official of the city by an aggrieved party. 
Approach-departure clearance surface: This surface is symmetrical about the runway centerline extended. It begins as an inclined plane (glide angle) 200 feet beyond the end of the runway at the same elevation as the runway end, and extends for 50,000 feet. The slope of this surface is 40:1 (glide angle). 
Automated teller machine: An automated device that performs banking or financial functions at a location remote from the controlling financial institution. 
Average grade plane: A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining a building or structure at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building/structure and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than 6 feet (1,829 mm) from the building/structure, between the building/structure and a point 6 feet (1,829 mm) from the building. 
Awning: A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway, or window from the elements. 
Basement: The part of a building that is wholly or partly below ground. 
Boarding house: A building other than a hotel or motel, where for compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods of time, lodging or meals and lodging are provided for four or more persons. 
Brew pub: Any eating establishment which meets revenue requirements of the Alcohol Ordinance from the sale of prepared meals and food and in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed subject to the barrel production limits and regulations under state law. 
Buffer: Any area required to screen adjacent properties or to provide protection to a stream bank or body of water. 
Building: Any roofed structure attached to the ground and enclosed and isolated by exterior walls and constructed, intended for any use or occupancy. 
Building facade: Any exterior wall of any building. 
Building footprint: The land area on which a proposed building is located. 
Building inspector: The building inspector of the City or his/her designated representative. 
Bus station: Any location where patrons of a for-pay motor carrier may purchase tickets for passage, board, or disembark such motor carrier. 
Candela (cd): Unit of luminous intensity considered an illumination standard, formerly known as the candle. One candela is one lumen per steradian. 
Canopy: A permanent roof-like structure projecting from a building and open on at least one side for shielding a vehicular drive or pedestrian walkway from the elements, or a freestanding roof-like structure intended to shield a vehicular driveway or service area from the elements. 
Cemetery: A burial ground or columbarium for earth interments. 
Channel: A natural or artificial open watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Child and personal care uses: The provision of child and personal care services as regulated by the Georgia Department of Early Care and Learning, including "family day care homes," "group day care homes," and "child care learning centers," see those terms for further definition. 
Child care learning centers: A program operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution, or group that receives pay for group care. The childcare learning center cares for 19 or more children under the age of 18 for less than 24 hours per day (see Child and personal care uses ). 
Collection Container: Any container, storage unit or structure, other than an accessory building or shed, that can or is used for the holding of charitable donated items, associated with nonprofit organizations, by the general public, including but not limited to, clothing, toys, books, and newspapers, with the collection of those donated items made at a later date or time and which is located for such purposes outside an enclosed building. 
Commercial solid waste: All types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Commercial vehicle: Limousine, flatbed truck, dump truck, tow truck, bus, school bus, transport wrecker, cab-on-chassis truck, tractor trailer, wheeled attachment, earth-moving machinery, semi-trailer, and any vehicle over 20 feet in length, eight feet in height, or seven feet in width. 
Composting: All controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Comprehensive Plan: Unless otherwise stated, the City of Chamblee Comprehensive Plan approved by the Mayor and City Council pursuant to the Minimum Standards for Local Comprehensive Planning, as prepared by Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
Conservation easement: An agreement between a land owner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Construction: Any site or building preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, or demolition of buildings or structures. 
Convenient cash business: Any business engaged in check cashing, currency exchange, money lending in exchange for personal property as collateral, excluding a state or federally chartered bank, savings and loan association, or credit union. 
Convertible space: Space in the ground floor of a multifamily residential building that is designed to readily convert from initial use as dwelling units to one or more nonresidential uses(s) at a later time in a development that is intended to be mixed-use. 
Conveyor car wash: A commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
Corner commercial: Commercial retail and service use intended for convenience of an adjacent neighborhood. 
Craft brewery: A building or group of buildings where beer is brewed, bottled, packaged and distributed for wholesale and/or retail distribution. 
Craft distillery: A building or group of buildings where distilled spirits are manufactured (distilled, rectified, or blended), bottled, packaged, and distributed for wholesale and/or retail distribution. 
Curb cut: Any interruption or break in the line of a street curb for the purpose of connecting a driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. 
Decibel (dB): The unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location. 
dBA is the A-weighted unit of sound pressure level. See A-weighting. 
dBC is the C-weighted unit of sound pressure level. See C-weighting. 
Dedication: An intention by the owner, of a right to use land for a specified purpose(s) that is carried out by written document. 
Developed property: Property upon which a building, structure, pavement, or other improvements have been placed. 
Developer: A person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Development of Community Impact: Any development or building project with an aggregate of 20,000 square feet or more of new buildings or a site consisting of two acres or more and requires a greater amount of scrutiny based on its potential impacts. 
Drive-through establishment: A business establishment so developed that its retail or service character includes providing a driveway approach and service window for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons as they are seated in the motor vehicle and passing by the service window rather than serving them from within a building. 
Driveway: A vehicular connection between the right-of-way of a street and to a vehicle parking, loading, or maneuvering facility, lots, building sites, uses, or other divisions of land and not intended to be public ingress and egress. A driveway is not considered a street. 
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments: A business establishment open to the general public for laundry/dry cleaning purposes. For purposes of this ordinance, a dry cleaner/laundry excludes a dry cleaning plant, which serves solely to dry clean clothing processed for other dry cleaners and not open to the public. 
Dry cleaning plant: A building used or intended to be used for cleaning fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, or articles of any sort with chemical solvents having little or no water, and which serves solely to dry clean clothing processed for other dry cleaners and not open to the general public. 
Dwelling, accessory: An ancillary or secondary living unit that has a separate kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping area, existing either within the same structure or on the same lot as the primary dwelling unit. Accessory dwelling units are also known as accessory apartments, garage apartment, granny flats, or mother-in-law flats. 
Dwelling, multifamily: A building designed for and containing two or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling, single-family: A structure containing not more than one dwelling unit designed for residential use and not attached to another dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, single-family attached (Townhouse): A dwelling unit which is located on an individual lot of record and which is attached to another dwelling unit or any adjoining lot by a common wall. 
Dwelling, single-family detached: A single-family dwelling that is located on an individual lot of record. 
Dwelling unit: A building or portion thereof, providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including provision for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, but not including units in hotels or other structures designed for transient residence. 
Dwelling, zero lot line: A dwelling unit built with one side adjacent to the side property line. 
Easement: A grant by the property owner of a strip of land for specified purposes and use by the public, a corporation, or persons. 
Encroachment: Any portion of a structure, appurtenance, or other item or activity extending beyond a designated point or limit. 
Event center: A multi-purpose facility generally used for meetings, parties, banquets, weddings, and other social gatherings, conventions, and the display of merchandise by a wide variety of industrial groups, professional groups, social groups and trade organizations. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 1, 2006. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Extended-stay motel/hotel: Any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes for guests and contain kitchen facilities for food preparation, including but not limited to, such facilities as refrigerators, stoves, and ovens. May also be known as "apartment hotels." 
Family: A group of individuals related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other custodial relationship, or not more than four persons not so related, living together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
Family day care home: A program that operates in a private residential home less than 24 hours per day. It provides care for three children, but no more than 6, under the age of 18 for pay. 
Farmers market: Farmers market means a sales venue, most often outdoors and seasonal in nature, at which producers or their representatives follow state regulations for the offering of locally grown produce, value-added agricultural products, and/or fresh baked goods, produced by the seller, for sale directly to the public. Also sometimes called greenmarket. 
Fence : A structure designed to provide separation and security, constructed of materials including chain link, wire, metal, artistic wrought iron, vinyl, plastic and other such materials. 
Fenestration: An opening in the exterior surface of a structure or building, primarily achieved with glass. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Financial institution (also includes institutions under GA Industrialized Loan Act): An establishment that focuses on dealing with financial transactions, such as investments, loans, and deposits. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flight hazard: Any structure or natural growth or use of land, which obstructs or restricts the airspace required for the safe operation of aircraft in landing, takeoff, or maneuvering areas at or near the airfield. 
Flight school: A space or facility that is located on, or adjacent to an airport and used exclusively as a school for training students to fly airplanes. 
Floor area: The gross horizontal areas of a building, including mezzanines and lofts, exclusive of garages, parking structures, basements, open balconies and porches, and equipment and service areas, measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls of a building. 
Floor area ratio (FAR): The total floor area of a building divided by the total area of the lot the building is located on, expressed as a ratio. 
Frontage: The width in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street, or along the curb where it adjoins a private street. 
Frontage, building: The width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular establishment. 
Future development map: The map located in the City of Chamblee Comprehensive Plan that designates the future land uses for the City of Chamblee. 
Governing authority/body: The Mayor and Council of the City of Chamblee. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Grasscrete or grasspave: Paving systems primarily used for parking that utilize porous elements, which facilitate the drainage of stormwater runoff. 
Greenway: A linear park and alternative transportation route approved by the City that provides passive recreational opportunities, pedestrian and/or bicycle paths, and conservation of open spaces or natural areas. 
Gross floor area (GFA): The total covered floor area inside the building envelope, including exterior walls, and excluding the roof. 
Group day care home: A program operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution, or group that receives pay for group care. The group day care home cares for 7 to 18 children under the age of 18 for less than 24 hours per day (See Child and personal care uses ). 
Group residential facility: A residential structure that is licensed to provide room, board, and supervised care for adults, but not continuous nursing care, personal care or halfway house. 
Growler: A professionally sanitized and sealed glass bottle meeting the requirements of state law filled by a licensee or an employee of a licensee with beer from a keg procured or produced by the licensee in accordance with applicable laws. 
Growler Store: A facility which beer and other malt beverages are distributed for tasting, wholesale, and/or retail distribution in growlers. 
Guest room: An accommodation combining living, sleeping, sanitary, and storage facilities within a hotel, motel, boarding house or extended stay. 
Halfway house: A licensed home where persons are aided in adjusting to society following a period of imprisonment, hospitalization or institutionalized treatment, wherein supervision, rehabilitation and counseling are provided. 
Height of building: The vertical distance measured from the average grade-plane to the coping of a flat roof; to the deck lines of a mansard roof; or to the mid-point of a pitched roof. 
Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Holiday: An official day of festivity or recreation when the offices of the city government are closed for business (other than a Saturday or Sunday). 
Home occupation: An accessory use of a dwelling unit for limited commercial purposes. 
Hotel: A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging facilities are provided for transient guests, and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. 
Impervious: Any paved, hardened or structural surfaces, including but not limited to, buildings, dams, decks, driveways, parking areas, patios, streets, swimming pools, tennis courts, walkways or other structures which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil. 
Impervious surface, maximum: The maximum impervious surface allowed on a given property. 
Impulsive sound: A sound having a duration of less than one second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
In-bay automatic car wash: A commercial car wash where the driver pulls into the bay and parks the car. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
Industrial or manufacturing property category: Any property, which is used primarily for manufacturing or processing. 
Industrialized building: Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that not all parts or processes can be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the Industrialized Buildings Act, Georgia Law 1982 pp 1637—1643 (O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2, article 2, part 1). 
Innovator space: Space in an existing or new building that is designed to support innovative design, fabrication and wholesale or retail sales of small articles that are unique in design and employ methods of low volume, high value-added production that employ innovative technology and/or artistic skill that are not hazardous or noxious. 
Institutional property category: Any property which is used for institutional purposes. 
Institutional uses: A nonprofit or quasi-public use, such as a religious institution, library, public or private school, hospital, or government owned or government operated structure or land used for public purpose. 
Invasive species: Any species, including its seeds, spores or other biological material capable of propagating that species, that is not native to the Piedmont physiographic region and its related ecosystems; and whose introduction does or is likely to cause environmental harm. 
Junkyards: A site where discarded products and materials are stored. 
Land development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Land development activities: Those actions or activities, which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance: Any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. 
Land-disturbing activity: Those actions or activities, which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Landfill: A location that accepts solid waste for land disposal. 
Landing area: That part of the airfield that is used or intended to be used for landing and takeoff of aircraft. 
Landscape plan: A plan indicating the location, size, quantity and species of replacement trees and shrubbery. 
Landscape zone: Area reserved for the growing and maintenance of landscape materials, including approved street trees and ground cover. 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. 
Late night establishment: Any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where such establishment is open for use by patrons beyond 12:30 a.m. 
Litter: Any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Live-work unit: A structure consisting of a commercial/office component and residential component that is occupied by the business owner. 
Lot: Land for which boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title. 
Lot, corner: A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, provided that the interior angle formed by the intersection is less than 135 degrees. 
Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, interior : A lot with only one frontage on a street. 
Lot of record: A lot, which is part of an approved subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
Lot, through : A lot that abuts two parallel streets or that abuts two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
Lot width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum building setback line. 
Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that, such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Mansard: A steeply sloped, roof-like facade architecturally similar to a building wall. 
Manufactured home: A building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Marquee: A permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building, designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Massage establishment: See City of Chamblee Code of Ordinances, Chapter 22, "Business", Article VIII, "Massage and Spa Establishments", Section 22-301 "Definitions." 
Mean sea level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this UDO the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
Mezzanine: One or more intermediate levels between the floor and ceiling of a story. A mezzanine is usually just above the ground or main floor and extending over only part of the main floor. 
Mixed-use development: A tract of land or building or structure developed with two or more different uses. 
Mobile food unit: Any motor vehicle or non-motorized cart used for the vending of food or beverage items to the public. 
Motel: One or more buildings in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for transient guests for compensation. Ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made primarily directly from an exterior walkway rather than from an inside lobby. 
Muffler: A sound-dissipative device or system for attenuating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine, where such a device is part of the normal configuration of the equipment. 
Multifamily building: A building containing two or more dwelling units for rent, lease, or ownership. 
Multifamily development: One or more buildings each of which contains two or more multifamily units. 
Multi-use path: A path physically separated from motor vehicle traffic by a landscaped area or barrier within the street right-of-way or an independent easement. A multi-use path is used by several transportation modes, including bicyclists, pedestrians, joggers, skaters and other non-motorized travelers. Multi-use paths accommodate two-way travel. 
Municipality: Any incorporated city within the State of Georgia. 
Nonconforming characteristics: Characteristics of use, including but not limited to, off-street parking and loading, lighting, sidewalks, building design requirements, and similar matters pertaining to the use of land, structures, or combinations thereof, that lawfully existed prior to the adoption or amendment of the zoning ordinance and that are not in compliance, as adopted or amended, with the zoning ordinance. 
Nonconforming lot of record: A lot that does not comply with the minimum size and dimensional requirements of the UDO but was lawfully established in accordance with former regulations of the City of Chamblee and DeKalb County prior to the adoption or amendment of the UDO making such lot noncompliant. 
Nonconforming situation: A nonconforming lot of record, nonconforming use of land, nonconforming structure, nonconforming characteristic of use, or any combination thereof. 
Nonconforming structure: A structure, including buildings, that lawfully existed prior to adoption or amendment of the zoning ordinance that could not be built under the current terms of the zoning ordinance by reason of restriction on size, lot coverage, height, yards, location on the lot, or other requirements of the zoning ordinance applicable to said structure. 
Nonconforming use: A use of land, including unenclosed or partially enclosed uses, where such use was lawfully established but is no longer authorized in the zoning district in which it is located under the zoning ordinance or future amendments thereto. 
Nonresidential space: Space that is not intended for residential occupancy, and not including uses that are accessory to residential uses located in the same building or development, such as a parking, storage, leasing office, or fitness room intended principally for use by such residential occupants. 
Nonresidential use: A principal use other than a residential use, and not including uses that are accessory to residential uses. Nonresidential uses do not include space used for leasing offices, fitness centers, storage and similar uses when such space is within the same development with the residential units to which they are accessory. 
Non-stormwater discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice: Any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions and vegetated channels. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988: A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Notice of intent (NOI): A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
Nursing home: Any building in which aged, chronically ill or incurable persons are housed and furnished with meals and nursing care for compensation. 
Open space: A lot or portion of a lot set aside, designated or reserved for the outdoor enjoyment of the public or for all persons occupying a building on the lot, and is preserved as natural areas or is designed as a park or recreational area. 
Outdoor storage: The keeping of personal or business property, bulk materials, and motorized equipment outdoors or in a required parking lot for a period exceeding 72 hours. The term "outdoor storage" does not apply to outdoor dining, seasonal sales and other vending that is otherwise authorized by city ordinances. 
Overlay district: A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zoning districts and that varies certain restrictions required by the underlying zoning district to a greater or lesser degree. 
Owner: The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Parcel: See Lot. 
Park: All publicly maintained and accessible recreational areas. 
Parking lot or garage: An area or building designated and designed for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. 
Parking space: A marked or striped usable hard-surfaced area enclosed within a main or accessory building, or unenclosed, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one vehicle. 
Pawn shop: Any business that loans money on deposit of personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor, or loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon, and takes or receives such personal property. 
Pedestrian walkway: A walking surface similar to a sidewalk, which facilitates the safe, unobstructed and convenient flow of pedestrians internally on a private property. 
Permit: The permit issued by the city to the applicant, which is required prior to undertaking any development or building activity. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Personal care home: A building(s) in which housing, meals, and twenty-four-hour continuous watchful oversight for adults are provided and which facility is licensed or permitted as a personal care home by the State of Georgia. The term "personal care home" shall not include a "child caring institution," "transitional housing," a "rehabilitation housing facility," a "rooming house" or a "boardinghouse." "Personal care home" includes a "community living arrangement," which is an establishment licensed by the state and providing a residence for adults receiving care for mental health, development disabilities and/or addictive diseases. 
Personal care home, community: A personal care home that offers care to seven (7) or more persons. 
Personal care home, group: A personal care home that offers care to four (4) to six (6) persons. 
Pervious: Any surface or element through which water can infiltrate directly into the ground. 
Pervious paving: Any paving surface that presents an opportunity for precipitation to infiltrate or percolate directly into the ground. 
Phase or phased: Subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Place of worship: A building where persons regularly assemble for religious purposes and related social events and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious ceremonies and purposes. 
Planned center: A building or group of buildings occupied by two or more retail stores, service establishments, offices, industries or any other businesses that do not share common space, which is located on a property that is in common ownership or condominium ownership. Buildings that are occupied by one or more businesses that share internal common space, such as, but not limited to, a branch bank in a grocery store, a fast-food restaurant in a merchandise store, or booths in a flea market, are not considered planned centers. 
Planned unit development: A parcel of land or combination of parcels under control by a single, corporation, firm, partnership, or association, planned and developed as an integral unit, in a single development operation, or a definitively programmed series of development operations and according to a development plan approved by a zoning amendment. 
Plat: A map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been, subdivided. 
Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved, or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Principal building: A building in which is conducted the principal permitted use(s) of the lot on which said building is situated. 
Private: Property or stormwater conveyances owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by city, county, state or federal governments. 
Private deed restrictions or covenants: Private deed restrictions or covenants are imposed on land by private landowners. They bind and restrict the land in the hands of the present owners and subsequent purchasers. They are enforced only by the landowners involved and not by any city or other public agency. 
Private street: An undedicated, paved roadway that provides access to abutting properties within a development and is not owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Produce: Agricultural products especially fruits, vegetables, herbs and flowers that have been grown, raised, foraged or otherwise produced. Home-processed meat and poultry or custom-processed meat and poultry, including wild game are expressly excluded from this definition. 
Project: The entire proposed development project. 
Public: The term "public," when used as a modifier for such words as building, park, right-of-way, and similar words, shall mean "government-owned" or "government-operated." 
Public authority: Any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer: The officer who is authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, this Code section, and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-9—41-2-17 and by ordinances adopted under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, this Code section, and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-9—41-2-17, to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Recreation area or park: An area of land or combination of land and water resources for public use that is developed for active and/or passive recreational pursuits with various manmade features that accommodate such activities. Such areas shall be designed in the form of playgrounds, parks, squares, greenbelts and parkways. They shall be designed to serve the immediate neighborhood in which they are located, or can be regional in scope, serving several neighborhoods (see "Open space") . 
Recreational vehicle: A vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Recycled water system: A water system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles of a car wash. 
Regulation: Any regulation, rule, development standard, or other requirement prepared by the department and adopted by the governing body pursuant to the requirements of this UDO. 
Remodel: Altering or improving a dwelling, building or structure and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
Residential property: All property used for single-family detached, single-family attached, or multifamily residences, or mixed-use development that contains one or more dwelling units. 
Residential zoning district: Those zoning districts that have residential uses as the primary use (NR-1, NR-2, NR-3 and VR zoning districts). 
Restaurant, drive-through: Any eating establishment where the primary activity is oriented toward use by the motoring public by providing curb, carryout, pick-up and other related services. 
Retaining wall : A structure constructed and erected between lands of different elevations to protect structures and/or to prevent erosion. 
Seasonal activity: Seasonal activities generally refer to private or nonprofit events of community interest including carnivals, health fairs and holiday fairs. 
Self-service car wash : A commercial car wash where the customers wash their cars themselves with spray wands and brushes. 
Self-storage, climate-controlled: A development of one or more enclosed structures providing individually accessible compartments each of which is leased to the general public for the purpose of storing non-hazardous personal property and not used for residential occupancy, business operation, storage of commercial or industrial inventory or operation of machinery in a climate-controlled building. 
Self-storage facility: A development of one or more enclosed structures providing individually accessible compartments each of which is leased to the general public for the purpose of storing non-hazardous personal property and not used for residential occupancy, business operation, storage of commercial or industrial inventory or operation of machinery. 
Setback: The distance in feet, that development must remain away from property lines. 
Shopping center: A group of commercial establishments having a building composition that is an architectural unit and is not a miscellaneous assemblage of stores; planned, developed, analyzed as a unit, related in location, and providing on-site parking in definite relationship to the types and sizes of stores. 
Sign: Any structure, display, or device that is used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to a business, institution, organization, person, idea, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design characteristics, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement or illumination. All sign definitions predominantly used in Chapter 260 are included in Chapter 260. 
Solar energy system (SES): The components and subsystems required to convert solar energy into electric or thermal energy suitable for use on-site or off-site. The term applies to, but is not limited to, solar photovoltaic (PV) systems, solar thermal systems, and solar hot water systems. The term includes the related transformers, substations, and other equipment, buildings and equipment on the same site that are needed to operate the system and deliver power to the intended use or user. 
Solar energy system, accessory: Any of the following components present on the same parcel with a principal use such as a residence, business, industry or public building: 
(1)  Roof-mounted on any code-compliant building, including a parking structure; 
(2)  Solar energy system integrated into the form or materials of a code-compliant building (shingle, hanging solar, canopy, etc.); or 
(3)  Ground-mounted on an area of up to 50 percent of the footprint of the primary structure on the parcel but no more than one acre, including SES covering some or all of a surface parking lot or other hardscape area. 
Solar energy systems, principal: A ground-mounted system that is the principal use on the site and not considered an accessory solar energy system. 
Sport shooting range: An area designated and operated by a person or persons for the sport shooting of firearms and not available for such use by the general public without payment of a fee, dues, membership contribution or by invitation of an authorized person, or any area so designated and operated by a unit of government, regardless of the terms of admission thereto. 
Story: A part of a building included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the floor above or, if there is no floor above, that part of the building, which is between the surface of the floor and the ceiling next above. 
Street, public: An accepted right-of-way or public access easement, which affords access to abutting property. 
Street right-of-way line: The dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a street. 
Streetscape: The appearance or view of a street, made up of the combination of the adjacent land uses, public and semi-public space along a street, and design element that make the street a dynamic and inviting space to the user. Design elements include how the paved area is laid out and treated, landscaping, and the fixtures that facilitate its use, such as sidewalks, street trees, lighting, benches and bus shelters. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
Structure, as used in Section 220-1 Runway Protection Zone Overlay District: An object constructed or installed above the ground. 
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites. 
Tasting room: A use associated with and on the same premises as a brewery or distillery, at which guests may sample the manufacturer's products. 
Tattoo parlor: Establishments that provide services, which create an indelible mark or figure, fixed upon the body by insertion of pigment under the skin or by production of scars. 
Temporary outdoor sales: Outdoor retail sales and services such as markets or sidewalk sales. 
Temporary structure: A structure without any foundation or footing and removed when the designated time period, activity, or use of which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
Tenant: A natural person, business or other entity that occupies land or buildings by ownership, under a lease, or through payment of rent; an occupant, inhabitant or dweller of a place. 
Tenant frontage: The horizontal distance in feet between sidewalls or building end wall of a tenant space fronting on a street. 
Tent: A structure, enclosure or shelter constructed of fabric or pliable material supported by any manner except by air or the contents that it protects. 
Tobacco products shop: A retail establishment that derives more than 90 percent of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. Tobacco products shops shall include sales received from use of hookah pipes and sales of electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes). 
Use: The purpose, for which land, premises or a building thereon is designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied, used or maintained. 
(1)  Accessory use: A use of land or building or structure or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use. 
(2)  Permitted use: A use which is lawfully established in a particular zoning district or zoning districts and which conforms to all requirements, regulations and performance standards of such district. A permitted use may be a principal use or an accessory use. 
(3)  Principal use: A primary or predominant use of the subject lot. 
(4)  Supplemental use: Permitted use that has additional requirements. 
Value-added agricultural products: Raw agricultural product to which value has been added by taking such product to, at least, the next state of production. This includes, but is not limited to, packaging, processing, cooking, churning, culturing, grinding, hulling, extracting, drying, smoking, handcrafting, spinning and weaving. Examples include honey, jams, jellies, baskets, wreaths and soaps. 
Variance: A modification of the specific provisions of this title granted when strict enforcement of the title would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted. 
Yard: That area of a lot between the principal building and adjoining lot lines, open, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted herein. 
(1)  Front yard: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending across the full width of the lot between side lot lines and being that area situated between the street right-of-way and the line established by the front wall or walls of the principal structure projected to intersect the side lot lines. Through lots shall provide front yards for each property line with street frontage. 
(2)  Rear yard: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the permissible building area on the lot. 
(3)  Side yard: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending between the building and the side lot line and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17; Ord. No. 748 , 3-20-18) 
CHAPTER 120. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Section 120-1. - Violations of this Unified Development Ordinance. 
(a)  All uses of land, buildings or structures shall be completed in accordance with approved zoning, development plans and permits, including any conditions attached thereto. The building inspector shall make periodic field inspections as required. When a violation is found to exist while an existing development plan or permit is in effect, the building inspector shall proceed with notice as prescribed in section 120-4. No certificate of occupancy or completion shall be issued unless all on-site improvements, landscaping, and exterior building facades are completed in accordance with the approved development plans and permits, unless a performance bond in accordance with Section 300-27 is submitted and approved. Once development has been completed, action taken to secure compliance with the UDO shall proceed under section 120-2. 
(b)  The Development Director shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. If it is found that any of the provisions of this UDO are being violated, the Development Director shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. 
(c)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this UDO shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined as prescribed in the City Charter. Each day, such violation continues may constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person, who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(e)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 120-2. - Inspection and right of entry. 
(a)  Upon presentation of City identification to the developer, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, City employees authorized by the Development Director shall be permitted to enter during all reasonable hours, or outside reasonable hours in the event of any emergency threatening life or property, any public or private property for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this UDO during the open period of any development plan or permit. 
(b)  Upon presentation of City identification to the developer, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, City employees authorized by the Development Director may seek to enter, during all reasonable hours, or outside reasonable hours in the event of any emergency threatening life or property, any public or private property for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this UDO following issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Where consent is not given to entry, such City employees may seek a warrant pursuant to section 120-3 to secure entry to the premises. 
(c)  If a property or facility has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the Development Director. 
(d)  The owner or operator shall allow the Development Director ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, investigation, observation, monitoring, measurement, recording, enforcement, sampling and testing, photography and videotaping for ensuring compliance with the provisions of this UDO. The owner or operator shall allow the Development Director to examine and copy any records that are required under the conditions of any permit granted under this UDO. 
(e)  The Development Director shall have the right to set up on any premises, property or facility such devices as are necessary to conduct any monitoring and/or sampling procedures. 
(f)  The Development Director may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the Department. The owner shall maintain this sampling and monitoring equipment at all times in a safe and proper operating condition or operator at his/her own expense. 
(g)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises, property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the Development Director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(h)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the Development Director access to a facility, property or premises shall constitute a violation of this UDO. 
(i)  If the Development Director has been refused access to any part of a premises, property, or facility and the Development Director is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this UDO, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this UDO or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the Development Department may seek issuance of an inspection warrant from the municipal court. 
(j)  The Development Director may determine inspection schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 120-3. - Inspection warrants. 
(a)  The department, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant for the purpose of inspection or investigation of conditions relating to the enforcement of this UDO or observation, measurement, sampling or testing with respect to the provisions of this UDO. 
(1)  Inspection warrants may be issued by the municipal court when the issuing judge is satisfied that the department has established by oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection that includes the property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of the property. 
(2)  An inspection warrant will be issued only if it meets the following requirements: 
a.  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant; 
b.  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or occupant of the property or discharger can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection; 
c.  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal; and 
d.  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the code provisions sought to be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 120-4. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the Development Director determines that any violation of this UDO is taking place, or that a condition of rezoning, DCI, variance, or other permit or administrative approvals are not complied with, the Development Director shall present to the owner, owner's agent, occupier, or party responsible for such use or activity, a notice of violation and order the use or activity to cease immediately. 
(b)  The notice shall at least contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A description of the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial actions or measures necessary to bring an action or inaction into compliance with a permit, approved plan or this UDO; 
(5)  The deadline or completion date of any such remedial actions or measures, to consist of not less than ten days, except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient; and 
(6)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the owner or responsible person to whom the Notice of Violation is directed. 
(c)  If the violation has not been corrected within a reasonable length of time, as noticed in the violation, the owner of the property on which such violation has occurred or the owner's agent, occupier, or other party responsible for the violation shall be subject to the penalties set forth in this chapter, provided that either the Development Director or his or her designee may, at his/her discretion, extend the time for compliance with any such notice. 
(d)  The Development Director or his or her designee also shall have authority to issue a warning notice prior to issuance of a notice of violation. A warning notice shall be discretionary when circumstances warrant such action in the opinion of the Development Director and shall under no circumstances be required prior to issuance of a notice of violation or other enforcement action. If issued, a warning notice shall include all of the requirements set forth in subsection 120-4(b). If a warning notice has not resulted in corrective action within the time specified in the notice, or within any time limit as extended by the Development Director, the Development Director may proceed with a notice of violation or other authorized enforcement action. 
(e)  Appeal of Notice of Violation. Appeals shall be made pursuant to the process outlined in Chapter 280, Article 6. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 120-5. - Stop work orders and revocations. 
The Development Director may issue a stop work order, which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 120-6. - Other enforcement. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation (see section 120-4), any one or more of the following actions may be taken against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions, the Development Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action as provided in section 120-4. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Development Department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the penalties provided in Section 120-7: 
(1)  Withhold certificate of occupancy/completion. The Development Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy/completion for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(2)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The Development Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the Development Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 120-7. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Civil penalties. Where authorized by statute, in the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described by the specified deadline or completion date, the City may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (for each day the violation is not remedied after the specified deadline or completion date. 
(b)  Criminal penalties. The Police Department or Code Enforcement Officer may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court of the City to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both shall punish such person. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 120-8. - Judicial review. 
All final decisions of the City concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in DeKalb County Superior Court. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the City may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(2)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 120-9. - Pre-application conference. 
(a)  Applications to take the following actions shall not be submitted or accepted by the City until a pre-application meeting is held: 
(1)  Amend the future development map (FDM); 
(2)  Amend the zoning map (Rezoning); 
(3)  Vary the terms of Title 2 or 3 of the UDO (Variance); 
(4)  Permit a Development of Community Impact (DCI); 
(5)  Subdivide Land (Subdivision); 
(6)  Any other waiver or request requiring review and approval of the City Council; 
(7)  Any other application deemed necessary by the Development Director based on the scale and scope of the project. 
(b)  The purpose of the pre-application meeting shall be to assist in the applicant's understanding of this UDO and its requirements; to educate the applicant on community design policies and standards; and to inform the applicant of all necessary application materials required by this UDO. No final decision on the application or assurances that a particular proposal will be approved shall be made. 
(c)  The applicant shall present concept plans and an application to the Development Director that demonstrate how the pending application adheres to the requirements of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17; Ord. No. 748 , 3-20-18) 
TITLE 2. - LAND USE AND ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 743 , adopted Dec. 19, 2017, amended title 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former title 2, §§ 200-1—280-19 pertained to pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 682 of 6-16-15; Ord. No. 683 of 8-18-15; Ord. No. 684 of 8-18-15; Ord. No. 687 of 9-15-15; Ord. No. 689 of 10-20-15; Ord. No. 697 of 12-15-15; Ord. No. 705 of 6-21-16; Ord. No. 706 of 6-21-16; Ord. No. 711 of 7-19-16; Ord. No. 713 of 7-19-16; Ord. No. 714 of 7-19-16; Ord. No. 715 of 7-19-16; Ord. No. 717 of 8-16-16; Ord. No. 718 of 8-16-16; Ord. No. 725 of 10-18-16; Ord. No. 728 of 12-20-16; Ord. No. 729 of 12-20-16; and Ord. No. 730 of 1-17-17. 

CHAPTER 200. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 200-1. - Purpose. 
Title 2 of this Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) is enacted for the purposes of promoting health, safety, order, prosperity, aesthetics, and the general welfare of the present and future residents of the City of Chamblee; protecting the environmental integrity of the City, encouraging an aesthetically attractive environment, both built and natural, and to provide for regulations that protect and enhance these aesthetic considerations; encouraging economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base; protecting the public welfare by protecting approach slopes and other safety areas of licensed airports; of improving the City's appearance; furthering traffic safety; protecting property against blight and depreciation; encouraging the most appropriate use of land, buildings and other structures throughout the city; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, flood-protection, schools, parks and other public requirements; providing for protection of the constitutional rights and obligations of all citizens within the City; and for other purposes, all in accordance with a well-considered comprehensive plan for the development of the City. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 200-2. - Authority. 
Title 2 of this UDO is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by Article 9, Section II, Paragraph IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, 1983, the Charter of the City, "The Zoning Procedures Law" and other federal, state and local laws. 
The regulations set by this Title 2 shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 200-3. - Incorporation of official zoning map. 
(a)  Official Zoning Map. 
(1)  The City is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared a part of this zoning ordinance. 
(2)  The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in the Chamblee Zoning Ordinance" together with the date of adoption of this UDO. The official zoning map (together with all notations, references, data and other information shown on the map) is adopted and incorporated into this zoning ordinance. It is as much a part of this zoning ordinance as if actually depicted within its pages. 
(3)  The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this zoning map are depicted on and maintained as part of the City's geographic information system (GIS), under the direction of the City Manager. The latest adopted version of the official zoning map shall be available for inspection in the offices of the City of Chamblee Development Department during regular business hours of the City. 
(b)  Maintenance and updates. The Development Director is responsible for directing revisions to the official zoning map to reflect its amendment following the effective date of the zoning map amendments. No unauthorized person may alter or modify the official zoning map. The Development Director may authorize printed copies of the official zoning map to be produced and must maintain digital or printed copies of superseded versions of the official zoning map for historical reference. 
(c)  Replacement of official zoning map. 
(1)  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the Mayor and City Council may by zoning ordinance adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map, and shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the City Clerk and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted the date of March 21, 2006 as part of the Chamblee Zoning Ordinance." The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map. 
(2)  Unless the previous official zoning map has been lost, or has been destroyed, the previous map or any significant remaining parts thereof, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(d)  Annexation. Any land subsequently annexed to the City shall be annexed in accordance with the procedures adopted by Mayor and City Council that are based upon state law and are part of the City Code. Such land shall, immediately upon annexation, be classified into a zoning category compatible with adjacent zoning and land uses, and sound planning principles in accordance with the procedures in Subsection 280-16(e) and applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 200-4. - Division of City into districts. 
For the purposes of this zoning ordinance, the City is divided into zoning districts designated as follows: 
NR-1, Neighborhood Residential 1 District. 
NR-2, Neighborhood Residential 2 District. 
NR-3, Neighborhood Infill District. 
VR, Village Residential District. 
NC-1, Low-density Neighborhood Commercial District 
NC-2, Medium-density Neighborhood Commercial District. 
CC, Corridor Commercial District. 
CVC, Corridor Village Commercial District. 
VC, Village Commercial District. 
PUD, Planned Unit Development District 
TOD, Transit Oriented Development District. 
MU-BC, Mixed-use Business Center District. 
IT, Industrial Transitional District. 
I, Light Industrial District. 
A, Airport District. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 200-5. - Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. 
(a)  The Development Director is the final authority in determining the current zoning status of land, buildings and structures in the city. 
(b)  Where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of any zoning district boundaries as shown on the official zoning maps, the following rules apply: 
(1)  Where possible, a rezoning file shall be used for delineating zoning boundaries. Such records shall have precedence over information otherwise contained on maps. 
(2)  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as approximately following a corporate limits line, a land lot line, a lot line or the centerline of a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway, or a railroad right-of-way or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundary lines. 
(3)  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, each portion shall be governed by the zoning district that each portion is classified. 
(4)  Where areas appear to be unclassified on the zoning maps, and classification cannot be established by the above rules and there is no other evidence of its existing or past classification, such areas must be considered to be classified NR-1 until action is taken by the mayor and City Council to amend the zoning maps. 
(c)  Where uncertainties continue to exist or further interpretation is required beyond that presented in the above subsections, the question shall be presented to the Mayor and City Council to enact a clarifying ordinance and Mayor and City Council's action shall be recorded on the zoning maps. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 200-6. - Relationship to comprehensive plan and future development map. 
The City of Chamblee Comprehensive Plan, consisting of the Future Development Map and related policies, is hereby established as the official policy of the City concerning future land uses and shall serve as a guide regarding the appropriate manner in which property shall be zoned in the city. The most recent version of the Comprehensive Plan, as adopted by the Mayor and City Council, shall identify zoning districts that are appropriate within each of the City's character areas as delineated on the Future Development Map. No rezoning of property in the city shall be done in a manner inconsistent with the Future Development Map and related policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 200-7. - Relationship to previous approvals. 
(a)  When a condition of approval is more restrictive than the UDO, the condition of approval shall prevail. When a requirement of the UDO is more restrictive than a previously established condition of approval, the requirements of the UDO shall prevail. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall repeal the conditions of use, operation, or site development accompanying zoning approval(s), variances or permits issued under previous ordinances or resolutions. All variances, exceptions, modifications and waivers heretofore granted by the Development Director, City Manager, or City Council shall remain in full force and effect, and all terms, conditions and obligations heretofore imposed by the City Council shall remain in effect, unless modification or repeal of such past conditions of approval is accomplished as authorized and provided by the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 200-8. - Zoning verification. 
Upon request, the Development Director shall have authority to issue written zoning verifications stating the existing zoning of a particular parcel or property. Requests to the Development Director shall be in writing, accurately identify the subject property, and be accompanied by a fee established by the Mayor and City Council. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
CHAPTER 210. - BASE ZONING DISTRICTS 

Section 210-1. - Applicability. 
This chapter sets forth the overall purpose and intent of each of the base zoning districts in the City of Chamblee's Unified Development Ordinance (UDO). See additional standards pertinent to each property as in Titles 2 and 3. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 210-2. - NR-1, neighborhood residential 1 district. 
Purpose and intent. This zoning district is intended primarily for single-family residences and related accessory uses. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 210-3. - NR-2, neighborhood residential 2 district. 
Purpose and intent. This zoning district is intended primarily for single-family residences and related accessory uses at a higher density than NR-1. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 210-4. - NR-3, neighborhood infill district. 
Purpose and intent. This zoning district is intended to provide standards for a specific infill development plan that would apply to an existing lot or series of contiguous lots within or adjacent to an existing neighborhood that would allow innovative use of the property. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 210-5. - VR, village residential district. 
Purpose and intent. This zoning district is intended primarily for single-family attached and detached residences, two-family residences, and multifamily residences with related accessory uses, supportive nonresidential uses, open space, and amenities. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 210-6. - NC-1, low-density neighborhood commercial district. 
Purpose and intent. This zoning district is intended primarily for a mixture of residential and nonresidential development and related accessory uses at a low density and neighborhood scale. This district provides a location for residences and convenient goods and services directly adjacent to single-family neighborhoods that will satisfy the common and frequent needs of the residents of nearby residential neighborhoods. Design standards and design parameters encourage a pedestrian-friendly traditional urban form, oriented to pedestrians, which limits the conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 210-7. - NC-2, medium-density neighborhood commercial district. 
Purpose and intent. This zoning district is intended primarily for mixed-use development and related uses at a medium density. This district provides a location for residences and convenient goods and services not directly adjacent to single-family neighborhoods that will satisfy the common and frequent needs of the residents of nearby residential neighborhoods. Design standards and design parameters encourage a pedestrian-friendly traditional urban form, oriented to pedestrians, which limits the conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 210-8. - CC, corridor commercial district. 
Purpose and intent. This zoning district is intended primarily for commercial and mixed-use development and related accessory uses at a medium density. This district provides a location for residences, retail, goods and services and offices to satisfy the common and frequent needs of the city's businesses and residents. Design standards and design parameters encourage a pedestrian-friendly traditional urban form, oriented to pedestrians, which limits the conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 210-9. - CVC, corridor village commercial district. 
Purpose and intent. This zoning district is intended primarily for nonresidential development and related accessory uses at a medium density where auto-dominated uses are not appropriate. This district provides a location for nonresidential uses in corridors of the city that serve the needs of the city's businesses and residents. Design encourages a pedestrian-friendly traditional urban form, oriented to pedestrian, which limits the conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 210-10. - VC, village commercial district. 
Purpose and intent. This zoning district is intended primarily for mixed-use development and related uses at a higher density. This district provides a location for residences, retail, goods, services and offices to satisfy the common and frequent needs of the city's commercial core and greater Chamblee area. Design standards and design parameters encourage a pedestrian-friendly traditional urban form, oriented to pedestrians, which limits the conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 210-11. - TOD, transit oriented development district. 
Purpose and intent. This zoning district is intended to support mixed-use development and higher density development within walking distance of the Chamblee MARTA Station. This district provides a location for residences, retail, goods and services and offices with design standards and design parameters to encourage a pedestrian-friendly traditional urban form, oriented to a network of pedestrian and bicycle pathways to the MARTA Station. This district is intended to minimize automobile use and maximize the use of public transportation, bicycle and pedestrian access. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 210-12. - MU-BC, mixed-use - business center district. 
Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this zoning district is to facilitate a high-rise urban form of development with a mix of uses, open space, and a connected street and sidewalk system to support a more active multi-modal and walkable environment at all times of the day. This district also encourages adaptive reuse and redevelopment of existing mid-rise and high-rise development that was originally designed in a suburban form. 
The district shall consist of a minimum of two of the following use categories, which shall be accommodated in a vertical mixed-use development configuration: 
(1)  Residential multifamily; 
(2)  Offices; 
(3)  Retail/Restaurant; 
(4)  Hotel; or 
(5)  Civic uses. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 210-13. - IT, industrial transitional district. 
Purpose and intent. This zoning district is intended for adaptive reuse of properties in which low impact industrial and commercial activities are permitted and where a transitional use is needed between commercial and light industrial uses and less intense residential or commercial districts while maintaining an attractive external environment. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 210-14. - I, light industrial district. 
Purpose and intent. This zoning district is intended for properties that are located on or have ready access to a major street or state highway and are well adapted to light industrial development but whose proximity to residential or commercial districts makes it desirable to limit industrial operation and processes to those that are not objectionable in terms of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors and do not create fire or explosion hazards, or other obnoxious conditions. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
CHAPTER 220. - SPECIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

Section 220-0. - Interpretation and applicability of special zoning districts. 
(a)  This Chapter establishes standards that apply to the development, use, or alteration of land, buildings and structures within the boundaries of a special zoning district. 
(b)  The zoning district regulations of this chapter contain additional standards and procedures that are supplemental to all other regulations and requirements of this Unified Development Ordinance (UDO). Should the requirements of these special district standards and procedures conflict with standards of other requirements of the UDO, the requirements of the special district shall apply. 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all parcels of land and rights-of-way within the boundaries of the special zoning districts. 
(2)  The provisions of the special districts shall apply to all applications for land disturbance permits, plan review, plat approval, sign permits, and building permits for all property within the respective special zoning district boundaries, unless expressly exempted. 
(3)  All special zoning districts identified as "overlays" shall also require conformance with the approved underlying zoning district regulations. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 220-1. - Runway protection zone (RPZ) overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. An ordinance regulating the use and design of property at and in the vicinity of DeKalb-Peachtree Airport (PDK). The purposes of this runway protection zone (RPZ) overlay are to: 
(1)  Prevent the establishment and/or expansion of uses, structures, or vegetation, which constitute hazards or obstructions to, or be vulnerable to impact from aircraft operating to, from or near an airport; and to 
(2)  Allow for appropriate uses surrounding the airport that further the City's economic development. 
(b)  Overlay District Boundaries. A detailed runway protection zone boundary indicating the location of zones is maintained on the Zoning Map. 
(c)  Restrictions and requirements. 
(1)  The following generalized land uses are defined as incompatible within the RPZ and are therefore prohibited: 
a.  Residential development; 
b.  Any use that would attract and congregate people including but not limited to, retail commercial development, industrial development, institutions, and places of worship; 
c.  Water uses such as lakes, ponds, and landfills that significantly increase the potential for interference of airborne fowl with landing and departing aircraft; 
d.  Construction activities and land uses, which would produce smoke and/or dust in such a manner so as to impair visibility of pilots using the airport; 
e.  High intensity exterior lighting, including, but not limited to, lighting for signage, private drives, parking lots and security, which is located in such a manner as to impair the visibility of pilots using the airport is prohibited unless such lighting is properly shielded; 
f.  Land uses which create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft. 
(2)  Height limit: Ten feet below the approach-departure clearance surface, with a maximum height of 35 feet. 
(d)  Modification or expansion of existing uses, structures, or vegetation. 
(1)  Before any existing use, structure, or vegetation may be replaced, substantially altered, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher than permitted height (vegetation), or replanted within the RPZ, a permit must be secured. No such permit shall be granted that would: 
a.  Allow establishment or creation of a flight hazard or use not authorized by this Section 220-1; 
b.  Permit a nonconforming use, structure, or vegetation to become higher; or 
c.  Become a greater hazard to air navigation or become less compatible in use than it was on the effective date of this Section, or than it is when the application for a permit is made. 
(2)  The Development Director will determine which projects require submittal to the FAA's notice criteria tool based on the scope of the project as it relates to 14 CFR Part 77.9. Before any permit is issued as required by this Subsection, the applicant shall file with the Federal Aviation Administration FAA Form 7460-1 and provide to the City a copy of all responses received from the Federal Aviation Administration by the applicant as a result of filing Form 7460-1. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 220-2. - A, airport district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. This zoning district is intended for properties that are located on land used for an airport and are well adapted to commercial and light industrial development associated with the operation of an airport. 
(b)  Exemptions. Properties within the Airport District, as defined on the zoning map, shall be exempt from Title 2, unless identified herein. The entirety of Title 1 and Title 3 apply to The Airport District. 
(c)  Permitted Uses. In the airport district the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Aviation facilities, including passenger terminals, air cargo facilities, hangars, aircraft refueling, parking facilities, and other uses integral to airport operations. 
(2)  Commercial or industrial uses that are related to aviation and require direct access to an airport facility or aviation services, including assembly or sale of aircraft, air frames, aircraft engines, aircraft parts or associated components, radios or navigational equipment, and similar products or services. 
(3)  Service establishments such as auto rental and travel agencies, hotels, commercial parking lots and garages, automobile service stations, day care facilities, car washes, banks, gift shops, newsstands, bookstores, restaurants, medical offices, postal facilities, laundry services, and similar facilities available to airport users and airport employees. 
(4)  Public and institutional uses that support the aviation industry such as aviation technical schools, security services, and inspection facilities. 
(5)  Warehousing and storage facilities that support the aviation industry. 
(6)  Public transportation and freight railroad facilities. 
(7)  Uses shall be allowed only upon first obtaining a recommendation for approval by the airport director (and/or his designated agent). As a condition of this authorization, a sound attenuation may be required. 
(d)  Dimensional Standards. The following space dimensions table states the dimensions for each lot the airport district: 

 
1  Unless adjacent to residential, in which case, a 50-foot side or rear setback shall be enforced. 
(e)  Streetscape Requirements. All development adjacent to a public right-of-way shall comply with the minimum zone requirements as outlined in Section 230-26. Adjustments to required plantings to accommodate FAA requirements are permitted as approved by the City Landscape Coordinator. The Airport District is exempt from the supplemental zone requirements of Section 230-27. 
(f)  Minimum space between buildings. The minimum distance between buildings shall be 10 feet measured at the closest points between the two structures, excluding building projections such as cornices, eaves, steps, handrails, gutters and downspouts, except where a greater distance is required by the Building Code. 
(g)  Retaining Walls and Fences. Any fence or retaining wall visible from an exterior street right-of-way or adjacent property must comply with the fence and retaining wall requirements in Section 230-6. 
(h)  Building Materials. Any building within 300 feet of a public right-of-way or adjacent property outside of the airport district shall comply with the building material requirements of Section 230-27. In the Airport District, the appearance of the materials in this section is acceptable. 
(i)  Off-street Parking and Loading. There shall be no minimum or maximum parking or loading requirements in the airport district. 
(j)  Signs. Any signs visible from an adjoining right-of-way shall conform to Chapter 260, with the following exceptions/modifications: 
(1)  Project Entrance Signs. Where an internal street or driveway intersects with an adjacent public street a major entrance sign is permitted in addition to other permitted signs. Major entrance signs shall not exceed 15 feet in height or 150 square feet. Such sign shall be setback at least 10 feet from the property line. Each major entrance sign shall display the street number of the property. 
(2)  Monument Signs. Each building, not including hangars, shall be permitted to have one monument sign not to exceed 6 feet in height or 50 square feet in size. 
(3)  FAA Required Signs. All FAA required signage is exempt from these requirements, even if visible from an adjoining right-of-way. 
(k)  Outdoor Storage . The following additional regulations shall apply to the airport district: 
(1)  Outdoor storage yards shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Shall not be visible from a public street or adjoining property; 
b.  Shall be set back at least 50 feet from any property lines and shall be screened by a solid, opaque fence at least six feet high set back a similar distance from any side or rear property lines, appropriately landscaped and maintained. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 220-3. - PUD, planned unit development district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The PUD, Planned Unit Development district is intended to permit the planning and development of parcels of land that are suitable in location and character for the uses proposed as unified and integrated developments in accordance with detailed development plans. The PUD district is intended to provide a means of accomplishing the following specific objectives: 
(1)  To provide for development concepts not otherwise allowed within non-PUD zoning districts; 
(2)  To provide flexibility, unity, and diversity in land planning and development, resulting in convenient and harmonious groupings of uses, structures and common facilities; 
(3)  To accommodate varied type design and layout of housing and other buildings; 
(4)  To allow appropriate relationships of open spaces to intended uses and structures; 
(5)  To encourage innovations in quality residential, commercial, and industrial development and renewal so that the growing demands of the population may be met by greater variety in type, design, and layout of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary to those buildings; 
(6)  To lessen the burden of traffic on streets and highways; and 
(7)  To provide a procedure that can relate the type, design, and layout of residential, commercial, and industrial development to the particular site, thereby encouraging preservation of the site's natural characteristics. 
(b)  Minimum Standards: 
(1)  No PUD district may be established without the concurrent approval of an Overall Development Plan (ODP) by the Mayor and City Council, in accordance with subsection 220-3(c). 
(2)  PUD Districts shall have a minimum contiguous area of one acre. 
(3)  PUDs Districts shall provide a mix of a minimum of two of the following use categories, which shall be accommodated in vertical mixed-use development configuration: 
a.  Residential multifamily units; 
b.  Commercial offices; 
c.  Retail; 
d.  Hotel; or 
e.  Civic uses. 
(4)  20 percent open space, which shall include a town center, community green, park, or other community focal point. 
(5)  Civic design standards shall be considered minimum standards for the ODP. 
(6)  The boundaries of each PUD, upon approval, must be shown on the zoning map, shall be in conformance with the adopted comprehensive plan, any adopted master plan, and the approved Overall Development Plan. 
(7)  Any development standards not expressly defined by the ODP shall be regulated by Titles 2 and 3. 
(c)  Application of regulations. 
(1)  Overall Development Plan (ODP). Development of the PUD is governed by Overall Development Plan that designates the standards of zoning and development for the PUD. The ODP must be submitted as a part of the PUD rezoning application. 
(2)  At a minimum the ODP must include: 
a.  Analysis of existing site conditions. An analysis of existing site conditions including a boundary survey and topographic map of the site at a minimum 1 inch = 40 feet scale shall include information on all existing manmade and natural features, utilities, all streams and easements, and features to be retained, moved or altered. The existing shape and dimensions of the existing lot to be built upon including the size, measurement and location of any existing buildings or structures on the lot shall be included; 
b.  Master plan. A masterplan at a minimum 1 inch = 40 feet scale outlining all proposed regulations and calculations which shall include, but not be limited to, information on all proposed improvements including proposed building footprints, doors, densities, parking ratios, open space, height, sidewalks, yards, under and over-head utilities, internal circulation and parking, landscaping, grading, lighting, drainage, amenities, and similar details including their respective measurements; 
c.  Landscape plan. A site plan at a minimum 1 inch = 40 feet scale showing proposed regulations and calculations which shall include, but not be limited to, information on landscaping, tree species and the number of all plantings and open space including the landscaping that is being preserved, removed and that which is replacing the landscaping that is removed; 
d.  Architectural design. Preliminary architectural plans and all elevations with sufficient detail to demonstrate proposed design criteria shall include, but not be limited to, scaled floor plans and elevation drawings of proposed buildings and structures and information on building materials, features, exterior finish legend, windows, doors, colors, and items affecting exterior appearance, such as signs, air conditioning, grills, compressors, and similar details including their respective measurements. As a part of the architectural design, a "four-sided" design philosophy must be used. Materials used shall be enduring in their composition; 
e.  Phasing plan. Should a PUD be expected to require five years or longer to complete, a phasing plan shall be provided by the applicant that indicates the timeframe for construction and development of different aspects of the PUD; 
f.  Type and location of all intended uses; 
g.  Expected gross land areas of all intended uses, including open space; 
h.  Gross floor area or density and residential unit size for all buildings or structures; 
i.  Multi-modal circulation plan; 
j.  Street cross-sections; 
k.  Parking analysis; 
l.  Plan of how environmental features will be protected or impacted; and 
m.  Any other information deemed necessary by the Development Director. 
(3)  To the extent that the approved ODP and development standards for a PUD contradict the development regulations and this UDO, the approved ODP for the PUD district governs. 
(4)  Due to the mixed-use nature of PUD proposals, design must be determined based upon the context and guidance of the comprehensive plan and specific character area plan area in which the PUD is located, as applicable. 
(5)  Any additional information deemed necessary by the Development Department to determine compliance with ordinance standards 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 220-4. - Neighborhood preservation overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section to provide for the establishment of Neighborhood Preservation overlay districts by petition for the following reasons: 
(1)  To allow for the implementation of policies and objectives of the City's Comprehensive Plan and the zoning ordinance; and 
(2)  To avail neighborhoods of an opportunity to ensure that new and remodeled single-family dwellings and related accessory uses and structures are compatible with the height, size and level of forestation of the existing dwellings and lots; and 
(3)  To encourage property owners to improve and renovate existing housing stock rather than demolish the same; and 
(4)  To establish and maintain a balance between preserving the character of mature neighborhoods while accommodating compatible new residential development; and 
(5)  To allow neighborhoods an opportunity to establish architectural standards that will preserve the character of their existing neighborhoods. 
(b)  Scope of regulations. This division establishes standards and procedures that apply to demolition, new construction, and residential development in whole or in part within any area of the City that is designated a Neighborhood Preservation overlay district. 
(c)  Neighborhood Preservation overlay districts. 
(1)  The boundaries of any Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District shall be established by a zoning map amendment adopted pursuant to chapter procedures of Chapter 280 of this UDO. 
(2)  The City Council shall not approve any Neighborhood Preservation overlay district that does not include a contiguous arrangement of at least 20 lots of record and a rational, defined boundary consistent with historic patterns of neighborhoods, subdivisions and similarly constructed development. 
(d)  Applicability of regulations. This section applies to each application for a permit for redevelopment or new construction following the demolition or major alteration of an existing single-family home in established neighborhoods within a duly established Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District. 
(e)  Principal uses and principal structures. The principal uses of land and structures that are allowed in any Neighborhood Preservation overlay district shall be as provided in the applicable underlying zoning district, subject to the limitations and standards contained within this section. 
(f)  Accessory uses and accessory structures. The accessory uses of land and structures that are allowed in the Neighborhood Preservation overlay district shall be as provided in the applicable underlying zoning district, are subject to the limitations and standards contained within this title. 
(g)  Petition process, boundaries, staff analysis, and approval criteria. 
(1)  The City shall require the filing of a petition and completed application for any Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District on forms promulgated by the Development Director. 
(2)  Any person(s) interested in pursuing the approval of a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District shall develop a petition and submit an application form to the Development Department. The petition will allow for persons to sign in favor of the approval of a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District. All signatories to the petition must be real property owners residing within the proposed Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District. The Development Director shall not allow the petition process for the adoption of a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District ordinance to be reviewed and investigated by City staff until 40 percent of the property owners in the proposed Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District have signed a petition in favor of the imposition of the Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District designation as described in this title. Once the 40 percent threshold has been achieved, the Development Director shall notify all property owners within the proposed district and within 250 feet of the boundary of subject district of a public meeting in City offices. 
(3)  Application forms must be accompanied by a boundary map and complete list of owners of each property located in the Overlay District with their street address or tax parcel identification number(s). All applications must be accompanied by a letter of intent describing the need and purpose for proposed Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District and how the particular properties qualify for a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District designation. This letter of intent shall include an analysis of all of the following criteria that shall guide the City Council in deciding if specific property should be classified as a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District: 
a.  Whether the built environment of a neighborhood and its location, size or age, is one in which it is desirable to ensure that new and remodeled single-family dwellings and related accessory uses and structures are compatible with the height, size and level of forestation of the existing dwellings and lots; and 
b.  How the proposed boundary was established, including factors established in this section; and 
c.  Whether there is specific evidence that recent and proposed development patterns in the surrounding area pose a potential threat to the character of a mature neighborhood; and 
d.  Whether the type of additional standards proposed in the Neighborhood Preservation Overlay will accommodate renewal of the neighborhood while maintaining compatibility of new residential development and improvements to existing homes. 
(4)  All applications and petitions for a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District shall become final upon presentation at a public hearing before the City Council pursuant to Chapter 280 of this UDO, at which time the petition shall include a minimum of 75 percent of the property owners in support of the Overlay District. 
(5)  The Development Director shall conduct a site inspection on all complete applications for a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District and shall investigate and prepare an analysis of such application in substantial compliance with this Section and shall include a written analysis of whether the properties at issue satisfy the criteria identified in this section. The Development Department shall present its findings and recommendations in written form to the City Council. Copies of the written findings shall be posted on the City website and otherwise supplied to the public on request. 
(6)  If the City Council approves the creation of a specific Neighborhood Preservation overlay district, the newly created district shall be governed by the regulations in this Section, all other provisions of the UDO, and any other applicable stipulations accompanying the approval of the overlay district by the Mayor and City Council. 
(7)  Notice of hearing. Notice of the public hearing for any petition for a Neighborhood Preservation overlay district before the City Council shall comply with the code requirements for notice for a zoning decision by a party other than the City as set forth in Section 280 of this UDO. 
(h)  Prior to approval of a building permit for new construction or remodeling within a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District established by the Mayor and City Council, the Architectural Design Review Board shall review and comment on plans and elevations submitted for such construction in accordance with procedures in Chapter 280. 
(i)  Standards for compatibility of design. A Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District may impose one or more of the following standards subject to the concurrence of 100 percent of the petitioners in Subsection 220-4(g)(4): 
(1)  Height. No new construction or addition shall exceed the height standards established in Chapter 230-1. 
(2)  Building materials. The new or remodeled house shall be constructed with compatible building materials so that the building materials used on the façade of the proposed house are of the same type and similar colors as the majority of materials used on the facades of houses abutting the subject property. 
(3)  Square footage. The heated floor area of the proposed new or remodeled house shall not be less than the heated floor area of the existing house and shall not exceed 150 percent of the heated floor area of the existing house. If there was no previous house on the subject property, then the minimum floor area of the proposed house may not exceed 125 percent of the average of the houses on properties abutting the subject property. 
(4)  Setback. The new or remodeled house shall maintain a setback that is no less than the average setback of the 4 closest existing houses on the same block face or side of the same street, not including vacant lots. 
(5)  Roof forms. The new or remodeled house shall use only those roof forms (hip, gable, flat, mansard, gambrel, etc.) that are used on the majority of the houses on properties abutting the subject property. 
(6)  Threshold elevation. The front door threshold of the newly constructed or remodeled house shall be at an elevation that is no more than 12 inches higher or lower than the elevation of the front door threshold of the house prior to the proposed construction or remodeling. 
(7)  Other design features approved by vote of the Mayor and Council in the adoption of the Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District or in subsequent action by the Mayor and City Council that shall be through the procedures of Subsection 220-4(g). 
(j)  Variances. The Mayor and Council may consider variances to the provisions of Subsection 220-4(i) subject to the provisions of Chapter 280 of this UDO. 
(k)  Removal of overlay. The procedures to repeal or amend the restrictions, terms or boundaries of a Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District are the same as those set forth in Subsection 220-4(g). 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
CHAPTER 230. - STANDARDS APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS 
ARTICLE 1. - ZONING PROVISIONS 

Section 230-1. - Dimensional standards of zoning districts. 
(a)  The following Space Dimensions Table states the space dimensions required for each lot in a zoning district: 
Space Dimensions Table 9 

 
1  Single-family detached residential developments in NC-1/NC-2 shall follow the dimension standards for NR-2. 
2  See also open space provision in Section 230-30. 
3  Additional height limitations are in place for any structure within the Runway Protection Zone, see Section 220-1. In addition, any construction within five miles of the DeKalb Peachtree Airport is subject to Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) Part 77 and may require review by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
4  Cul-de sac lots shall provide the minimum lot width at the front yard setback line. The lot width shall not be measured from the discretionary placement of the principal structure. 
5  Front yard requirements for through lots. Buildings on through lots extending through from street to street shall provide the required front yard on all streets. 
6  Detached houses constructed or renovated on a block face that is occupied by two or more detached houses shall comply with Section 230-3, Contextual Lot and Building Standards for Infill Development. 
7  Side yard requirements are variable in the NR-3, VR, NC-1, NC-2, CC, CVC, VC, TOD and MU-BC, depending on the abutting zoning district; see Chapter 320, Article 2. 
8  See Section 230-5 for height exceptions. 
9  See Subsection 240-13(b)(1) for single-family attached (townhouse) dwelling dimensional standards. 
10  Residential front yards. 
a.  In single-family residential districts, the front yard shall be landscaped with the exception of driveways, terraces, and walkways, which may occupy a maximum of one-half of the front yard area. 
b.  Automobile parking is only permitted in front yards when located on the permitted access driveway on asphalt or gravel surface. 
(b)  Location and width of zoning buffers. 
(1)  The following Buffer Specification Table states the minimum buffer specifications required for each zoning district. 
a.  The required buffer strip shall be permitted to be included in the minimum yard area as specified in the appropriate zoning district in the Buffer Specification Table. 
b.  Zoning buffers shall be planted to planting standards in Section 320-21. 
Buffer Specification Table 

 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17; Ord. No. 748 , 3-20-18) 
Section 230-2. - Access to public street. 
(a)  Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to an approved public or private street or alley, and all structures shall have safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking. 
(b)  In the event a land-locked lot exists that has been legally subdivided through the applicable subdivision process, as of the effective date of this zoning ordinance, the property owner shall be entitled to building permits, provided: 
(1)  All other zoning and development standards are met or appropriate variances are approved to allow the lot to be developed or altered as proposed; and 
(2)  The property owner has acquired an access easement to a publicly maintained street for single-family detached dwelling [use]. Said easement shall be duly recorded and made part of the property deed. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 230-3. - Contextual lot and building standards for infill development. 
(a)  Single-family detached or attached houses constructed or enlarged on a block face that is occupied by two or more existing houses shall comply with Contextual Lot and Building Standards for Infill Development of this subsection, in lieu of the standards for front yard setbacks in the "Space Dimensions Table" of Section 230-1. 
(b)  Contextual Lot Setbacks. 
(1)  The front and street side yard setbacks of an attached or detached house subject to these setback regulations must be located within the range of front yard setbacks observed by detached houses that exist on the nearest two lots on either side of the subject lot. 
(2)  In no case, shall the front and street side yard setbacks be greater than 20 feet from the rearmost observed front and street side yard setbacks. 
(3)  If one or more of the nearest two lots on either side of the subject lot is vacant, the vacant lot shall not be considered. In this case, the contextual setback back shall be based on the next closest lot, containing a detached house, in the same direction. 
(4)  Lots with frontage on a different street than the subject lot or that are separated from the subject lot by a street or alley may not be used in determining the street setback range. 
(5)  If existing lots are proposed to be subdivided, the reference parcels for the purposes of determining contextual requirements shall be those immediately adjacent to and outside the parcel or group of parcels for the subject subdivision. 
(6)  If the subject lot abuts a corner lot with frontage on the same street, the street setback range is determined based on the abutting corner lot and the nearest two lots with frontage on the same street as the subject lot. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  These contextual street setback regulations may not be used to reduce the setback of a street-facing garage door to less than 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17; Ord. No. 748 , 3-20-18) 
Section 230-4. - Encroachments into required yards. 
(a)  The following setback encroachments are permitted: 
(1)  Architectural features, such as: Cornices, eaves, chimneys, canopies, landings, bay windows, or other similar features may encroach into the required front, side, and rear yard setbacks, provided such encroachments do not exceed three feet, and provided such features are no closer than five feet to the side or rear yard property line. 
(2)  Unenclosed decks, inclusive of staircases, may encroach into required rear yard setbacks up to 10 feet. 
(3)  Patios, driveways, walkways, and similar surfaces may encroach all setbacks. 
(4)  Unenclosed porches and stoops, inclusive of staircases, may encroach into required front yard setbacks up to six feet. For townhomes, such features may encroach up to the property line or the edge of an access easement in the case of a private street. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 230-5. - Building height exceptions. 
The height limitations of this zoning ordinance shall not apply to unoccupied portions of buildings such as spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, chimneys, mechanical and electrical equipment and associated screening, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flagpoles, or aerials. The maximum height allowed for these elements shall be the maximum height allowed in the designated zoning district plus an additional 15 percent. See also Section 220-1, Runway Protection Zone Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 230-6. - Fences and retaining walls. 
(a)  This section regulates fences, walls, and fences and walls in combination. 
(b)  General conditions. 
(1)  Fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair. 
(2)  Fences and walls may step down a slope, however supports shall be vertical and plumb. 
(3)  Posts shall be anchored in concrete. 
(4)  Supports shall face inward to the property. 
(5)  Barbed wire shall be prohibited on all fences and walls. 
(c)  Fences. 
(1)  Fences in the front or street yard: 
a.  Maximum height: Fences in the front or street yard shall not exceed four feet in height and shall not extend into the public right-of-way. See Section 230-7 for corner lot restrictions. Vehicular gates may be up to six feet in height, provided the surrounding fence is no taller than four feet. Properties with agricultural and industrial uses are allowed fences up to six feet. 
b.  Materials . Fences in the front or street yard shall not be made of wire, woven metal, or chain link, unless located on property of an agricultural or industrial, use. All other fences shall be ornamental or decorative fences constructed of brick, stone, stucco, split rail, wood, aluminum, or wrought iron. The fence shall be a minimum of 50 percent transparent to reduce the appearance of an opaque structure along the sidewalk. Exposed block, tires, junk or other discarded material shall be prohibited fence materials. 
(2)  Fences in interior side and rear yards. 
a.  Maximum Height . Fences shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
b.  Materials. If a fence is constructed of chain link or other metal fencing, fence shall be vinyl, powder coated, or galvanized. 
(d)  Retaining walls. 
(1)  Maximum Height . Retaining walls in the front or street side yards are limited to four feet in height. A retaining wall located adjacent to a sidewalk along a public street shall not exceed two feet in height. Retaining walls shall be limited to eight feet in height in interior side and rear yards. 
(2)  Materials . Retaining walls shall be constructed of decorative concrete modular block or shall be faced with stone or brick or textured cement masonry. 
(e)  Fences and retaining walls combined: 
(1)  Fences erected within five feet of the top a retaining wall shall be regulated by this section. 
(2)  Fences and retaining walls combined that are erected within ten feet of a public sidewalk: 
a.  Maximum Height . Fences and retaining walls combined within ten feet of a public sidewalk shall not exceed two feet for the wall and four feet for the fence. 
b.  Materials . Fences shall not be made of wire, woven metal, or chain link, unless located on property of an agricultural or industrial, use. All other fences shall be ornamental or decorative fences constructed of brick, stone, stucco, split rail, wood, aluminum, or wrought iron. The fence shall be a minimum of 50 percent transparent so as to reduce the appearance of an opaque structure along the sidewalk. Exposed block, tires, junk or other discarded material shall be prohibited fence materials. Retaining walls shall be constructed of decorative concrete modular block or shall be faced with stone or brick or textured cement masonry. 
(3)  Fences and retaining walls combined in all other locations on a lot: 
a.  Maximum Height . Fences and retaining walls in combination in the rear yard cannot exceed eight feet each, provided their combined height does not exceed twelve feet. Retaining walls and fences in the front yard shall not exceed four feet each, provided their combined height does not exceed six feet. 
b.  Materials . Chain link and other metal fencing shall be vinyl, powder coated, or galvanized. If fences and retaining walls in combination are located in the front yard, wire, woven metal, or chain link fences are prohibited, unless located on property of an agricultural or industrial. Retaining walls shall be constructed of decorative concrete modular block or shall be faced with stone or brick or textured cement masonry. Any portion of a combined fence and wall that exceeds ten feet shall be transparent for a minimum of 50 percent of the length of the fence so as to reduce the appearance of an opaque structure. 
(f)  Method of measurement . Heights of fences and retaining walls shall be measured from the grade plane. 
(g)  Exceptions. Temporary chain link security fences up to 6 ft. in height may be erected to surround the property up to 30 days prior and 30 days following completion of demolition, rehabilitation, or new construction. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 230-7. - Corner visibility. 
On corner lots within all zoning districts, no fence, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to traffic line of sight vision shall exceed a height of three feet within the triangular area formed by the intersection of right-of-way lines at two points measured 20 feet along the property line from the intersection. Within said triangle, there shall be no sight obscuring wall, fence or foliage higher than 30 inches above grade or in the case of trees, foliage lower than ten feet. Vertical measurement shall be made at the top of the curb on the street or alley adjacent to the nearest side of the triangle or if no curb exists, from the edge of the nearest traveled way. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 230-8. - Accessory structures. 
(a)  General provisions for accessory structures. All accessory buildings and structures, including accessory dwellings shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
(1)  An accessory building or structure shall be clearly subordinate to the primary structure in all dimensional aspects. 
(2)  In all residential districts the building or structure shall be located behind the front wall of the primary structure. 
(3)  The building or structure shall be located in a required interior side or rear yard. However, a separation of at least five feet shall be required between the building or structure and an adjoining lot line. 
(4)  A maximum of three accessory structures shall be permitted per lot. 
(5)  In all single-family zoning districts, the total of all accessory structures shall have a gross square footage of no greater than 50 percent of the gross square footage of the principal building with a 1,200 square feet maximum per lot. 
(6)  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
(7)  Where a building is attached to the principal building by breezeway, passageway or similar means, it is considered part of the principal structure and shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 230-9. - Sustainable certification. 
(a)  Intent. The City of Chamblee is committed to minimizing the short-term and long-term negative impacts construction has on the environment. The intent of this section is to provide owners and occupants of commercial buildings, offices, industrial buildings, multiple residences and senior citizen multiple residences with energy and water savings; good indoor air quality and healthy, pleasant and productive surroundings. A further intent of this section is to benefit the community by having buildings constructed that are resource-efficient and conserve energy. 
(b)  LEED. The City of Chamblee hereby adopts the latest version of the Green Building Council's (USGBC) Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEEDNC) Rating System Version 4. The LEED-NC system (for new construction) establishes several levels of environmental achievement from the certified rating to a platinum rating. The ratings are attained by earning LEED points in the categories of sustainable sites, water efficiency, energy and atmosphere, materials and resources, indoor environmental quality and innovation and design process. Alternatively, compliance with the requirements of this section may be achieved for new construction as set forth herein by certification from Green Globes as promulgated by the Green Building Initiative (GBI). Other certifications may be approved in lieu of the LEED certification upon submitting documentation to the Development Director demonstrating that the proposed certification is comparable. 
(c)  Applicability. This section shall be applicable to all new construction of a commercial building, office building, industrial building, multifamily, equal to or greater than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area space. Furthermore, this section shall be applicable to all new construction of municipal buildings regardless of square footage. 
(d)  Sustainable Certification Checklist . 
(1)  Every applicant who files a building permit application for construction of a commercial building, industrial building, office building, or multifamily equal to or greater than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area, shall provide a completed LEED checklist or Green Globes certification on a form acceptable to the Development Director. 
(2)  A building permit shall not be issued unless the LEED checklist or Green Globes certification shows that the proposed building will achieve enough points to attain LEED certified status or Green Globes certified status. No applicant shall be issued any building permits until the following are submitted and reviewed: (1) copies of the LEED checklist (or alternative certification); and (2) the registration of the proposed project with the USGBC (United States Green Building Council), or in the alternative, the registration of the project with the proper agency. 
(e)  Sustainable Certification Closeout. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until the applicant produces verifiable documentation from the USGBC or GBI which affirms that the project is LEED certified or Green Globes certified. However, upon completion of construction, satisfactory inspection by the Development Director and confirmation that all documentation has been submitted for required certification, the Development Director may issue a certificate of occupancy. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall submit a performance bond to ensure successful completion of the certification as set forth below. If the developer achieves certification status, the bond shall be released to the applicant. 
Sustainable Certification Fee Table 

 
(f)  Sustainability Measures. 
(1)  Applicability. The sustainable development measures in this section shall be addressed by any new buildings and/or any redevelopment in excess of the 70 percent threshold outlined in Section 270-9, Redevelopment Thresholds that are exempt or not required to comply with the Sustainable Certification requirements of Section 230-9. 
(2)  Exemptions. Existing single-family lots shall be exempt from the sustainability measures of this section. 
(3)  Calculation and Evaluation. 
a.  Minimum Points Required . 
1.  All projects, unless otherwise noted, shall achieve a minimum of 5 points from any combination of the sustainable development measures as valued in Figure 230-9 "Sustainability Measures & Values." 
2.  New single-family lots not exempted from the requirements of this section shall achieve no fewer than 3 points (i.e.; each lot in a project with the development of more than one lot). 
3.  No partial points will be accepted. 
b.  Minimum Requirements of the Measure . All points shall be awarded based on meeting the minimum requirements of each sustainability measure, as indicated in this section or elsewhere in the UDO. 
c.  Newly Constructed Measures. Measures count only if they are part of the new development application; measures already in place at the time of application do not count, unless clearly shown on the plans and approved by the Development Director. 
d.  Required Documentation. The following documentation is required: 
1.  Documentation of which measures and total number of points the applicant will achieve shall be indicated on the Development Permit application submitted to the City. 
2.  Documentation is required to clearly illustrate the extent to which the minimum requirements of each of the selected measures is to be met through permanent construction or policies. 
(4)  Energy Category Measures. 
a.  Energy Efficiency . Newly constructed buildings must demonstrate an average 10 percent improvement over the energy code currently in effect in the city. To receive credit for this measure, calculations shall be provided that compare the energy code requirements to the performance of the proposed building. 
b.  Renewable Energy . Incorporate renewable energy generation on-site with production capacity of at least 5 percent of the building's annual electric or thermal energy, established through an accepted building energy performance simulation tool. The following renewable energy generation sources are applicable: solar thermal or photovoltaics, ground-sourced heating or cooling, fuel cells and micro-turbines using non-fossil fuel and wind energy conversion. Other means of generating electricity without using a fuel, such as kinetic, heat exchange, approved by the Development Director. 
c.  Green Roof . Install a vegetated roof for at least 50 percent of any building roof area or roof deck; a minimum of 2,500 square feet is required to receive credit. 
d.  Heat Island Reduction . Use any combination of the following strategies for 35 percent of all on-site, non-roof hardscape areas, including sidewalks, plazas, courtyards, parking lots, parking structures, and driveway: coverage of the surface at canopy tree maturity in 15 years, and/or solar reflective paving and roofing with a SRI (solar reflectance index) of at least 29. 
e.  Energy Efficient Fixtures. Installation of ENERGY STAR appliances and LED light bulbs for a minimum of 80 percent of the fixtures and equipment. 
(5)  Water Category Measures. 
a.  Building Water Efficiency . Indoor water use in new buildings and major renovations must be an average 20 percent less than in baseline buildings. Baseline water usage shall be determined based on fixtures per the Energy Policy Act of 1992 and subsequent rulings by the United States Department of Energy or a similar method approved by the development director. To receive credit for this measure, calculations shall be provided that compare the baseline water usage to the performance of the proposed building. 
b.  Water-Efficient Landscaping . Reduce potable water used for landscape irrigation by 50 percent from a calculated midsummer baseline case by using either one of the following methods: utilizing all xeriscape plant materials and providing no permanent irrigation system, or using only captured rainwater with an irrigation system. 
c.  Pervious Pavement . Install an open grid or pervious pavement system that is at least 40 percent pervious on 65 percent of all hardscape surface areas, including sidewalks, plazas, courtyards, parking lots, and driveways. The water shall be directed into the groundwater or other acceptable storm accommodation per the Development Director. 
d.  Water Reclamation. Install a water collection device to be used in lieu of potable water for irrigation, water features, etc. not already required by this chapter. 
(6)  Transportation Category Measures. 
a.  Enhanced Bicycle Amenities Measure. Inclusion of 2 of the following earns 1 point. Inclusion of 3 of the following earns 2 points: 
1.  Lockable enclosed bicycle storage. Provide secure, enclosed bicycle storage space for 10 percent of building occupancy with no more than 10 spaces required. 
2.  Employee shower facilities. Provide a minimum of one shower facility per 150 occupants, minimum of one total. 
3.  Repair Center. Provide a designated bicycle repair center open to the public and consisting of, at least one air pump, water, and basic tools for minor repairs. 
b.  Transportation Access Measure. Site must be within 1/4 mile of an existing or proposed transit stop with provision of enhanced access to transit and shall include one or more of the following: 
1.  Construction of a bus turnout on development property or in adjacent street right-of-way and appropriate dedication. 
2.  Construction of shared use paths installed with a minimum of 12 feet of width. 
3.  Provision of direct platform connection to rail station. 
4.  Additional easement for provision or enhancement of transit. 
5.  Other items approved by the Development Director. 
c.  Transportation Demand Management. Provision of 3 or more of the following transportation demand management tools on the project: 
1.  Shuttle services with route connecting a minimum of three external sites to the subject property. Properties applying for a parking reduction per section 250-7, Shuttle Service, are not eligible for these points toward a sustainability measure requirement. 
2.  Flex-time work schedules by employers to reduce congestion at peak times. 
3.  Provision of building or project bicycle rentals for use by any occupant. 
4.  Free ride home in case of emergency or sickness for employees using transit. 
5.  Provision of transit passes to building occupants for a period of 2 or more years. 
6.  Other tools that encourage transit and bicycle use, or reduce personal vehicular traffic may be approved by the Development Director. 
(7)  Alternative Measure. The applicant may submit an alternative sustainable development measure for approval by the Development Director. The measure shall further a sustainability goal and shall not be considered standard practice for current developments. The measure shall be unrelated to any of the other measures defined in this Section. Based upon their review, the Development Director shall approve for the number of points to be awarded. Required documentation shall clearly illustrate that the measure furthers a sustainability goal. 
Figure 230-9 Sustainability Measures & Values 

 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 230-10—230-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - CIVIC DESIGN 

Section 230-25. - Application. 
The following standards shall apply to all zoning districts. When the requirements of these standards are more restrictive than other portions of the UDO, these standards shall prevail, unless expressly exempted. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 230-26. - Streetscape design. 
(a)  The dimensions of all landscape zones, sidewalk clear zones, and supplemental zones are governed by street designation to ensure consistent application of the streetscape requirements. 
Street Type Dimensions Table 

 
Footnote: 
1  Redevelopment of a single lot in a single-family residential zoning district is exempt from the landscape, sidewalk clear and supplemental zones. 
2  All lots in single-family residential zoning districts are exempt from the supplemental zone requirements. 
3  Where multi-use trails are required, a 10' minimum is required for the sidewalk clear zone. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements below, the City may provide developers with adopted typical streetscape designs for designated areas. Such design may include alternate dimensions, additional materials, details and specifications regarding street trees, street lights, litter containers, benches and similar sidewalk-related items. Conformity with the City Comprehensive Plan and any other plans adopted as addenda are also required where applicable. 
(c)  Properties with required landscape, sidewalk clear or supplemental zones that are located on private property shall provide a permanent easement arrangement to ensure public access to said zones. 
(d)  Where applicable, streetscape elements shall be installed in the right-of-way in accordance with the specifications in Section 350-54. 
(e)  Landscape zone requirements. 
(1)  All required street trees, streetlights, and pedestrian lights shall be provided in the landscape zone. Said zone shall be located immediately adjacent to the curb and shall be continuous. Along state routes, a minimum of 14' from the edge of travel lanes is required to meet GDOT standards for placement of street trees and lights in the landscape zone. 
(2)  The requirements of Section 320-20 Landscape Zone Planting Requirements shall apply to all street tree and other plantings in the landscape zone. 
(3)  Trees shall be located 40' on center. 
(4)  Pedestrian lights shall be located between every other street tree (80 feet on center). 
(5)  Street lights shall be located as required by the Development Department. 
(6)  Landscaping should be kept to no more than 36" tall for ground cover and limbed up to no lower than 6' above ground to provide clear, uninterrupted sight lines. 
(f)  Sidewalk clear zone requirements. 
(1)  Said zone shall be located immediately contiguous to the landscape zone and shall be continuous. Sidewalks meeting the standards of Section 230-26 shall be installed in sidewalk clear zones. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be unobstructed for a minimum height of eight feet. 
(3)  Sidewalks within the sidewalk clear zone shall be designed to meet the construction standards of Section 350-7, Sidewalk and Bikeway Construction Standards. 
(4)  Where newly constructed sidewalks abut narrower existing adjacent sidewalks, the newly constructed sidewalk shall provide an adequate transitional clear zone width for the purposes of providing a safe facilitation of pedestrian traffic flow between the adjacent sidewalks, as approved by the Development Director after review by the Public Works Director. 
(5)  All existing sidewalks shall be replaced in accordance with these provisions. 
(6)  Sidewalks shall be broom-finished concrete with 4" trowel edge along edge and joints. 
(g)  Supplemental Zone Requirements. 
(1)  Non-residential, multifamily, and mixed-use development supplemental zones shall be hardscaped. However, a maximum of 20 percent may be occupied by landscaping, planters, or other areas not accessible by pedestrians. 
a.  This zone shall be used for the following pedestrian amenities: benches, trash receptacles, pet stations, bicycle parking racks, outdoor dining, display of public art, other street furniture, or other similar elements. The supplemental zone shall be located on private property. 
1.  Façades shall be located immediately adjacent to the supplemental zone(s). 
2.  At a minimum, at least one bench, one trash, and one recycling receptacle shall be provided on each street frontage, unless a bench or receptacle is already provided within 500' on the same street frontage. 
3.  At least one additional pedestrian amenity shall be provided on each street frontage. 
4.  Adjacent ground floor uses must be visible, accessible, and oriented toward the supplemental zone. 
5.  The supplemental zone shall be no more than 24 inches higher than the adjacent sidewalk, unless existing topographical conditions render this requirement unreasonable, per approval of the Development Director. 
6.  Any authorized walls surrounding landscaped and grassed areas shall not exceed 24 inches, except retaining walls which shall not exceed a maximum height of 36 inches, unless existing topographical conditions render this requirement unreasonable, per approval of the Development Director. 
7.  Pedestrian amenities shall be connected to the public sidewalk with a public access easement. 
8.  Storage, utility rooms, restrooms, or other accessory service uses shall not be located adjacent to the supplemental one. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17; Ord. No. 748 , 3-20-18) 
Section 230-27. - Building architecture. 
(a)  All non-single-family residential Buildings. 
(1)  Exterior building materials, excluding architectural accents or metal split seam roofing, shall be primarily brick, glass, wood, stucco, or stone. 
a.  Brick, stone, textured concrete masonry, and cementitious fiberboard are acceptable exterior materials. Cementitious fiberboard lap siding shall only be permitted on buildings less than 3 stories. 
b.  Masonry shall "wrap" corners to avoid appearance of being "applied." 
(2)  Fenestration shall be provided for a minimum of 65 percent of the length of all building facades along boulevard, primary, secondary, and feeder street frontages and of 50 percent of all local street frontages, excluding places of worship and fire stations: 
a.  Beginning at a point not more than three feet above the sidewalk, to a height no less than ten feet above the sidewalk; 
b.  Beginning at the finished floor elevation to a height no less than ten feet above the finished floor elevation when the finished floor elevation is three or more feet above the sidewalk; or 
c.  Beginning at a point not more than sidewalk level, to a height no less than ten feet above the finished floor elevation when the finished floor elevation is below the sidewalk; 
d.  The length of facade without intervening fenestration or entryway shall not exceed 20 feet; 
e.  Fenestration shall not utilize painted glass, reflective glass or other similarly treated or opaque windows. Entrances may be counted towards fenestration requirements. 
(3)  When located on a lot with multiple frontages, each street-facing façade shall be treated architecturally as a primary façade as approved by the Development Director. 
(4)  Service entrances, utility closets and other similar features shall not be oriented towards a public street. 
(b)  All single-family residential Buildings. 
(1)  When located on a lot with multiple frontages, each street-facing façade shall be treated architecturally as a primary façade, as determined by the Development Director. When located on a corner lot where streets have different classifications, the primary façade shall be oriented toward the street with the higher classification. 
(2)  When located on a Storefront, Primary, Secondary of Feeder Street the following additional requirement shall apply: 
a.  Garage doors shall not be oriented toward the street or located on the street-facing facade; 
b.  All new single-family detached residential dwellings shall provide a covered front porch that is a minimum of 8 feet wide and 6 feet deep. All new single-family attached residential dwellings shall provide a covered porch that is a minimum of 6 feet wide and 4 feet deep. 
(c)  Proportion and scale of building facades. The following requirements shall apply to all newly constructed buildings over 20,000 s.f., other than single-family structures, but including multi-level parking structures: 
(1)  Building massing. All new development proposals shall incorporate means of reducing the apparent size and bulk of the building. Facades shall be broken up via offsets or recesses, both horizontally and vertically, in order to avoid creating a heavy or institutional appearance. The following methods for reducing the apparent size and mass of larger buildings shall be required. 
a.  Discontinuous building massing: Every building shall reduce its perceived height and bulk by dividing the building mass into smaller scale components. Building walls exceeding 100 continuous linear feet shall utilize offsets, such as projections, recesses, and changes in floor level, to add architectural interest and variety, and to relieve the negative visual effect of a simple long wall. 
b.  Variation in building silhouettes: Variation in the roofline of buildings and offsets in pitched roofs and gables shall be required. Parapets in building masses exceeding 100 continuous linear feet shall be varied in height and projection and shall use decorative elements such as crown moldings, dental, brick soldier courses, or similar detail. 
c.  The principal entry area of a building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. 
(d)  All building façades, with the exception of single-family residential, shall have a minimum height based on the street type(s), which the subject building fronts: 
(1)  Local, private and feeder streets: 12' 
(2)  Primary and secondary streets: 18' 
(3)  Boulevard streets: 24' 
(e)  All buildings, with the exception of single-family residential, shall have roofs surfaced with a heat reflective material. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Accessory mechanical systems and features. Accessory mechanical systems, including utility meters, boxes, HVAC units, and other similar equipment shall not be located between the building and a public street. Efforts shall be taken to locate accessory mechanical system features including utility meters, boxes and other similar equipment so as to not be visible from the public right-of-way. When this is not possible or satisfied, as determined by the Development Director, the following screening shall be required: 
(1)  Roof-mounted systems. Roof-mounted systems shall be screened with an opaque wall constructed of materials similar to the primary building. 
(2)  All other systems. Systems mounted on walls, ground, or elsewhere, shall be screened with an opaque wall constructed of materials similar to the primary building or sufficient landscaping to provide year-round screening. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17; Ord. No. 748 , 3-20-18; Ord. No. 749 , 3-20-18) 
Section 230-28. - Non-combustible materials. 
(a)  Building permits for multi-story buildings shall be restricted as follows: 
(1)  Except as provided below, all buildings three or more stories in height, excluding all single-family dwellings (attached or detached), shall be constructed with concrete and steel framing materials (Type I or Type II in accordance with the 2012 International Building Code). 
(2)  Mixed-use buildings with three or more stories that are constructed on sites following approved demolition of 20 or more multifamily dwelling units on the same property shall be permitted to use "podium" construction meeting the requirements of Section 510.2 of the 2012 International Building Code in which the basement and/or ground floor is of Type I-A construction and the stories above the ground floor are of Type V-A construction. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 230-29. - Storefront streets. 
(a)  Storefront streets are designated on the Streetscape and Gateways Map of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  All buildings that front storefront streets shall meet the following sidewalk level requirements: 
(1)  The first floor shall have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of 18 feet, unless a taller height is required by Subsection 230-27(c). 
(2)  Ground floor uses shall be limited to non-motor vehicle-related uses, including restaurants, sales and rental of goods, merchandise, or equipment establishments, banks and financial institutions, or offices. 
(3)  Motor vehicle-related uses and their accessory structures are prohibited. 
(4)  Drive-through facilities are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 230-30. - Open space. 
(a)  The following section states the requirements for the provision of open space listed in the space dimensions table, Section 230-1: 
(1)  Required yards, supplemental zones, sidewalk zones, and landscape zones that are constructed on private property may be counted towards this requirement. 
(2)  Open space may also include common amenities, front yards, planted buffers, parks, and other hardscaped elements, and similar features which are located on private property and owned and operated as common space, provided that no more than 25 percent of the required open space may consist of hardscape or paved materials, and the remaining percentage shall be grass or landscaped areas. 
(3)  A minimum of 50 percent of areas included in the minimum required open space shall be accessible to the public. 
(4)  Open space shall not include areas devoted to public or private vehicular access or parking, including required parking lot landscaping. 
(5)  Public access easements for open space are required. 
(b)  Water features, including stormwater management that are designed and fully landscaped as an amenity may be counted toward open space requirements. 
(c)  Open space implementation and maintenance. 
(1)  Implementation. All open space shall be fully implemented prior to occupancy and if not completed, a performance bond is required in accordance with Section 300-27. Maintenance bonds shall be issued in accordance with Section 300-27. 
(d)  Relocation of open space. Relocation of minimum open space requirements: At the option of the property owner, up to 50 percent of a development's required open space may be relocated to an off-site location provided: 
(1)  The Development Director has reviewed and approved the transfer request; 
(2)  The receiving parcel(s) is located within 1/4 mile of the donating property; 
(3)  The receiving parcel(s) contains the required amount of open space; 
(4)  All other standards of open space are met; and 
(5)  When the receiving parcel(s) is a designated open space site and not a newly created street, the following additional regulations shall apply: 
a.  The open space shall provide active or passive recreational amenities; 
b.  The open space shall be visible from public or private streets and sidewalks; 
c.  The open space shall provide for active use by the public and include amenities such as fountains, pedestrian furniture, public art or other similar elements; and 
d.  Open space on receiving parcel shall not be counted for more than one project. 
(e)  Open space density bonus: For every one square foot of additional approved open space provided in excess of the minimum open space requirements, an additional ten square feet of development shall be permitted beyond the maximum FAR. 
(f)  Fee in lieu is permitted in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If an existing park is within 1/4 mile of a project or a proposed park within 1/4 mile is scheduled for construction within one year of the issuance of a development permit, the minimum open space requirement for a development may be reduced by up to 50 percent, provided the distance shall be measured from the closest property lines of each subject property along the shortest path of travel for a pedestrian. 
(2)  Fee in lieu. 
a.  The fee in lieu shall be $250,000.00 per acre. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 230-31. - Outdoor lighting. 
(a)  Purpose. The regulations of this division are intended to: 
(1)  Permit reasonable uses of outdoor lighting for nighttime safety, utility, security, productivity, enjoyment and commerce; 
(2)  Curtail and reverse the degradation of the nighttime visual environment and the night sky; 
(3)  Preserve the dark night sky for astronomy; 
(4)  Minimize glare, obtrusive light and artificial sky glow by limiting outdoor lighting that is misdirected, excessive or unnecessary; 
(5)  Conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible; and 
(6)  Help protect the natural environment from the damaging effects of night lighting from human-made sources. 
(b)  Conformance with applicable regulations. All outdoor lighting devices must comply with the provisions of this section, the building code and the electrical code, required permits and inspections, as applicable. 
(c)  Prohibited lighting. The following are expressly prohibited: 
(1)  Aerial lasers; 
(2)  Searchlight-style lights; 
(3)  Light sources that exceed 200,000 lumens or intensity in any direction of 2,000,000 candelas or more; 
(4)  Mercury vapor lamps; 
(5)  Low-sodium vapor lamps; 
(6)  Visually exposed neon lighting; and 
(7)  LED light strips. 
(d)  Exempt lighting. The following luminaries and lighting systems are expressly exempt from the regulations of this division: 
(1)  Underwater lighting used for the illumination of swimming pools and fountains; 
(2)  Temporary holiday lighting; 
(3)  Lighting required and regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other authorized federal, state or local government agency; 
(4)  Emergency lighting used by police, fire, or medical personnel, or at their direction; 
(5)  All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly from the combustion of fossil fuels, such as kerosene and gasoline; 
(6)  Security lighting controlled and activated by a motion sensor device for a duration of ten minutes or less; 
(7)  Signage that conforms with the standards of Chapter 260. 
(e)  Regulations. 
(1)  Applicability. 
a.  The regulations of this section apply: 
1.  To all new land uses, new developments, and new buildings that require a permit; 
2.  Whenever non single-family existing land uses, developments or buildings are expanded by 25 percent or more in terms of additional dwelling units, parking spaces or gross floor area, in which case the entire property must be brought into conformance with these regulations; and 
3.  Whenever existing outdoor lighting constituting 60 percent or more of the permitted lumens for the parcel is modified or replaced, no matter the actual amount of lighting already on the site. 
b.  When non single-family existing developments or buildings are expanded by less than 25 percent in terms of additional dwelling units, parking spaces, or gross floor area and the expansion requires a permit, the applicant must submit a complete inventory and site plan detailing existing and any proposed new outdoor lighting. Any new lighting on the site must comply with the shielding and lamp type regulations of this section. 
(2)  General regulations. 
a.  Outdoor lighting fixtures must be full cutoff and placed so as to allow no light above the horizontal as measured at the luminaire, except as herein noted in this section (as in the case of period fixtures, cutoff fixtures may be used). 
b.  Outdoor lighting fixtures must be located, aimed or shielded to minimize glare and stray light trespassing across lot lines and into the public right-of-way. 
c.  Flood or spot lamps must be positioned no higher than 45 degrees above straight down (half-way between the vertical and the horizontal) when the source is visible from any off-site residential property or public roadway. 

 

 
d.  All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that the shielding is effective as described herein for fully shielded fixtures. 
e.  Lighting on sites consisting of multiple uses must conform to the standards of the respective uses. 
f.  Illumination levels are measured from any height and orientation of the measuring device at any location along the property line except the lighting of parking lots must be measured at grade with the meter sensor held horizontally at the surface. 
(3)  Specific uses and activities. This subsection establishes supplemental lighting regulations for specific types of uses and activities. All lighting not directly associated with the special use areas designated below must comply with all other applicable regulations of this article. 
a.  Outdoor sports, recreation fields and performance areas. Lighting of outdoor recreational facilities (public or private), such as, but not limited to, outdoor athletic fields, courts, tracks, special event or show areas must comply with the following regulations: 
1.  Facilities designed for municipal leagues, elementary to high school levels of play and training fields for recreational or social levels of play, college play, semi-professional, professional or national levels of play must utilize luminaries with minimal up light consistent with the illumination constraints of the design. Where fully shielded fixtures are not utilized, acceptable luminaries include only those that: 
(i)  Are provided with internal and/or external glare control louvers or lenses, and are installed so as to minimize up light and off-site light trespass and glare, and 
(ii)  All lighting installations must be designed to achieve the illuminance levels for the activity as recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA RP-6). 

 
E1 = Areas with intrinsically dark landscapes, such as national parks, areas of outstanding natural beauty, etc. 
E2 = Areas of low ambient brightness, including sensitive residential areas. 
E3 = Areas of medium ambient brightness, generally being urban residential areas. 
E4 = Areas of high ambient brightness, which would include dense urban areas with mixed residential and commercial use with high levels of nighttime activity. 
2.  All events must be scheduled so as to complete all activity no later than 10:30 p.m. Illumination of the playing field, court or track is permitted after the curfew only to conclude a scheduled event that was unable to conclude before the curfew due to unusual circumstances. Field lighting for these facilities must be turned off within 30 minutes of completion of the last event of the night. 
3.  All light poles must be set back a minimum 60 feet from any residential property line or right-of-way. 
b.  Service station canopies and parking garages. 
1.  All luminaries mounted on or recessed into the lower surface or service station canopies and parking structures must be fully shielded and utilize flat lenses. 
2.  The total light output of luminaries mounted on the lower surface, or recessed into the lower surface of the canopy, and any lighting within signage or illuminated panels over the pumps, may not exceed 50 foot-candles. The total light output of other illuminated areas of a service station may not exceed 15 foot-candles. 
3.  Illuminance levels for the interior of parking structures, where interior lighting is visible from outside the structure, must conform to IESNA recommendation RP-20. 
4.  Lights may not be mounted on the top or sides of a canopy, and the sides of the canopy may not be illuminated. 
c.  Security lighting. 
1.  Security lighting must be directed towards the targeted area. 
2.  Sensor activated lighting must be located in such a manner as to prevent direct glare and lighting into properties of others or into a public right-of-way, and the system must be designed and maintained so that lights are not activated by activity off of the subject property. 
d.  Pedestrian path lighting. Lighting posts for pedestrian path lighting may not exceed 16 feet in height from finished grade. 
e.  Architectural accent lighting. 
1.  Fixtures used to accent architectural features, materials, colors, style of buildings, landscaping, or art must be located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only on those features. Such fixtures must be aimed or shielded to minimize light spill into the dark night sky in conformance with the luminaire standards. 
2.  Lighting fixtures may not generate glare, or direct light beyond the façade onto a neighboring property, streets or into the night sky. 
f.  Temporary lighting permits. The development department may grant permits for temporary lighting if the total output from the luminaries does not exceed 50 foot-candles, subject to the following regulations: 
1.  The lighting may not remain for more than 30 days, except that permits for a major construction project may extend to completion. 
2.  The lighting must be designed in such a manner as to minimize light trespass and glare. 
3.  Temporary recreational lighting allowed by permit must be extinguished by 10:30 p.m. 
g.  Parking areas. 
1.  All lighting fixtures servicing parking lots must be directed downward and not towards buildings or other areas. 
2.  Parking lots must be illuminated to a minimum illumination level of 0.4 foot-candles at grade level, and the ratio of the average illumination to the minimum illumination may not exceed 4:1. 
3.  Light poles used in parking lots with 100 parking spaces or less may not exceed 20 feet in height. Light poles used in parking lots with more than 100 parking spaces may not exceed 35 feet in height. 
h.  Street lights. Unless street light fixtures are of a period or architecture style as approved by the public works department, all new, repaired or replaced fixtures must be full cutoff fixtures. 
(f)  Plans. 
(1)  Applicants for any permit for any single-family residential use required by any provision of the ordinances of the city involving outdoor lighting fixtures must submit evidence that the proposed work will comply with the outdoor lighting regulations of this division. 
a.  The submission must include the following information with the application for the required permit: 
1.  Description of all proposed outdoor illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors. The description may include, but is not limited to catalog cuts and illustrations by manufacturers. 
(2)  Applicants for any permit for any non-single-family use required by any provision of the ordinances of the city involving outdoor lighting fixtures must submit evidence that the proposed work will comply with the outdoor lighting regulations of this section. 
a.  The submission must include the following information with the application for the required permit: 
1.  Plans indicating the location on the premises of each outdoor illuminating device, both proposed and any already existing on the site. 
2.  Description of all proposed illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors. The description may include, but is not limited to catalog cuts and illustrations by manufacturers. 
3.  Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar, showing the angle of cut-off of light emissions. 
4.  Photometric plans must include the maximum and average light layout. 
b.  The above-required plans, descriptions, and data must be complete and accurate so that the development department is able to readily determine whether the proposal will comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 230-32—230-44. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 240. - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE 1. - PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED USES 

Section 240-1. - Table of permitted and prohibited uses. 
(a)  The following regulations shall apply to uses in all zoning districts. 
(1)  General use regulations. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except in conformity with the regulations of this Unified Development Ordinance (UDO). 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a.  The following table states the permitted principal and accessory uses authorized within each zoning district. Symbols used in the table have the following meanings: 
P = Permitted as a principal use; 
A = Permitted as an Accessory Use - See Section 240-7; 
S = Permitted subject to Supplemental Use Standards of Section 240-13; 
T = Permitted as a Temporary Use - See Section 240-14. 
b.  The Development Director is authorized to prepare a written interpretation whether a proposed use not specifically listed in this table is so similar in nature to a permitted use that it is also intended to be permitted in the same zoning district(s). Such determination by the Development Director may consider factors such as: 
1.  The common usage of two or more terms to describe the same land uses; 
2.  The similarity in the scale and intensity of the uses; 
3.  The similarity in the impacts of comparable uses in terms of traffic, noise, light, parking requirements, customers, hours of operation, impacts on the environment, and impacts on abutting properties. 
c.  Any use not listed in the table as permitted within a district, and not determined by the Development Director to be similar in nature to a listed use, is prohibited within that district. 
Permitted Use Table 

 
(3)  The following uses of land and buildings are incompatible with existing and future development within the City limits and are prohibited in all districts. In addition, neither the Development Director, City Manager, nor the Mayor and City Council shall have the authority to grant variances or special exceptions for these prohibited uses: 
a.  Meat packing, slaughtering, eviscerating and skinning; 
b.  Poultry killing, plucking and dressing; 
c.  Rendering of byproducts of slaughtering and killing animals or poultry; 
d.  Yards for the sale, transfer or temporary holding of livestock; 
e.  Use of equipment which causes off-site radio or television interference and interferes with airport operations; 
f.  Landfills and junkyards; 
g.  Outside storage on any property that is not customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or is not otherwise permitted by this section; 
h.  Adult Massage Establishment, see definition in Chapter 110 under "Adult entertainment establishment," this does not refer to a "Massage establishment" or "spa establishment," see definition in Chapter 110. 
i.  Those uses that emit obnoxious, injurious or offensive noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, gas fumes or odors or create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17; Ord. No. 748 , 3-20-18) 
Sections 240-2—240-6. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - ACCESSORY USE STANDARDS 

Section 240-7. - Accessory use standards. 
(a)  General accessory use provisions. Accessory uses shall be permitted as a subordinate use to the primary use existing on the site. Certain accessory uses shall be subject to the additional standards described in this section. Accessory uses shall be operated in a way that presents no nuisance to the surrounding properties or larger community. 
(1)  Accessory uses for commercial development shall include those normally appurtenant to such development, as provided for in other sections of this UDO. 
(2)  Any accessory use normally appurtenant to a permitted use shall be allowed provided that such use conforms to all performance standards set forth for that district. 
(3)  Such structures and uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal building to which they are accessory. 
(4)  In all zoning districts, no accessory use shall be permitted in public rights-of-way. 
(5)  Should these standards conflict with other standards provided in the UDO, the following design and development standards shall apply. 
(b)  Specific accessory use provisions. The following accessory use provisions are organized by major use category as presented in Section 240-1, Table of Permitted and Prohibited Uses. Permitted use table reference numbers are presented in brackets [#]. 
(1)  Single-Family detached, with an accessory dwelling [1.1.2]. 
a.  The owner of the property shall reside on the property in either the principal dwelling or the accessory dwelling. 
b.  The accessory dwelling shall be located within the primary dwelling (e.g., accessory apartment) or shall meet the locational and dimensional requirements for accessory structures. 
c.  Accessory dwellings shall be permitted only on lots that are a minimum of 8,000 square feet in size. 
d.  Only one accessory dwelling shall be allowed per lot. 
e.  An entrance that is separate from the main dwelling shall be provided for the accessory dwelling unit. 
f.  The property shall retain a single-family appearance from the street. 
g.  There shall be at least one off-street parking space for the accessory dwelling unit in addition to base off-street parking requirements for the principal use as provided in Chapter 250. 
h.  The size of the accessory dwelling unit may be no more than 50% of the living area of the principal dwelling unit or a maximum of 800 square feet, whichever is less. 
i.  The accessory dwelling shall be constructed with exterior materials, roof forms, and fenestration that is similar to that of the principal dwelling. 
j.  No business activity is permitted in the accessory dwelling unless it meets the requirements of a home occupation. 
(2)  Home occupations [1.4]. 
a.  It is the intent and purpose of this section to provide for certain types of restricted occupational uses. Such uses are restricted to those which: 
1.  Are incidental to the use of the premises as a residence; 
2.  Are compatible with residential uses; and 
3.  Do not detract from the residential character of the neighborhood. 
b.  Any building used for residential occupancy may conduct a home occupation use if: 
1.  The primary use of the unit is residential; 
2.  The following standards are complied with in full at all times: 
(i)  Such use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and only persons living in the dwelling unit shall be engaged and employed in such occupation, and the number of residents employed shall not exceed two; 
(ii)  No mechanical or electrical equipment is to be utilized except that which is necessarily, customarily, or ordinarily used for household or leisure purposes; 
(iii)  No outside operations, storage, or display of materials or products shall be visible from the right-of-way or from any adjacent property; 
(iv)  No accessory buildings shall be used in connection with the home occupation, unless the accessory building is used as an accessory dwelling unit; 
(v)  No alteration of the residential appearance of the premises occurs, including the creation of a separate entrance to the dwelling or utilization of an existing entrance exclusively for the business; 
(vi)  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation; 
(vii)  No commodity shall be stocked or sold on the premises to the general public; 
(viii)  Visitors, customers or deliveries shall not exceed that normally and reasonably occurring for a residence and shall, under no circumstance, exceed more than two business visitors an hour and eight a day and not more than two manufacturer or wholesaler direct deliveries of products or materials per week; 
(ix)  No on-street parking associated with the business shall be permitted; 
(x)  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the home occupation; 
(xi)  The home occupation shall be restricted to 25 percent of the dwelling and shall not exceed 200 square feet of floor area, whichever is less; and 
(xii)  There shall be no group instruction, assembly, or activity. 
(3)  Automatic teller machines (ATMs) [5.5]. 
a.  ATM facilities may be located as follows when not located on storefront streets: 
1.  As an accessory use with a drive-through service lane of a permitted bank. 
2.  As a freestanding accessory structure with a drive-through service lane located in the parking lot of a multi-tenant commercial or mixed-use building, 
3.  On the ground floor within a multi-story parking structure, provided that the entrance, exit and stacking lanes are separate from entrance and exit lanes of the parking structure; and 
4.  As a walk-up vending machine adjacent to a public or private sidewalk when permitted as an accessory use to a bank, office building or commercial/retail use. 
b.  On storefront streets, ATMs are permitted only when integrated into facades or when entirely internal to a building. 
c.  All ATM installations shall comply with all the following requirements: 
1.  A five-foot deep and four-foot wide privacy area shall be provided in front of the ATM. This would require an ATM to be set back in an alcove when located adjacent to a sidewalk. 
2.  At the time that the ATM is removed, the structure's facade shall have a finished appearance consistent with the existing structure and shall be subject to the approval of the Development Director. 
3.  Outdoor security lighting shall be required, subject to approval of the Development Director. 
4.  The ATM shall be designed to meet the requirements of the ADA. 
5.  A trash receptacle shall be located within 10 feet of the ATM. 
6.  Installation shall not reduce any required landscape or parking areas. Required trees must be located and species of trees chosen appropriately to allow security lighting to take precedence. 
7.  Stand-alone ATMs shall not be visible from the public right-of-way. 
8.  A maximum of two wall signs are permitted with a total aggregate sign surface area not to exceed 16 square feet. 
d.  Development standards for ATM facilities in parking lots or drive-through service facilities: 
1.  Maximum height: 12 feet, including any signage or canopy. 
2.  Minimum setback from right-of-way: 25 feet. 
3.  Located a minimum of 125 feet from the property line corner of the nearest street intersection. 
4.  ATMs are subject to the design requirements of Chapter 230 and the driveway and stacking space requirements of Chapter 250. 
(4)  Satellite dishes [5.24]. 
a.  Satellite dishes larger than 24 inches in diameter are prohibited from being installed in single-family residential districts. 
b.  No satellite dish may be placed in the front or street side yard of a single-family residential district. 
c.  If a satellite dish is installed in a front or side yard in any other district, the overall mounted height of the satellite dish and the mounting pole shall not exceed 6 feet in height above the ground and the entire assembly shall be screened by an aesthetically pleasing encasement or allowable vegetation. 
d.  Satellite dishes shall not be mounted on or attached to trees. 
(5)  Swimming pools [6.7]. 
a.  Swimming pools having a minimum depth of two feet shall: 
1.  Be located a minimum of ten feet from any property line, as measured from the edge of the water; and 
2.  Be completely enclosed with an adequate protective fence of not less than six feet in height with latching or similar secure closure. 
(6)  Building Material or other outdoor storage as an accessory use to sales [8.2.2]. 
a.  Outdoor storage shall be set back at least 15 ft. from any side or rear property lines. 
b.  Outdoor storage shall be screened by a solid fence as required to screen view from adjacent property and public streets. 
c.  Outside the fence, the perimeter of the outdoor storage area shall be landscaped to provide a year-round vegetative screen. 
d.  Outdoor storage shall not be located in a front or street side yard. 
(7)  Keeping of animals [9.2]. Small animals, domestic fowl, farm animals, and bees shall be subject to the following specific regulations and all regulations promulgated by the county health department: 
a.  Small animals. 
1.  Up to three (3) small animals are allowed (cats, dogs, rabbits, goats, etc.), accessory to each dwelling unit or business establishment. On lots of 20,000 sq. ft. or more, up to four (4) small animals are allowed. One additional small animal is permitted for each 5,000 sq. ft. of lot area in excess of 20,000 sq. ft. 
2.  In no case is more than one potbelly pig allowed. Potbelly pigs may be no greater than 22 inches in height at the shoulder or more than 150 pounds. 
3.  Goats may be kept if they are Miniature, Dwarf, or Pygmy. Goats must be dehorned, and male goats must be neutered. 
b.  Domestic fowl. 
1.  Up to eight domestic fowl may be kept on any lot in addition to the small animals allowed. On lots greater than 10,000 sq. ft. that include a community garden or an urban farm, one additional fowl is permitted for every 1,000 sq. ft. of lot area over 10,000 sq. ft. in community garden or urban farm use. 
2.  Roosters are not permitted. 
3.  Structures housing domestic fowl must be located at least 10 feet away from any residential structure on an adjacent lot. 
4.  Every person owning or keeping chickens or any other domestic fowl in the city is required to keep such fowl and chickens confined and not allow such chickens or fowl to enter any other property. 
c.  Farm animals. 
1.  Cows, horses, sheep, and other similar farm animals shall be limited to property having a minimum lot area of three acres. Any structure, pen, corral or other building appurtenant to the keeping and raising of farm animals must be located a minimum of 200 feet from any property line. Pigs, other than potbelly pigs, are not allowed. 
2.  On these lots, one farm animal for every 10,000 sq. ft. of lot area is permitted. 
d.  Bees. 
1.  Bees are permitted in accordance with the State Department of Agriculture. 
2.  Bees shall not be allowed on lots less than 10,000 sq. ft. in area. 
3.  No more than four hives, each with only one swarm, are allowed on a lot. 
4.  Hives may not be located within 20 feet of any lot line. 
5.  Hives may be located in any side or rear yard. 
(8)  Collection Containers [12.3]. 
a.  Are limited to one Collection Container per parcel. 
b.  Shall only be permitted on a parcel that also contains a principal building that contains at least one operating business. 
c.  Chamblee Police Department shall be furnished with a key to the locking mechanism. 
d.  Shall be located as follows: 
1.  Shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any other Collection Container. 
2.  Shall not be located within 100 feet of any residentially zoned parcel. 
3.  Shall not be located within 20 feet of any public right-of-way. 
4.  Shall only be permitted in the rear or side yard and shall be located at least 5 feet from any property line. 
5.  Shall not be permitted to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, nor be located in any public right-of-way, zoning buffer, front yard setback, street side yard setback, landscape zone, landscape island or strip, supplemental zone, parking space, fire lane or loading zone. 
6.  Shall not be located on a parcel abutting a Storefront Street as identified on the Streetscapes and Gateways Map located in the Appendix of this UDO. 
7.  Shall not be located between a building and a street. 
e.  Shall only be permitted to display signage on one side. 
f.  Shall be clearly visible from the principal building and be no more than ten feet from a continually operating light source of at least one foot-candle. 
g.  Collection Containers shall: 
1.  Be fabricated of durable and waterproof materials not including wood; 
2.  Be placed on a surface that is paved with durable cement; 
3.  Have a collection opening that has a tamper-resistant locking mechanism; 
4.  Be no more than 84 inches high, 60 inches wide and 50 inches deep; 
5.  Not be electrically or hydraulically powered or otherwise mechanized; 
6.  Have the following information conspicuously displayed on at least two-inch type visible from the front of the Collection Container: 
(i)  The name, address, 24-hour telephone number, and, if available, the Internet Web address, and email address of the owner and operator of the Collection Container and the parcel owner/owner agent; 
(ii)  Address and parcel number of the site; 
(iii)  Instructions on the process to register a complaint regarding the Collection Container to the City Code Enforcement Division; 
(iv)  The type of material that may be deposited; 
(v)  A notice stating that no material shall be left outside the Collection Container; 
(vi)  The pickup schedule for the Collection Container; 
(vii)  If owned by a nonprofit organization: 
A.  A statement describing the charitable cause that will benefit from the donations; and 
B.  The statement "This collection box is owned and operated by a nonprofit organization." 
(viii)  If owned by a for-profit entity: 
A.  "This donation is not tax deductible." and 
B.  "This collection box is owned and operated by a for-profit organization." 
h.  No collection overflow, litter, debris or dumped materials shall be present at any time; 
i.  Shall be maintained in good working order and be graffiti free at all times; 
j.  Shall be serviced at least once per week between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(9)  Solar energy system, accessory [12.5]. 
a.  Nonresidential. Active solar energy systems shall be allowed as an accessory limited use in all commercial or industrial zoning districts under the following standards: 
1.  Roof-mounted solar systems. In addition to the building setback, the collector surface and mounting devices for roof-mounted solar systems shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the building on which the system is mounted or built. 
(i)  Pitched roof-mounted solar systems. For all roof-mounted systems other than a flat roof the elevation must show the highest finished slope of the solar collector and the slope of the finished roof surface on which it is mounted. 
(ii)  Flat roof-mounted solar systems. For flat roof applications a drawing shall be submitted showing the distance to the roof edge and any parapets on the building. 
(iii)  The underlying zoning district maximum height for these systems shall be complied with. 
2.  Ground-mounted solar systems. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall meet the minimum zoning setback for the zoning district in which located, or 25 feet, whichever is strictest. The height of the structure(s) shall not be taller than 25 feet in height. 
3.  Visibility. Active solar systems shall be designed to blend into the architecture of the building or be screened from routine view from public rights-of-way or adjacent residentially-zoned property per the standards of Chapter 320. 
4.  Approved solar components. Electric solar system components must have a UL listing. 
5.  Plan approval required. All solar systems shall require a limited use approval by the Development Director. 
6.  Plan applications. Plan applications for solar systems shall be accompanied by to-scale horizontal and vertical (elevation) drawings. The drawings must show the location of the system on the building or on the property for a ground-mount system, including the property lines. 
7.  Plan approvals. Applications that meet the design requirements of this section shall be granted administrative approval by the Development Director. 
8.  Compliance with building code. All active solar systems shall meet approval of the building code. 
9.  Compliance with electric code. All photovoltaic systems shall comply with the National Electrical Code, current edition. 
10.  No grid-intertie photovoltaic system shall be installed until evidence has been given to the Development Director that the owner has been approved by the utility company to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement. 
b.  Residential. An application for a proposed solar collector/energy system located at a residence must meet the following standards as a limited accessory use: 
1.  All solar energy collectors, whether ground-mounted or mounted on an existing structure, shall meet the minimum accessory structure zoning setbacks for the zoning district in which located. The height of the structure shall not be taller than the maximum allowed height of a structure in the zoning district in which located. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 240-8—240-11. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - SUPPLEMENTAL USE STANDARDS 

Section 240-12. - Measurements. 
In interpreting the distance requirements between incompatible uses, measurements shall be made along a straight line drawn from the closest point of the property line of the site occupied by the subject use to closest point of the property line of the site occupied by the limiting use. This applies to the following use provisions found in Section 240-13: (1) Adult Entertainment, (2) Pawn Shops, (3) Personal Care Homes (group), (4) Kennels and animal hospitals, (5) Package Stores for the sales of alcoholic beverages, and (6) Tobacco products shop. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 240-13. - Supplemental use provisions. 
(a)  Should these standards conflict with other standards provided in the UDO, the following design and development standards shall apply. 
(b)  The following supplemental use provisions are organized by major use category as presented in Section 240-1, Table of Permitted and Prohibited Uses. Permitted use table reference numbers are presented in brackets [#]. 
(1)  Single-Family attached (townhouse) dwellings [1.1.3]. 
a.  Minimum width of lot: 20 ft. 
b.  Total FAR (max): per zoning district. 
c.  Maximum impervious surface: per zoning district and applied to the entire development. 
d.  Max building height: per zoning district. 
e.  Perimeter Yards: per zoning district. 
f.  Interior Yards: none except there must be a minimum of 5 feet between the end of a townhome unit and any internal adjacent sidewalk, alley or street. 
g.  Minimum lot size: 1,600 sq. ft. 
h.  See Subsection 230-27(e) for minimum front porch dimensions. 
i.  Each townhouse shall have a minimum of 200 sq. ft. of private yard space in either the front or rear, not including driveways and alleys. 
j.  For townhome developments exceeding eight (8) units, the minimum open space shall be 20 percent of gross acreage of the development. The open space shall be common to the development. 
k.  Minimum heated floor area of each Townhouse dwelling shall be 1,600 sq. ft. 
l.  All townhouse dwellings shall include a side-by-side two-car garage that is either under the unit or detached. Garage doors shall be setback at least 18 ft. from the adjacent sidewalk or alley so that a parked vehicle in the driveway will not obstruct the sidewalk or alley. 
m.  All townhouse buildings shall include a continuous sidewalk 5 ft. in width connecting front entrances of all dwellings. 
n.  No individual townhouse shall have vehicular access to an existing external street. A minimum of 50 percent of townhouse developments with more than 20 units shall have rear-entry garages. Alleys are permitted as the principal means of vehicular access for these units. See Section 350-3, Requirements for New Streets, for specifications of alleys. 
o.  At least 50 percent of townhouse facades that face public streets shall be constructed of brick, stone, or textured masonry units. 
p.  The front facades of townhouse units shall have architectural modulation and detail that includes features such as varied materials and wall planes, varied roof forms and roof lines, balconies, porches, bay windows, varied window sizes and shapes, shutters, entrance doors, sidelights, pilasters, varied garage door designs, and other features to provide visual interest. 
q.  If there are common areas, townhouse developments shall have a mandatory homeowner's association that shall own and maintain all common areas. 
(2)  Cottage cluster development [1.1.4]. 
a.  Cottage cluster development shall be designed to accommodate a minimum of four and a maximum of twelve detached dwelling units surrounding a shared internal courtyard. Each unit shall have a direct entrance from the courtyard. 
b.  Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 500 square feet of heated floor area and a maximum of 1,500 square feet. 
c.  The courtyards shall be a minimum of 5,000 square feet in size. A minimum of 70 percent of the courtyard shall consist of pervious material, of which a minimum of 50 percent of the courtyard shall be landscaped. Courtyards shall not be parked or driven upon except for emergency access and permitted temporary events. 
d.  A cottage development may be subdivided into individual lots that do not meet the minimum street frontage requirements and may be treated as fee-simple or condominium lots. 
(3)  Multifamily residences [1.2]. 
a.  "Four-sided architecture" is required, such that architectural features and materials shall be used in a consistent manner on all sides of the residential units. 
b.  Minimum heated and finished floor area for multifamily dwelling units shall be as follows: studio: 650 square feet; one bedroom: 790 square feet; two bedrooms: 1,000 square feet; three bedroom: 1,200 square feet per unit. 
c.  Multifamily and parking uses are not permitted on the ground floor within 100 feet of a public or private street. If such uses are located on the ground floor beyond 100 feet from a street, they shall be concealed and wrapped by other active uses positioned adjacent to the street. 
d.  Multifamily units shall provide a minimum of 60 percent of units with a balcony that may be occupied. 
e.  A minimum of 100 sq. ft. of open space per unit or 20 percent of the lot, whichever is greater, shall be provided in common areas at ground level or on rooftop gardens. 
f.  Surface parking lots shall be well lit and shall be limited to the rear or interior side yards. If visible from the street, they shall be screened with landscape materials as provided in Chapter 320, Article 3. 
g.  Buildings shall conform to the following design standards: 
1.  60 percent of exterior building materials on facades must be brick or stone. 
2.  Masonry should "wrap" corners to avoid appearance of being "applied." 
3.  Break-up facades, both vertically and horizontally, through building materials and offsets. 
4.  Vary roof lines. 
5.  Utilize a variety of building materials to create visual interest. 
6.  Building entrances should be well-marked and identifiable from the building form. 
7.  Common walls and common floors ceiling between units shall be constructed to meet a sound transmission coefficient (STC) rating of 50 or higher. 
(4)  Live-work units [1.2.2]. 
a.  Live-work units shall be owner-occupied mixed-use dwellings that are fire separated from adjacent units as attached dwellings such as townhouses or as part of a larger mixed-use building. 
b.  The maximum number of households in a single live-work unit shall be two. 
c.  If any, the minimum number of live-work units in a building is two. 
d.  Each live-work unit shall contain a minimum of 2,400 gross square feet of which the nonresidential component shall be no less than 500 sq. ft. and shall be on the ground floor oriented to the street. 
e.  The owner-proprietor of the business shall be the owner and occupant of the entire live-work unit, including the residential unit(s). 
f.  An occupational tax certificate shall be required for operation of a business. The business shall not be considered a home occupation. 
g.  The business use or activity shall not employ more than two persons other than the owner-proprietor. 
h.  Permitted business uses in a live-work unit shall be one of the following types: 
1.  Professional office, workshop, or design studio (art, architecture, engineering, jewelry design, real estate, marketing, counseling, etc.). 
2.  Professional services (travel agent, hairdresser, nail salon, tanning salon, music sales or instruction, tutoring, etc.). 
3.  Specialty retail sales (newsstand, books, jewelry, clothing, shoes, antiques, confections, coffee/tea, ice cream). 
4.  Other similar uses subject to approval of the City Manager. 
i.  The façade of the live-work unit shall meet the requirements of Section 230-27. 
(5)  Mixed-use development [1.3]. Mixed-use development shall facilitate a live-work-play environment, minimize driving between uses, and promote walkability. 
a.  Mixed-use developments shall comply with the supplemental regulations for each applicable use within the development. 
b.  The following standards apply to residential portions of the building: 
1.  Residential portions of the building shall have at least two entrances/exit ways to the ground floor that are separate from the entrances/exit ways used by occupants of nonresidential portions of the building. 
2.  Primary entrance for the residential portion of the building shall be clearly visible from the street and shall face the street. 
(6)  Convertible Space [1.3.2]. 
a.  Convertible space may be substituted for not more than 50 percent of the nonresidential use otherwise required in mixed-use buildings. 
b.  Such convertible space shall be oriented toward the street. 
(7)  Group residential facility [1.5.1]. 
a.  Each group residential facility must obtain all license(s) and/or permit(s) required by the State of Georgia in order to operate. Each facility licensed and/or permitted by the State of Georgia must display its State-issued license(s) and/or permit(s) in plain view visible from the front doorway of the facility. 
b.  Each group residential facility must obtain all necessary permits and inspections before a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the City. Certification evidencing satisfactory inspections must be displayed in plain view visible from the front doorway of the facility. 
(8)  Personal care homes [1.5.2]. 
a.  General requirements. 
1.  Each personal care home must obtain all license(s) and/or permit(s) required by the State of Georgia in order to operate. Each personal care home licensed and/or permitted by the State of Georgia must display its State-issued license(s) and/or permit(s) in plain view visible from the front doorway of the facility. 
2.  Each personal care home licensed and/or permitted by the State of Georgia must obtain a business occupation tax certificate as required by Chapter 22 (hereinafter referred to as a "business license") from the City before beginning to operate. Each personal care home must display its City-issued business license in plain view visible from the front doorway of the facility. 
3.  Each personal care home must obtain all necessary permits and inspections before either a certificate of occupancy or business license may be issued by the City. Certification evidencing satisfactory inspections must be displayed in plain view visible from the front doorway of the facility. 
4.  For all building permitting procedures, personal care homes will be considered commercial uses. 
b.  Personal care home, group. 
1.  No group personal care home located in any residential NR zoning district may be operated within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other group personal care home. Distances shall be measured as provided in Section 240-12. 
2.  If owned by a corporation, partnership, Limited Liability Company or any entity other than a natural person, the administrator identified in the state license application must reside in the group personal care home. If owned by an individual, the individual owner must reside in the group personal care home. 
(9)  Child and personal care uses (including family daycare homes, group day care home, and child care learning centers) [1.5.3]. Family day care home, group day care home, and child learning centers shall meet all applicable state requirements and shall receive all necessary county board of health and state fire marshal approvals prior to issuance of a permit for construction and operation. 
(10)  Extended-stay motels/hotels [1.7.4]. 
a.  Regulations. 
1.  Extended-stay motels/hotels are limited to no more than 25 guest rooms per acre; 
2.  Each guest unit must contain a minimum square footage per unit of 300 square feet; 
3.  Extended-stay hotels/motels shall not be more than four stories in height; 
4.  Extended-stay hotels/motels must be constructed on a tract of land containing at least two acres; 
5.  Extended-stay hotels/motels must contain an enclosed, heated and air conditioned laundry space containing a minimum of three clothes washers and three clothes dryers for the use of guests; 
6.  Extended-stay hotels/motels must provide a minimum of 1,000 square feet for recreational use by guests. In computing the 1,000 square feet requirement, swimming pools, fitness or recreation centers and other recreational facilities may be used in determining the square footage required by this subsection; 
7.  Management must be on the property 24 hours a day, seven days a week; 
8.  Daily maid service must be included in the standard room rate; and 
9.  Parking areas must have security fencing and lighting in compliance with the Outdoor Lighting Ordinance. 
b.  Change of location or name. 
1.  No applicant shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an extended-stay motel/hotel under any name other than their name and the name of the business as specified on the occupation tax certificate. 
2.  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an extended-stay motel/hotel is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
3.  There is established an administrative fee to apply for a change of name for an extended-stay motel. 
(11)  Sales or rental establishments with drive-through facilities [2.3], Sales or rental establishments with drive-through facilities [2.6], and Restaurants with drive-through facilities [3.5]. 
a.  Such uses are not permitted on storefront streets. 
b.  Applicants for drive-through facilities shall submit a plan demonstrating the adequacy of entrance and exit facilities, stacking spaces adjacent to service facilities, provision for circulation, and layout of parking areas as a part of the initial permitting phase. 
c.  The Development Department may prohibit left-turn movements entering or leaving such establishment, may limit hours when such movements may be made, may require construction of deceleration lanes adjacent to entrances, and may make such other requirements as are reasonably necessary to assure safety to pedestrians and motorists and to avoid inconvenience and traffic congestion. Such requirements shall be determined after review of a traffic study submitted by the applicant, which is a required submittal for establishing such a use. 
d.  Stacking spaces shall comply with Section 250-8. 
e.  Drive-through facilities shall not be located between a building and the street. 
f.  Drive-through service windows shall not be visible from any public right-of-way. 
(12)  Convenient cash business [2.6]. 
a.  Convenient cash businesses are allowed only on lots with frontage on a Boulevard street, as identified in the Streetscape and Gateway Map in the appendix. 
b.  Convenient cash businesses may not be located within 1,000 feet of an existing pawn shop or convenient cash business. Distances shall be measured as provided in Section 240-12. 
(13)  Corner commercial [2.7]. 
a.  Corner commercial shall be limited to the Neighborhood Infill (NR-3) zoning district and located on a parcel that is not less than 15,000 sq. ft. and not more than 1 acre in size at the intersection of a feeder street with another feeder street or local street. The following uses are permitted within a corner commercial site: 
1.  Barber and beauty shops and other similar operations. 
2.  Bed and Breakfast Inn. 
3.  Bookstore. 
4.  Child Day Care. 
5.  Clinics, including medical, dental, chiropractic, osteopathic, and similar operations. 
6.  Convenience store (no gasoline sales). 
7.  Coffee shop. 
8.  Laundry and dry cleaning. 
9.  Fitness center. 
10.  Food store and grocery. 
11.  Growler store. 
12.  Hardware store. 
13.  Ice cream parlor. 
14.  Newsstand. 
15.  Pet grooming (no overnight boarding). 
16.  Restaurant (no drive-through). 
17.  Restaurant with outdoor dining. 
b.  The property shall be designed in a manner consistent with UDO Design Guidelines Addendum 1.0, Figure 4.3. 
c.  Outside dining is permitted for an area not greater than 50 percent of the indoor seating area and shall be included in the minimum parking requirements. 
d.  Corner commercial properties that abut single-family property shall provide a 15 ft. vegetated buffer and 6 ft. tall solid fence along the property line abutting the residential property as provided in Section 320-12. 
(14)  Drive-in theater [2.8]. 
a.  Applicants for drive-through facilities shall submit a plan demonstrating the adequacy of entrance and exit facilities, stacking spaces adjacent to service facilities, provision for circulation, and layout of parking areas as a part of the initial permitting phase. 
b.  The Development Department may prohibit left-turn movements entering or leaving such establishment, may limit hours when such movements may be made, may require construction of deceleration lanes adjacent to entrances, and may make such other requirements as are reasonably necessary to assure safety to pedestrians and motorists and to avoid inconvenience and traffic congestion. Such requirements shall be determined after review of a traffic study submitted by the applicant. 
c.  Stacking spaces shall comply with Section 250-8. 
d.  Drive-in facilities shall not be located between a building and the street. 
(15)  Package stores for the sale of alcoholic beverages [2.18]. See Chamblee Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6 - Alcoholic beverages, Article IV, Retail Package Sales of Distilled Spirits. 
(16)  Pawn shops [2.20]. 
a.  Pawn shops are allowed only on lots with frontage on a Boulevard street, as identified in the Streetscape and Gateway Map in the City Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  Pawn shops may not be located within 1,000 feet of an existing pawn shop or convenient cash business. Distances shall be measured as provided in Section 240-12. 
(17)  Sporting goods retail with accessory indoor shooting ranges [2.25]. Under no circumstances shall a shooting range be permitted as a principal use. Sporting goods retail establishments with accessory indoor shooting ranges shall comply with the following provisions: 
a.  Buildings containing shooting ranges shall have walls, ceilings, and floors that are impenetrable to the bullets of the firearms being used within it, and shall provide an absorption system for wall, ceiling and trap for bulletproofing and lead containment. Provisions shall also be made to stop glancing bullets or particles of bullets at the sides of the target area. 
b.  Absorption systems shall be constructed of rubberized media such that a majority of captured projectiles remains intact. 
c.  A ventilation system shall be installed and maintained within the range that complies with the standards and requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency (the "EPA"). 
d.  Buildings containing ranges shall comply with all requirements of the National Association of Shooting Ranges (NASR) and the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA). 
e.  All indoor shooting ranges shall be of such construction whereby the sound from the discharge of any firearm and the impact of any projectile shall not exceed the sound level limitations as set forth in Chapter 310, Article 4, "Noise" of this UDO. 
f.  Fifty percent or more of the overall square footage of a structure containing shooting range facilities shall be used for the retail sale of sporting goods. 
g.  Residential uses shall not be permitted on the same site as a retail sporting goods establishment with an accessory indoor shooting range. 
h.  No piece of any projectile or target shall leave the building because of the activities taking place therein. 
i.  All indoor shooting ranges shall comply with all local, state and/or federal regulations related to indoor shooting ranges. 
j.  No firearms other than handguns, shotguns or rifles with a bore of 0.50 caliber or less shall be discharged on premises containing a shooting range. 
k.  There shall be posted conspicuously inside any building containing a shooting range a sign stating the rules and regulations of the range. 
(18)  Tobacco products shop [2.27]. 
a.  No tobacco products shop, including sale of e-cigarettes, shall be located within 1/2 mile of another tobacco products shop. Distances shall be measured as provided in Section 240-12. 
b.  In the VC districts, tobacco products shops shall not exceed a floor area greater than 2,500 square feet. 
(19)  Fireworks Sales [2.31]. 
a.  Outdoor sales of fireworks shall be limited to properties with an occupational tax certificate for indoor sales of fireworks. 
b.  Outdoor sales shall be limited to 400 s.f. of the lot and shall be limited to 30 days in a calendar year. 
c.  Required parking shall not be occupied for the outdoor sales of fireworks. 
(20)  Restaurants with outdoor dining [3.2]. Outdoor dining for restaurant service is permitted subject to the following standards: 
a.  No outdoor seating shall be used for calculating seating requirements pertaining to the location of, applications for, or issuance of a liquor license for any establishment nor shall the additional seats be used to claim any exemption from any other requirement of any county or state codes or ordinances. 
b.  Outdoor dining abutting a public sidewalk shall be subject to the following additional development standards: 
1.  Outdoor dining areas may not conflict with sidewalk clear zones. They may be counted toward the required supplemental zone. When located adjacent to a sidewalk clear zone, the outdoor dining area shall be clearly delineated. 
2.  A minimum setback of at least 2 feet from the curb line shall be provided adjacent to on-street parking spaces in order to maintain adequate space for pedestrian access to motor vehicles. 
3.  White string lighting may be permitted during operating hours. 
4.  Outdoor entertainment shall not be amplified and shall cease at 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and at 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday. 
(21)  Brew pubs [3.4]. Brewing activities shall be: 
a.  Accessory to sales and consumption of food and beverages on-premises. 
b.  Shall be located in a wholly enclosed building. 
c.  Production space shall be limited subject to state law. 
d.  No outdoor equipment or outdoor storage is permitted. 
(22)  Restaurants with drive-through facilities [3.5]. See 240-12(b)(11) Sales or rental establishments with drive-through facilities [2.3]. 
(23)  Restaurant Providing Hookah [3.6]. 
a.  Indoor seating only. 
b.  Minimum 2,500 sq. ft. of floor area required for customer seating. 
c.  See International Building Code for mechanical ventilation requirements. Sprinklers may be required by the Fire Marshal. 
(24)  Automobile dealerships [4.1]. The following design standards shall apply to automobile dealerships: 
a.  Land uses within the project shall be clearly marked, separated and isolated from each other: 
1.  Customer parking (sales) from employee parking and service areas; 
2.  Service areas from sales areas; 
3.  Car display areas from all other areas; and 
4.  Auto inventory lot areas. 
b.  Auto dealerships on parcels larger than 3 acres may park up to 6 display vehicles in the front yard, but not closer than 20 feet from the right-of-way. 
c.  Service and storage areas shall not front or maintain a dominant position on the site as viewed from the public rights-of-way. 
d.  All storage/service areas shall be screened from all public rights-of-way and any abutting noncommercial properties with a vegetative screen as per the buffer landscape and tree guidelines. 
e.  If a car wash is provided as an accessory use to an automobile dealership, the supplemental regulations for car washes apply. 
(25)  Automotive wash services (Car Wash), as a principal or accessory use [4.5]. 
a.  Car washes, where permitted as a principal use, shall provide a paved area located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting service. Said space shall be adequate in size to accommodate the number of vehicles equal to one-third of the practical hourly capacity of the washing facilities. 
b.  Outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment or materials shall not be permitted. 
c.  No permit shall be issued for any drive-through car wash where customers are served in their automobiles without approval of the Development Department as to the adequacy of entrance and exit facilities, reservoir spaces adjacent to service facilities, provision for circulation, and layout of parking areas. 
d.  The Development Department may prohibit left-turn movements entering or leaving such establishment, may limit hours when such movements may be made, may require construction of deceleration lanes adjacent to entrances, and may make such other requirements as are reasonably necessary to assure safety to pedestrians and motorists and to avoid inconvenience and traffic congestion. Such requirements shall be determined after review of a traffic study submitted by the applicant. 
e.  Stacking spaces shall comply with Section 250-8. 
f.  Drive-through facilities shall not be located between a building and the street. 
g.  Commercial Car Wash Water Recycling Requirement. 
1.  All new commercial conveyor car washes, permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011 must install operational recycled water systems regardless of the water source. A minimum of 50% of water utilized will be recycled. 
2.  The provisions of this ordinance do not apply to conveyor commercial car washes that were permitted or constructed before January 1, 2011. 
3.  The provisions of this ordinance do not apply to self-service car washes or in-bay car washes. 
(26)  Automobile rental establishments [4.7]. 
a.  Automobile rental establishments shall park all automobiles for lease in marked spaces that are separate and do not occupy required parking. 
b.  Accessory car wash and service areas shall be conducted entirely within enclosed structures. 
c.  If a car wash is provided as an accessory use to an automobile rental establishment, the supplemental regulations for car washes apply. 
(27)  Gasoline stations with convenience stores [4.9]. 
a.  Gasoline fuel dispenser structures and associated vehicular services such as air pumps, vacuums, and other accessory uses shall not be located between a building and the street. 
b.  If a car wash is provided as an accessory use to gasoline sales, the supplemental regulations for car washes apply. 
(28)  Bus stop shelters [5.8]. Bus stop shelters may be constructed and maintained in any district as permitted in Section 240-1, Permitted Use Table. Bus stop shelters shall meet the standards listed below: 
a.  Bus stop shelters may be located within any street right-of-way or within the required setback of property, which abuts a street, and within the supplemental zones, but shall not be located so that they might obstruct the vision of drivers on the street as regulated in City Code. 
b.  A schematic plan shall be submitted and approved by the Development Director for the construction of a bus shelter. The plan must include the following information: 
1.  The location of the proposed shelter relative to street, property, and setback lines; 
2.  The size and design of the shelter, including all four (4) elevations, building materials, and any public convenience or safety features such as a telephone, lighting, heating, or trash containers. 
c.  Bus shelters are required to provide a trash receptacle and a bench. 
d.  Signage shall be limited to 25 square feet. 
(29)  Bus station [5.11]. 
a.  No motor carrier may remain on the premises for more than one hour at a time, except under extraordinary circumstances, such as inclement weather or mechanical failure. 
b.  All motor carriers located on the station property shall require the driver or chauffeur to be actually present and in charge. 
c.  Ticket sales may occur online or in-person; however, patrons shall be provided the opportunity to purchase tickets in-person at the bus station. 
d.  An indoor area shall be available for use by patrons for waiting and purchasing tickets. This area is required to secure an occupational tax certificate and shall be included in a multi-tenant or stand-alone building. 
e.  Bus loading area shall be located entirely on private property. 
f.  Loading or storage shall not occupy required parking or loading spaces on the site. 
g.  Operations of the bus station shall not interfere with the circulation of any other uses on site. 
h.  No overnight parking of personal vehicles shall be permitted. 
(30)  Massage establishments [5.20]. See City of Chamblee Code of Ordinances, Chapter 22, Article VIII, "Massage and Spa Establishments" for applicable regulations. 
(31)  Tattoo establishments [5.26]. 
a.  Clients or business-related visitors shall be by appointment only and scheduled only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
b.  There shall be a minimum separation distance of 400 feet between tattoo establishments. Distances shall be measured as provided in Section 240-12. 
c.  Tattoo parlors shall be separated by at least five hundred (500) feet from any residential district, existing residential use, religious institution use, day care use, public park or recreation facility, or school. Distances shall be measured as provided in Section 240-12. 
d.  All federal, state and local regulations for tattoo establishments shall be met. 
(32)  Spa establishment [5.28]. See City of Chamblee Code of Ordinances, Chapter 22, Article VIII, "Massage and Spa Establishments" for applicable regulations. 
(33)  Adult entertainment establishments [6.1]. Adult bookstores, adult movie theaters, adult cabarets, and other adult entertainment establishments are subject to the following locational requirements in all districts in which they are permitted: 
a.  Shall meet all requirements set forth by the City Code regulating Adult Entertainment Establishments in Chapter 22, Article VI. 
b.  No adult entertainment facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other adult entertainment establishment, package store, or any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential use or purpose, any public park, any public or private school, any child care home or child care institution, any public library, or any place of worship. Distances shall be measured as provided in Section 240-12. Distances shall be measured as provided in Section 240-12. 
(34)  Subdivision recreation centers (private) [6.8]. Renovation of existing swim and tennis clubs built prior to 2006 shall be exempt from the following provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance: 
a.  Section 230-26, Street Types Dimension Table. 
b.  Subsection 250-7(a)(1), Parking spaces. 
c.  Section 320-20, Landscape strip planting requirements. 
d.  Section 320-21, Off-street surface parking lot planting requirements. 
e.  New subdivision recreation centers (private) shall meet all requirements of the UDO. 
(35)  Craft brewery [7.7]. When located in the CC, CVC, TOD, MUBC Districts, the following supplemental regulations shall apply: 
a.  Shall be a maximum of 20,000 square feet. 
b.  No outdoor speaker systems shall be permitted. 
c.  Production shall be in a wholly enclosed building. 
d.  No outdoor equipment or outdoor storage is permitted. 
(36)  Reserved. 
(37)  Craft distillery [7.8]. When located in the CC, CVC, TOD, MUBC Districts, the following supplemental regulations shall apply: 
a.  Shall be a maximum of 20,000 square feet. 
b.  No outdoor speaker systems shall be permitted. 
c.  Production shall be in a wholly enclosed building. 
d.  No outdoor equipment or outdoor storage shall be permitted. 
(38)  Dry cleaning plants [7.9]. 
a.  Dry cleaning plants using systems which make use of solvents rated at above 40 according to the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. Standard of Classification known as class I systems shall be prohibited. 
b.  Dry cleaning plants which make use of solvents rated at more than five but less than 40 according to the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. Standard of Classification, known as class II and III systems, shall not be established in buildings with other occupancy and shall only be established in buildings which shall be set back not less than 20 feet from any side or rear property line and another building. 
c.  The applicant for such a plant shall certify in writing and in the required plan that all the above conditions shall be met. 
d.  Such dry cleaning plant shall comply with all of the requirements of the City, DeKalb County, and state fire prevention codes. 
e.  Such plant shall be designed to operate in a manner that will not emit smoke, odor, or objectionable waste materials and which will not produce noise that will carry beyond the walls of the building occupied by such plant. 
(39)  Innovator space [7.17]. 
a.  When located in the VC, CC, CVC, and TOD zoning districts the following standards apply: 
1.  The maximum floor area in a building that may be used for innovator space shall be 10,000 square feet. 
2.  Activities related to innovator space shall take place within an enclosed building and outdoor storage of materials, inventory, equipment, commercial vehicles or equipment is prohibited. 
3.  Activities related to innovator space shall not result in emissions of noise, smoke, fumes, heat, or odors that leave the innovator space. 
(40)  Parking structures, multi-story [8.1]. 
a.  Multi-story parking structures shall meet the standards of Section 230-27 concerning proportion and scale of building facades. 
b.  Above ground decks of multi-level parking structures shall not face public streets. Structures shall be screened from view by "liner buildings" providing pedestrian-oriented activities such as retail or office at least 20 feet in depth that are continuous along the ground floor except for driveway entrances or completely enclosed by architectural facades that provide materials and design elements comparable to occupied buildings with external openings having proportions similar to those of upper floors of occupied buildings. 
c.  External openings shall be screened with decorative elements such as metal grill-work, brick screens, or louvers. 
d.  Facades of all multi-story parking structures shall conceal automobiles from visibility from any public right-of-way or private drive or street that is open to the public. 
e.  Facades of all multi-story parking structures shall have the appearance of a horizontal-storied building. 
f.  Above ground decks of parking structures that have a total length or width of 250 feet or more along a public street shall provide at least one lighted and signed 5-foot-wide pedestrian entrance and walkway passing completely through the parking structure connecting with buildings or other sidewalks leading to adjacent buildings or to the surrounding streets. 
g.  The roof level of multi-story parking structures open to the sky shall provide adequate shade cover for a minimum of 40 percent of the upper surface. 
h.  Multi-story parking structures located on storefront streets shall also meet the requirements of Section 230-29. 
(41)  Self-storage facilities [8.2.5]. Self-storage facilities shall meet the following standards of design and development: 
a.  No individual storage space shall be larger than 600 sq. ft. 
b.  Storing hazardous or toxic materials is prohibited. 
c.  Storage shall be limited to personal property of households and small businesses. 
d.  No space may be used for residential occupancy, business sales or operation, storage of commercial or industrial inventory or raw materials, and no space may allow workspace or operation of machinery. 
e.  The facility shall consist of a single building that is a minimum of three stories in height. 
f.  Exterior wall material shall not include metal except for soffits, mullions, grills, and minor trim. 
g.  No outdoor storage is allowed. 
h.  Up to 15 percent of floor area may be used for administrative offices and related product sales. 
i.  Self-storage facilities must provide 24-hour security or camera surveillance. 
j.  A minimum of 75 percent of the street frontage of the self-storage facility shall consist of leased uses that shall be limited to retail sales, offices, commercial services, or restaurant uses, not including drive-through services, nor directly related to the sales and operations of the self-storage facility. 
k.  All self-storage facilities shall be climate-controlled. 
l.  All self-storage units shall be accessed from the interior of the building. 
(42)  Boarding and breeding kennels, and animal hospitals with outdoor boarding of animals [9.1]. 
a.  Kennels and animal hospitals, where permitted as a principal use, shall locate all structures, and elements used for housing animals, at least 200 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
b.  Outdoor kennels or runs must be at least 300 feet from the nearest property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(43)  Veterinarian, including animal hospitals, veterinary clinics with no outdoor boarding of animals, and county animal control shelter [9.3]. 
a.  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics shall be located at least 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
b.  Outdoor kennels or runs are prohibited. 
(44)  Cemetery [10.1]. Private and public cemeteries shall comply with all provisions of state law. In addition: 
a.  Any new private cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than 10 acres. 
b.  The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector or larger streets in the vicinity of such site. In addition, such site shall have direct access to a street classified as a feeder, primary, secondary or boulevard by way of an access way not less than 20 feet wide. 
c.  Any new cemetery shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than 4 feet in height. 
d.  All structures shall be set back no less than 25 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
e.  All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 25 feet from any property line or local street right-of-way lines and not less than 50 feet from the right-of-way line of any street designated as a boulevard, primary, secondary, feeder or freeway. 
f.  The entire cemetery property shall be landscaped and maintained. 
g.  Prior to approval of the request for the location of a new cemetery, a site plan and perpetual care plan must be submitted to the Development Department. 
(45)  Crematorium [10.2]. 
a.  Any structure containing a crematory shall be located at least 200 feet from the property line of any property zoned and/or used for residential use. This 200-foot limitation shall not apply if the structure containing the crematory is located on or immediately adjacent to property containing a cemetery. 
b.  Prior to the issuance/renewal of a business license for a crematorium, the applicant shall provide to the City Clerk or his/her designee a copy of the applicant's current and valid state license and written documents showing that the owner or operator of the crematory is licensed, certified, and operating in accordance with all requirements imposed by state law or by regulation of the state, including, but not limited to, the requirements imposed by O.C.G.A. § 43-18-1 et seq., and Ga. Comp. R. and Regs. R. 250-1-.01 through R. 250-7-.03, as such laws and regulations currently exist and as they may be amended hereafter. State licensure and certification is not currently required for crematories used solely for the cremation of animal bodies, but if so required in the future, prior to the issuance/renewal of a business license for a crematory used solely for the cremation of animal bodies, the applicant shall provide to the finance director or his/her designee a copy of the applicant's current and valid state license and written documents showing that the owner or operator of such crematory is licensed, certified, and operating in accordance with all requirements imposed by state law or by regulation of the state. 
c.  Prior to the issuance/renewal of a business license for a crematory, the applicant shall provide to the City Clerk or his/her designee, a copy of the applicant's annual maintenance contract with the manufacturer of the crematory, showing that the crematorium is being adequately and consistently maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. 
(46)  Public and private schools offering general education courses (including associated grounds and athletic and other facilities) [11.1.1]. and Places of Worship and places of assembly (including associated residential structures for religious personnel, and associated buildings) [11.4]. 
a.  When located in NR-1, NR-2 or NR-3 districts the following standards shall apply: 
1.  Property shall have a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a street classified as a feeder, secondary, primary, or boulevard on the Streetscapes and Gateways Map. 
2.  Front yard setback shall be a minimum of 40 ft. 
3.  Parking lots shall not be located within 20 feet of any property line. 
4.  Provide a continuous landscaped buffer at least 30 feet wide along all side or rear property lines adjacent to NR-1, NR-2 or NR-3 zoned property, except for perpendicular crossings of driveways or utility lines. 
5.  Maximum building height shall be 50 ft. 
6.  Accessory uses shall be limited to the following: 
(i)  Parking as required in Chapter 250, Article 1. 
(ii)  Classrooms. 
(iii)  Library. 
(iv)  Assembly hall and kitchen for social and educational gatherings and meals. 
(v)  Gymnasium. 
(vi)  Playground. 
(vii)  Storage building. 
(viii)  Cemetery. 
(ix)  Nonprofit adult day care center, after school care, or pre-kindergarten (Pre-K). 
(x)  One dwelling unit. 
(xi)  Outdoor recreation, provided that the property contains at least 5 acres, fields do not provide outdoor lights, and recreational activity is limited to 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(47)  Communications facilities, including cellular tower [12.2]. See Chamblee Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18 - Buildings and Building Regulations, Article V, Standards for Telecommunications Antennae and Towers. 
(48)  Solar energy systems, principal [12.6]. Principal solar energy systems (SES) shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  Permitting. No principal SES shall be constructed without issuance of a building permit except for a repair or modification of an existing SES that does not increase the spatial coverage of the SES by more than ten percent and does not encroach on any required building height or setback limits of the applicable zoning district. 
b.  UL-approved SES electric components. Electric components shall have an Underwriters Laboratory listing. 
c.  Height. Principal solar energy systems shall not exceed 20 feet in height when oriented at maximum tilt. Height of ground- or pole-mounted SES shall be computed separately for each unit or structure except power transmission poles or towers. 
d.  Setbacks. Ground-mounted or pole-mounted principal SES and supportive buildings and structures except electric transmission poles shall provide a minimum setback of 30 feet from all property lines. 
e.  Buffers. All principal SES solar collection units and supportive buildings and structures except electric transmission poles shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way and abutting properties by a 25-foot wide vegetative buffer that is continuous around the perimeter of the property except for perpendicular crossings of approved driveways and utilities. The vegetative buffer shall provide a visually opaque screen not less than 20 feet in height at maturity. Trees planted in the buffer shall be credited towards the tree planting requirements of Chapter 320. 
f.  Security. 
1.  The perimeter of the site of a principal SES shall be secured by an eight-foot tall security fence or wall that is constructed on the inside boundary of the required 25-foot buffer. Driveway entrances shall be gated. 
2.  The operator must provide the City Police Department with a 24-hour contact responsible for operations. 
g.  Lighting. Lighting of principal SES sites shall be limited to that required for safety and operations and shall be shielded to avoid spillage onto adjacent properties. 
h.  Decommissioning. 
1.  Previously permitted principal solar energy systems shall be completely removed from the subject property in accordance with a decommissioning plan if they become obsolete or operation ceases for 12 consecutive months (required decommissioning date) except when actively undergoing maintenance, upgrading or replacement. Removal and restoration activities must begin within 30 days following the required decommissioning date and shall be completed within 60 days following the required decommissioning date. Failure to comply with the decommissioning plan shall constitute a property maintenance code violation subject to enforcement actions of Chapter 18. 
2.  A decommissioning plan shall be required prior to permitting in order to ensure that facilities are properly removed after their useful life. A decommissioning plan shall include provisions for removal and safe disposal or recycling of all solar energy system components including structures and foundations, restoration of the site to its condition prior to construction and installation of the solar energy system. A decommissioning plan shall provide a schedule for removal of the solar energy system and restoration of the site within 90 days following the decommissioning date. 
i.  Application requirements. 
1.  Provide a site plan of existing conditions, including all requirements of Title 3, Chapter 300 of this UDO. 
2.  Provide a site plan of proposed development, including the following information in addition to all requirements of Title 3, Chapter 300 of this UDO: 
(i)  The number of solar collection units proposed. 
(ii)  Location, size, height and spacing of solar panels. 
(iii)  Location of related supportive facilities and structures including substations, transformers and other equipment, maintenance and storage buildings and facilities. 
(iv)  Location of parking and driveways and vehicle access routes. 
(v)  Method of connecting solar collection units to related substations, transformers and equipment. 
(vi)  Location of underground or overhead electric lines connecting solar collection units to on-site and off-site electric equipment. 
(vii)  Elevation drawings or perspective renderings of the solar energy system components accurately depicting the proposed solar energy system and its relationship to adjacent structures and site features. 
(viii)  Structural engineering analysis of solar panel support, anchoring and foundation. 
(ix)  Manufacturing specifications and recommended installation methods for all major equipment including solar panels, mounting systems and foundations for poles or racks. 
(x)  A copy of the interconnection agreement with the local electric utility or a written explanation of why an interconnection agreement is not necessary. 
(xi)  SES projects within five miles of an airport shall provide a copy of notification and approval of FAA. 
(49)  Utility Transmission and Monitoring Facilities [12.7]. 
a.  Such facilities shall be essential for service to the area in which located or for the proper functioning of the total utility system of which the same is a part. 
b.  Such facility shall be enclosed by an opaque fence or wall not less than ten feet high. Fences located within 50 feet of a ROW must meet the material requirements of Section 230-6, Fences and Retaining Walls. 
c.  Any building or structure, except an enclosing fence, shall be setback not less than 50 feet from any property line, and shall meet all other applicable yard requirements of the district in which it is located. 
d.  The perimeter of the property shall be suitably landscaped and maintained, and a planted buffer strip at least ten feet wide shall be located along all property lines. 
e.  Outdoor storage of vehicles and equipment shall be prohibited. 
(50)  Community gardens [13.2]. 
a.  Outdoor lighting shall not affect adjacent properties. 
b.  The community garden shall be within a fenced area. See fence regulations in Section 230-6. 
c.  Sales activities may occur only in locations where retail sales are an allowed use, provided that on-site sales of crops grown on a community garden site may be authorized and are not subject to Section 240-14. 
d.  Any structure used in conjunction with a community garden must comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Be located at least ten feet from any property line. 
2.  If the total area of a structure used in conjunction with a community garden does not exceed 64 square feet, the structures are not considered structures or accessory structures. Otherwise, all structures used for community gardens are accessory buildings and must comply with all applicable accessory use and structure regulations. 
3.  The following are not considered structures for the purposes of this section: benches, bike racks, cold-frames, hoop houses, raised/accessible planting beds, compost or waste bins, picnic tables, garden art, and rain barrel systems. 
4.  Composting is permitted on the premises if stored in a manner that controls odor, prevents infestation and minimizes runoff into waterways and onto adjacent properties. Compost shall not be stored closer than 50 feet from property lines. 
e.  The site must be designed and maintained so that irrigation water or stormwater will not drain onto adjacent property. 
f.  The garden must maintain an orderly appearance. The garden may not be neglected or allowed to become overgrown or eroded. 
g.  If the owners no longer desire the community garden, it shall be landscaped with grass and shrubbery in accordance with a plan submitted for approval by the Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17; Ord. No. 748 , 3-20-18) 
Section 240-14. - Temporary and mobile uses. 
(a)  Should these standards conflict with other standards provided in the UDO, the following design and development standards shall apply. 
(b)  The following temporary use provisions are organized by major use category as presented in Section 240-1, Table of Permitted and Prohibited Uses. Permitted use table reference numbers are presented in brackets [#]. 
(1)  Temporary manufactured housing approved in the event of an emergency, construction, or repair [1.8.1]. 
a.  May not be on-site for longer than 12 months, unless the Development Director grants an extension. 
b.  Must meet the requirements of Subsection 240-13(a)(3), Manufactured housing. 
(2)  Outdoor Retail Display of Goods [2.17]. 
a.  Outdoor retail display of goods may be permitted in the front yard of retail sales establishments for temporary display of merchandise or items designed for exterior display. 
b.  Outdoor retail display of goods are only permitted as accessory uses to tenants having an occupational tax certificate on the subject property. 
c.  Outdoor retail display of goods shall not comprise more than 50 square feet. 
d.  Outdoor retail display of goods shall be located within 10 feet of the business to which it relates, and shall not occupy required parking spaces. 
e.  Outdoor retail display of goods shall provide a minimum of 5 feet unobstructed clear passage on sidewalks/walkways. 
f.  Outdoor retail display of goods shall not be left out overnight. 
(3)  Mobile Food Unit [14.2]. 
a.  Any person conducting business from a mobile food unit shall apply for and receive an occupational tax certificate. 
b.  Mobile food units are required to own or lease a commissary (base of operation) and provide that information to the City in order to receive an occupational tax certificate. 
c.  Mobile food units are required to obtain and maintain a permit from the DeKalb County Board of Health - Division of Environmental Health and to abide by their regulations for operation. Mobile food units must display such permit on demand by the City. 
d.  Any such mobile food unit operating on private property shall obtain the written consent of the owner to use the property for such sales. No such sales may take place on property zoned NR-1, NR-2 or NR-3. 
e.  Mobile food units may only be located on a lot containing a principal building or use. 
f.  The number of mobile food units allowed per site is limited as follows: 
1.  A maximum of one mobile food unit is allowed on sites with less than 20,000 square feet of land area. 
2.  On sites with land area of 20,000 square feet or more, one mobile food unit is allowed per 20,000 square feet of land area or fraction thereof. 
3.  For purposes of this provision, a site may consist of one lot or a combination of contiguous lots. 
g.  Mobile food units must be located at least 100 feet from the main entrance of any eating or drinking establishment and at least 100 feet from any outdoor dining area serving a non-mobile food unit eating or drinking establishment. 
h.  Mobile food units may not obstruct pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicle circulation routes, and must be set back at least five feet from the edge of any driveway or public sidewalk and at least 15 feet from fire hydrants. 
i.  Mobile food units and any associated seating areas may not occupy parking spaces provided to meet the minimum parking requirements of the principal use, unless the principal use's hours of operation do not coincide with those of the mobile food unit business. Mobile food units may not occupy any parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities. 
j.  Power sources must meet applicable local and state electric codes. 
k.  Ventilation hoods require inspection and approval of the DeKalb County Fire Marshal. 
l.  No freestanding signs or audio amplification are allowed as part of the mobile food unit's operation. 
m.  Hours of operation of mobile food units are limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
n.  Mobile food units and associated outdoor seating must be removed from all permitted locations when not in operation. 
o.  Operators are responsible for ensuring that all waste is disposed of in accordance with City regulations and for maintaining all areas used for food vending and customer activity in a safe and clean condition. 
p.  Deviations from these requirements may be approved through a special event permit. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 240-15—240-19. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 250. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS 
ARTICLE 1. - OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS 

Section 250-1. - General requirements. 
(a)  It is the intent of this UDO that all buildings, structures, and uses of land shall provide off-street vehicular and bicycle parking and loading space in an amount sufficient to meet the needs caused by the building or use of land and that such parking and loading spaces be so oriented that they are readily useable for such purposes. 
(b)  Each use of land and each building or structure hereafter constructed or established shall provide off-street parking and loading according to the standards set forth herein. When a change is proposed to a building that is nonconforming as to parking or loading requirements, a conforming amount of parking or loading shall be supplied based upon the size of the addition. 
(c)  No addition, renovation, or change of use to an existing building shall be constructed which reduces the number of spaces, area, or usability of existing parking or loading space unless such building and its addition conform with the regulations for parking and loading contained herein. 
(d)  The parking lot shall not be modified, enlarged, relocated or expanded in a manner that violates any portion of this UDO. 
(e)  No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing or long-term storage of any vehicles or equipment, unless such use is permitted by the zoning district in which the area is located. 
(f)  Inoperable vehicles may not be parked in required parking spaces or in any side or front yard and shall be completely screened from view from all surrounding public streets. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 250-2. - Minimum number of parking spaces required. 
(a)  The following are the parking space requirements by type of permitted use: 
(1)  For any use not listed, the Development Director shall determine the proper requirements by classifying the proposed use among the uses specified herein as to assure equal treatment. In making any such determination, the Development Director shall follow the principles set forth in the statement of purpose for Title 2. 
(2)  Parking for all districts other than single-family districts within 1/4 mile of the Chamblee MARTA Train Station shall have no minimum parking requirements. In interpreting the distance requirements, measurements shall be made along a straight line drawn from the closest point of the property line of the site occupied by the subject use to closest point of the MARTA station entrance. 
(3)  Maximum number of parking spaces. 
a.  The total number of permitted parking spaces shall not exceed 110 percent of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by type of permitted use, except when the excess spaces are contained in a parking structure. 
b.  Any parking not included within a parking structure that is between 100 and 110 percent of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by type of permitted use, the parking shall be "Grasscrete" or "Grasspave" or other pervious paving or grass paving systems as approved by the Development Director. 
(4)  The following table states the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by use. Where only the parent category is listed, all uses that fall under that category in the Permitted Use Table shall provide the minimum parking required by the parent category. Individual uses that have specific minimum parking requirements are listed under the parent category. Any uses not listed would be required to provide the minimum number of parking spaces required by the parent category. 
Minimum Parking Space Requirements Table 

 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 250-3. - Shared parking. 
(a)  Reduction of parking requirements through a shared parking arrangement may be granted by the Development Director through written request from an applicant. An application for a shared parking arrangement shall be submitted by completing forms provided by the Development Department. 
(b)  A to-scale map indicating location of proposed parking spaces shall be provided; said map shall indicate or notate number of spaces in each parking area. 
(c)  A shared parking study conducted by a professional engineer shall be provided that demonstrates that each use will have adequate parking provisions at all times. Said calculation must receive Development Department review and approval. The study shall document that the arrangement shall avoid conflicting parking demands and provide for safe pedestrian circulation and access. 
(d)  For properties sharing parking spaces under this provision, cross-easements shall be filed establishing access to the parking spaces in perpetuity and documentation of filing provided to the City. 
(e)  Shared parking agreements shall be fully executed and submitted to the Development Department for review prior to receiving a Certificate of Occupancy or Completion. 
(f)  A reduction in the number of parking spaces that would otherwise be required for each of the various uses on a multiple-use property must be clearly shown on the development plan. If shared parking is proposed for a combination of contiguous properties, a plan must be submitted covering all of the properties that will be sharing the parking spaces. 
(g)  Any subsequent change in land uses within the participating developments shall require proof that adequate parking will be available. Prior to any change in use, the owner must apply to the Development Director for an evaluation and confirmation of the change. If the Development Director finds that the parking reduction is no longer justified, the Development Director shall notify the owner to construct the number of parking spaces necessary to meet the difference in the required parking between the proposed and previous uses. 
(h)  In no case, shall the Development Director approve a reduction of parking through a shared parking arrangement of greater than 25 percent for any use. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 250-4. - Bicycle parking. 
(a)  Developments in all NR-3 (commercial developments), VR, NC-1, NC-2, CC, CVC, MUC-BC, VC, I, IT, and TOD districts shall provide bicycle parking spaces at a ratio of at least one bicycle parking space for every 20 automobile parking spaces. 
(b)  No development shall have fewer than three bicycle parking spaces nor be required to exceed a maximum of 30 spaces. 
(c)  Bicycle parking spaces shall be located within the supplemental zone, or as approved by the Development Director. 
(d)  Bicycle parking shall provide an inverted U steel frame or decorative rack approved by the Development Director. The rack shall be anchored to a concrete pad. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 250-5. - Electric vehicle charging stations. 
(a)  Electric vehicle charging stations are permitted in all off-street surface parking lots and multi-level parking structures in the city. 
(b)  Spaces for electric vehicle charging shall be identified by pavement markings and by appropriate signage. Signage shall not count against the maximum aggregate sign area permitted on a lot as exempted in Section 260-7. 
(c)  Spaces reserved for electric vehicle charging stations may be counted as part of the minimum required parking spaces but shall not be counted toward the maximum. 
(d)  Any new building that is required by Section 230-9 to be sustainable certified shall equip at least one required parking space on its property with an electric vehicle charging station prior to receiving a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(e)  The owner of the property shall be responsible for the installation, maintenance and operation of electric vehicle charging stations. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 250-6. - Shuttle service. 
(a)  Reduction of parking requirements through the offering of a shuttle service may be granted by the Development Director through written request from an applicant. An application for a shuttle service shall be submitted by completing forms provided by the Development Department. 
(b)  A reduction of up to 10 percent of the total parking requirement is permitted through the operation of a shuttle service linked to the MARTA station and may be granted by the Development Director through written request from an applicant, provided that applicant documents that the arrangement meets all the requirements of this section. 
(c)  A to-scale map indicating route of proposed shuttle shall be provided; said map shall indicate the stops along the shuttle route and schedule. 
(d)  Service may only be discontinued until such a time that adequate parking is provided on the site. 
(e)  A reduction in the number of parking spaces that would otherwise be required for each of the various uses on a multiple-use property must be clearly shown on the development plan. 
(f)  Any subsequent change in land uses within the participating developments shall require proof that adequate parking will be available. Prior to any change in ownership or use, the owner must apply to the Development Director for an evaluation and confirmation of the reduction. If the Development Director finds that the parking reduction is no longer justified, the Development Director shall notify the owner to construct the number of parking spaces necessary to meet the difference in the required parking between the proposed and previous uses. 
(g)  Reduction in parking for Shuttle Service: 
(1)  Does not apply to residential uses; 
(2)  For office uses, morning and evening services shall be provided; 
(3)  For retail uses, mid-day, evening, and weekend services shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 250-7. - Parking in non-single-family residential districts. 
(a)  Parking spaces. 
(1)  Off-street surface parking shall not be located between the principal building and a street except where otherwise permitted below. 
a.  Automobile dealership uses, only as exempted for display of inventory in the supplemental use regulations. 
b.  Lots within VR, NC-1, NC-2, CVC and CC districts with a lot area of less than 13,000 square feet shall be permitted to have automobile parking located within the front yard only when the following additional regulations are met: 
1.  Front yard parking shall be limited in area to a maximum of 50 percent of the area of the front yard. 
(2)  When permitted, automobile parking is only permitted in front yards when located on the permitted access driveway on a paved surface. 
(3)  Required dimensions for each parking space. Each automobile parking space shall be not less than eight and one-half feet wide and 18 feet deep. Parking spaces for compact cars shall not be less than eight feet wide and 15 feet deep. Adequate interior driveways shall connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. 
(4)  Shall have access to a public street. 
(5)  Shall be graded and paved with asphalt or concrete, including access drive(s), and be curbed when needed for effective drainage control. 
(6)  Shall have all spaces marked with painted lines, curbstones or other similar devices. 
(7)  Shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets and where possible shall be drained towards infiltration swales located in the five-foot, head-to-head landscape strips required between vehicles in Subsection 320-21(a)(4). 
(8)  Adjacent parking lots serving buildings other than those zoned for use as single-family residential units shall be interconnected, as provided in Subsection 350-2(c). 
(9)  Shall have adequate lighting if the facilities are to be used at night, provided such lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting properties. The lighting shall be designed to comply with Section 230-31, Outdoor Lighting. 
(10)  Shall be designed to conform to the geometric design standards of the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) when not expressly required in this section. 
(11)  Wheel bumpers shall be placed at the head of all parking spaces that do not abut a curb and any spaces that abut a sidewalk. Wheel bumpers shall be made of concrete a minimum of 6 ft. long, 5 inches high and 6 inches wide and securely fastened to the pavement by steel re-bars or steel anchors. Individual wheel bumpers shall be placed a minimum of 24 inches from the end of each required parking space. 
(12)  Pedestrian circulation. 
a.  Parking areas shall be designed to facilitate safe and convenient use by pedestrians. 
b.  Parking areas with more than 50 cars shall provide safe pathways from aisles of parking to the nearest building entrance and to the adjacent streets. Such pathways shall be at least five feet wide and consist of raised pathways constructed of pavers or other contrasting material. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17; Ord. No. 748 , 3-20-18) 
Section 250-8. - Compact parking spaces. 
(a)  Developments where 30 or more parking spaces are provided shall be required to provide compact parking spaces, as follows: 
(1)  A minimum of five spaces, or ten percent of the total number of parking spaces, whichever is greater, shall be set aside for compact cars. 
(2)  A maximum of 25 percent of the total required parking spaces may be set aside for compact cars, up to a maximum of 50 spaces, whichever is less. 
(3)  All spaces provided which exceed the total required number of parking spaces may be compact sized, provided they meet the requirements of Subsection 250-2(a)(3) regarding maximum parking spaces. 
(4)  Compact parking spaces shall be identified by pavement markings and/or by appropriate signage. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 250-9. - On-street parking. 
(a)  The Development Director may approve credit for on-street parking spaces as a means to reduce the off-street parking requirements for a parcel, provided the developer of the project constructs the spaces to be counted toward the site's off-street parking requirement. 
(b)  A maximum of 25 percent of the total required parking spaces may be set aside for on-street parking, up to a maximum of 50 spaces, whichever is less. The spaces shall be dedicated to the City and shall be used as public parking that shall not be signed or assigned to a single site once in use. 
(c)  On-street parking stalls shall be marked and shall measure a minimum of 8 feet in width and 22 feet, 6 inches in length. 
(d)  If on-street parking spaces have already been counted toward another development, they cannot be counted for an additional property. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 250-10. - Stacking spaces for drive-through service windows and drive-through facilities. 
(a)  Stacking spaces shall be provided for any use having a drive-through service window or areas having drop-off and pick-up areas in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Inbound stacking spaces shall be provided before the first service window as stipulated below and at least one outbound stacking space shall be provided after each service window of a drive-through facility. 
(2)  Each stacking space shall be a minimum of 22 feet long. 
(3)  Designed stacking spaces shall not interfere with circulation of the lot or free movement or access to parking spaces. 
(b)  Banks with drive-through facilities shall provide a minimum of six (6) spaces before each service position and one outbound space after the service window. 
(c)  Restaurants with drive-through service windows shall provide a minimum of ten (10) stacking spaces for inbound drive-through customers and one additional outbound space after each service window. 
(d)  Other facilities with drive-through service windows shall provide three (3) stacking spaces for each window or drive-through service facility. 
(e)  Drive-through service window lanes shall be separated by striping or curbing from off-street parking areas. Individual lanes shall be striped, marked or otherwise distinctly delineated. 
(f)  Stacking lanes shall be a minimum of 8.5 feet adjacent to the service window. 
(g)  All drive-through service windows shall be provided with a bypass lane with a minimum width of 8.5 feet. 
(h)  All stacking lanes shall be at least 75 feet from an intersection with the nearest street or internal driveway. The distance is measured from the back of the stacking space nearest the entrance to the curb line of the nearest intersection. 
(i)  Pedestrian pathways crossing drive-through lanes shall be clearly signed and identified using alternative materials or raised crosswalks. Painted crosswalks alone are not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 250-11. - Landscaping in parking lots. 
See Section 320-21 for parking lot landscaping requirements. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 250-12. - Parking in single-family residential districts. 
(a)  Parking any automobile, motorcycle, motor vehicle or trailer shall not be allowed in the front yard, side yard, or rear yard of a residence unless said automobile, motorcycle, motor vehicle or trailer is parked on a concrete, asphalt, or gravel driveway or parking area. It shall be unlawful to park any automobile, motorcycle, motor vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle on the grass, lawn, or dirt areas. 
(b)  Recreational vehicles may be kept on residentially zoned properties as follows: 
(1)  A maximum of one recreational vehicle may be parked or stored on a single-family residential property in the side or rear yard. Recreational vehicles shall not be parked in street side yards. 
(2)  Additional recreational vehicles may only be parked or stored in enclosed buildings or in a carport if said recreational vehicle fits entirely within the building. 
(3)  Such vehicle may also be parked in a street front yard or street side yard on any part of residential properties for a period of not more than 24 hours during loading or unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
(c)  Commercial vehicles may be kept on residentially zoned properties as follows: 
(1)  Such vehicle is parked or stored within a fully enclosed structure that meets all other criteria of the zoning district. 
(2)  Such vehicle is temporarily parked or standing for up to eight hours. 
(3)  Such vehicle is engaged in loading or unloading. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 250-13—250-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - OFF-STREET LOADING STANDARDS 

Section 250-20. - Provision of off-street loading. 
(a)  This section shall apply to all activities related to loading and unloading. 
(1)  Loading activities within 150 feet of residential uses shall only be permitted to undertake said activities on Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. and on Saturdays from 9:00 a.m.—9:00 p.m. 
(2)  In no case shall loading activities hinder or obstruct the free movement of vehicles, and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk, alley, or interrupt parking lot circulation. 
(3)  All off-street loading activities and access shall be provided with an asphalt or concrete surface. 
(4)  Loading structures and bays. 
a.  Structures and bays associated with loading areas shall not face any public street. 
b.  Loading docks shall be screened so that loading docks and related activity are not visible from the public right-of-way. 
(5)  Loading spaces. 
a.  When required, one or more off-street loading space shall be provided on the same or adjoining premises with the facility it serves, either inside or outside a building or structure. 
b.  A loading space shall have minimum dimensions of 12 feet wide and 35 feet deep. 
c.  The loading space shall maintain overhead clearance of 14 feet. 
d.  All off-street loading spaces shall have access from an alley, or if there is no alley, from a street. 
(6)  Minimum loading space requirements for non-residential uses: 

 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 250-21. - Dumpsters. 
(a)  A solid fence on three sides shall enclose all dumpsters. 
(1)  The height of the fence shall be equal to or higher than the height of the dumpster, in accordance with Section 230-6. 
(2)  The visible materials of the fence shall be made up of brick, stucco, or stone. 
(b)  The operable side of the dumpster shall be concealed with a gate equal to or higher than the height of the dumpster. The gate shall be opaque and constructed of durable materials. 
(c)  Dumpsters shall be placed in the rear yard and shall be located a minimum of five feet from property lines. 
(d)  In no case shall loading activities hinder or obstruct the free movement of vehicles, and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk, alley, or to interrupt parking lot circulation. 
(e)  Service activities within 150 feet of residential uses shall only be permitted Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. and on Saturdays from 9:00 a.m.—9:00 p.m. 
(f)  Temporary construction trash and recycling dumpsters, which are not enclosed, shall be permitted up until such time as the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(g)  Access to dumpsters shall be provided via a paved, dust-free surface. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
CHAPTER 260. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Section 260-1. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Findings. The Mayor and Council find that signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and a detriment to property values and the City's overall public welfare as well as an aesthetic nuisance. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council further find that some signage has a single targeted function and identification of signage by description is impossible without referring to its function. For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of identifying addresses, which is a benefit to persons looking for those addresses and is essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. In addition, directional signs are used for the sole purpose of ensuring safe movement of vehicles entering and exiting property to and from public rights-of-way, private roads and driveways. While such signage may be referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this article, the provisions of this article are unrelated to the content of the speech provided and allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners. 
(c)  Intent of Mayor and Council. By enacting this chapter, the Mayor and Council intend to: 
(1)  Balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(2)  Further the objectives of the City's comprehensive plan, which is expressly incorporated herein; 
(3)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and others within the City; 
(4)  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
(5)  Promote the aesthetic qualities of the City; 
(6)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(7)  Promote economic development; 
(8)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations; and 
(9)  Promote the stated purposes of the UDO, which are expressly incorporated herein. 
(d)  Intent of sign regulations. Notwithstanding any other restrictions in this chapter, any sign authorized under this chapter can contain any message, other than messages containing obscenity as defined herein, or other than a sign that advertises an activity that is illegal under state or federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-2. - Applicability. 
The regulation and requirements of this chapter apply to all signs that are or are intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way, a private street, or adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-3. - Definitions. 
Abandoned or dilapidated sign. Cessation of the use of a sign by either the owner of the sign or the occupant of the property on which the sign is placed, or through the removal or relocation of the previous occupant of the property, or a sign that has ceased to be used through the removal of its copy, or the deterioration of its copy through lack of maintenance, but excluding temporary or short-term periods of remodeling, refurbishment or maintenance of the sign. 
Air- or gas-filled balloons. See Inflatable signs. 
Animated sign. A sign that uses movement or changes of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene or that uses the emission of smoke, noise, gas or other substance from the sign. Signs that utilize the movement of air through the device for visual effect are considered animated signs. Animated sign exclude changeable copy signs permitted by these regulations or changeable copy signs erected pursuant to consent order following litigation; provided no change is made in the type, size height, location, style or technology of the sign following its original erection. 
Awning sign. A building sign imposed, mounted or painted upon an awning. 
Banner. A sign other than a flag made of paper, cloth, thin plastic or similar lightweight material and rectangular in form. 
Canopy sign. A building sign affixed to, superimposed upon, or painted on any canopy, such that the sign is mounted in such a manner that a continuous face with the canopy is formed. 
Changeable copy sign. A sign on which the copy changes through either electronic or mechanical means. 
Digital sign face. See Electronic sign face. 
Directional Sign. Signs that provide traffic instruction for ingress and egress for travel to or from a lot. 
Double-faced sign. A sign structure with two sign faces that are parallel (back-to-back) or that form an angle to one another of no more than 60 degrees, where each sign face is designed to be seen from a different direction. 
Electronic sign [face]. An illuminated sign face without moving parts whose content may be changed by electronic process with intermittent light or lights, including light emitting diodes liquid crystal display, and plasma screen image display. 
Externally illuminated sign. Any sign that is only illuminated by an artificial light source that directly or indirectly illuminates the face of the sign from outside the sign structure. 
Feather flag. Means a sign made of paper, cloth, thin plastic or similar lightweight material oriented in a vertical direction and supported by a harpoon-style pole or staff driven into the ground as its primary means of support. 
Festoons. Strings of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pennants, streamers, pinwheels, or other devices or long narrow strips of fabric, plastic, or other pliable material designed to move in the wind or by mechanical fan. Festoons are considered animated signs. 
Flag. A sign consisting of any fabric containing distinctive colors, patterns, logos, or symbols, used as an official symbol of a government or any other entity or organization. 
Flashing Signs. Signs that flash, blink, rotate, revolve, or have moving parts or visible bulbs, and signs containing reflective elements that sparkle in the sunlight or otherwise simulate illumination during daylight hours. Flashing signs are considered animated signs. 
Freestanding canopy signs. A sign erected on the side of a permanent freestanding canopy erected on a lot for the protection of commercial activity on that lot. The canopy shall not be connected to any building or other structure. 
Ground sign. A sign permanently attached to the ground and that is wholly independent of any building or other structure for support. 
Incidental sign. A small sign, emblem, or decal located on a building or structure. Such signs are normally located on doors, windows, and gas pumps, and are generally not readily visible or legible from public rights-of-way. 
Inflatable signs. A sign that is intended to be expanded by air or other gas for its proper display or support. 
Internally illuminated sign. Any sign that is illuminated by a source of light that is internal to the sign structure. 
Miscellaneous Ground Sign. A permanent sign accessory to any other ground signs on the property. 
Monument sign. A ground sign in which the entire bottom of the sign face or structure is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous background for the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign. 
Multi-faced sign. A single sign structure consisting of three or more sign faces that are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than three feet. Sign faces on a single sign structure that are separated by more than three feet are treated as separate signs. 
Nit. A measurement of brightness equal to the brightness of one [foot-]candle per square meter, measured perpendicular to the source. 
Official signs. Signs placed by or at the direction of a governmental body, governmental agency, board of education or public authority. 
Parapet sign. A building sign imposed, mounted, or painted on a parapet and not extending above the top of the parapet. 
Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric or similar material designed to move in the wind. Pennants are often suspended from a rope, wire, or string in series. The term "pennant" shall not include a "banner" or "flag" as defined in this article. 
Permanent sign. A sign attached to a structure or the ground that is made of materials intended for long-term use. Banners and temporary signs are not considered permanent signs. 
Pole sign. A permanent sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole, pylon, columns, or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face or lowest sign module is not in contact with the ground. 
Project entrance sign. A permanent freestanding sign located at a discernible entrance into a multifamily development, or into a development containing multiple lots, such as, but not limited to, a particular residential or commercial subdivision, business center, office park or industrial park. 
Projecting sign. A sign projecting perpendicularly from the outside wall of the building upon which it is located. 
Property address signs. Property addresses (including multifamily building or unit numbers) displayed on a building or mailbox. 
Pylon sign. See Pole sign. 
Roof signs. A sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building, or a sign that extends into and/or above the immediately adjacent roofline of the building irrespective of attachment point. A sign applied to the fascia portion of a mansard roof, or to the face of a parapet wall, provided that the sign must not extend above the top of the mansard roof or parapet wall, is not considered a roof sign. 
Sandwich board sign. A single- or double-faced, hinged or un-hinged, A-frame, temporary sign. 
Sign. Any structure, display, or device that is used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to a business, institution, organization, person, idea, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design characteristics, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement or illumination. 
Sign area. The area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of a sign face, or the combination of the areas of all such rectangles delimiting each sign module, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign copy. 
Sign copy. That portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of one or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by open space or by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
Sign height. The height of a sign shall be equal to the vertical distance from the average grade at the base of the sign, or from the crown of the roadway of the nearest street if the street is within 100 feet of any portion of the sign (when measured perpendicular to the street), to the highest point of any portion of the sign, whichever results in the greater sign height. Any constructed earthen berms and elevated foundations supporting signs, signposts or other sign supports shall be included in the height of the sign. 
Sign module. Each portion or unit of a sign face that is clearly and physically separated from other such units. 
Sign structure. All elements of a freestanding sign, including the sign face, background, or decorative elements related to the presentation or support of the sign's message, and the structural supports. 
Sound- or smoke-emitting signs. See Animated sign. 
Stanchion sign. See Pole sign. 
Standard Informational Sign. A sign made for short-term use, containing no reflecting elements, flags, or attachments, that is rectangular and which is mounted on a post, stake or metal frame, or for business use, mounted directly on the façade of a tenant space. 
Temporary sign. A sign designed to be transported or easily relocated and not permanently attached to the ground, such as, but not limited to the following: (1) A sign designed to be temporarily placed upon the ground and not otherwise permanently affixed to it as otherwise required by the building code; (2) A sign mounted on a trailer, with or without wheels; or (3) A sidewalk, sandwich board or curb-type sign. 
Transit signs. Signs owned by and placed by or with the approval of a nonprofit transportation authority or service on bus benches and shelters owned by the organization. 
Tri-vision sign. A sign designed with a series of triangular slats that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show three different sign messages in rotation. For purposes of this chapter, a tri-vision sign is not a changeable copy sign. 
Under-canopy sign. A permanent sign attached to the underside of a marquee or canopy and protruding over private sidewalks. 
Variable message sign face. See Electronic sign face. 
Vehicular sign. Any sign placed on, mounted on, painted on or affixed to a motor vehicle, freight, flatbed or storage trailer or other conveyance, including signs erected within truck beds or signs wrapped on a vehicle, when same are utilized, placed or parked in such a manner as to be viewed or intended to be viewed from the public right(s)-of-way, except that this definition shall not apply when: 
(1)  Such conveyances are actively being used to load, transport or unload persons, goods or services in the normal course of business. Provided that the use of a truck bed to display signs while driven are prohibited; 
(2)  When such conveyances are parked in an inconspicuous area such as, but not limited to: a loading dock or to the side or rear of a building (away from the street); or 
(3)  When such conveyances are actively being used for storage of construction materials for, and on the same lot with a bona fide construction project for which building and other applicable permits have been issued and where construction is underway and provided said conveyances are located within designated storage areas. 
Wall sign. A sign attached parallel to a wall, painted on the wall surface or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, and supported by such wall or building Window sign: A sign that is placed on or behind a windowpane or glass door and intended to be viewed from outside the building. 
Window area. Window area is the term given to an entire assembly comprised of the sash, glazing, and frame or uninterrupted system of windows. Where a structural or architectural element of the structures interrupts the window or system of windows, it is considered a different window area. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-4. - Signs exempt from permit requirements. 
(a)  The following signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of Section 260-13; provided, however, that such signs shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Official signs. 
(2)  Property address signs. 
(3)  Incidental signs. 
(4)  Transit signs. 
(5)  Standard informational signs. 
(6)  Directional signs. 
(7)  Vehicular signs. 
(8)  Window displays of goods utilizing no more than 50 percent of the available window area. 
(9)  Signs on products that are an integral part of the product, the product's original packaging, and product dispensers (such as, but not limited to a soft drink machine). Product containers intended for the storage of products are not exempt from permit requirements. 
(10)  A building design, color, or motif that is associated with a particular establishment or organization but which conveys no message. 
(11)  Signs installed in conjunction with EV charging stations, pursuant to Section 250-6. Signs shall not exceed two square feet in area per EV parking space. 
(12)  Flags. 
(13)  Sandwich Board Signs. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-5. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  The following types of signs are prohibited in the City: 
(1)  Inflatable signs that exceed three cubic feet per device. 
(2)  Animated signs. 
(3)  Flashing signs; provided that signs meeting standards of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and installed for the safety or control of traffic are exempt from this provision so long as they meet all physical standards of the manual. 
(4)  Feather flags. 
(5)  Abandoned or dilapidated signs. 
(6)  Roof signs. 
(7)  Pole signs. 
(8)  Festoons. 
(9)  LED light strips. 
(10)  Signs that are painted on or attached to trees, curbs, utility poles, or rocks or other natural features. 
(11)  False statements. It is unlawful for a person to display false statements upon signs or other public places calculated to mislead the public as to anything sold, services to be performed, or information disseminated. The fact that any such sign or display contains words or language sufficient to mislead a reasonable or prudent person shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section by the persons displaying such sign or permitting such sign to be displayed at their residence, establishment or place of business. 
(12)  Obscene signs. Obscene signs, as defined by the state at O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80(b), are not allowed. 
(13)  Obstructions. No sign shall obstruct any fire escape, window, door, or opening usable for fire prevention or suppression, or prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. No sign shall extend above a parapet wall, be affixed to a fire escape, or interfere with any opening required for ventilation. 
(14)  Signs placed on public property. Any sign posted or erected on utility poles, public rights-of-way or any other public property is not allowed, except those placed or approved to be placed by agencies of the federal, state or local government having control of such property. 
(15)  Search lights and similar devices. 
(16)  Signs imitating public warning or traffic devices. Any sign that displays intermittent lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles, and any sign that uses the words: "stop", "go", "slow", "caution", "danger", "warning" or other message or content in a manner that might mislead or confuse a driver, is not allowed. Any sign that uses the words, slogans, dimensional shape or size, or colors of governmental traffic signs is not allowed. No red, green or yellow illuminated sign shall be permitted within 300 feet of any traffic light. 
(17)  Signs erected within a truck bed. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-6. - Conformance to state law. 
(a)  The following applies to any sign located or to be located within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of an Interstate, U.S. or state-numbered highway (or any other road designated as a "primary highway" by the state and approved by the U.S. Department of Transportation), or located or to be located beyond 660 feet of such highway but visible and intended to be read from such highway: 
(1)  Such sign shall comply with all requirements of the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Act, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 
(2)  Such sign shall comply with all requirements of this chapter. Between the state and the City regulations, such sign must comply with the most restrictive requirements with respect to each and every item of regulation. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-7. - Measurements. 
(a)  Computation of sign area. In order to determine compliance with the maximum allowable sign areas permitted under this chapter, the following shall establish how sign areas are measured. 
(1)  Sign area. 
a.  The area of a sign face shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of the sign area, or the combination of the areas of all such rectangles delimiting each sign module, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. If a combination of rectangles is used for the measurement of sign area, rectangles shall be contiguous. 
b.  For signs that have no identifiable frame or border, the smallest rectangle that includes all of the sign's words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements intended to convey the sign's message shall establish the area of the sign. 
c.  For signs applied to a kiosk or other cylindrical sign structure, the area of the sign face shall be computed as the largest rectangular area achieved from any one view of the sign. Measurements shall be made as a flat plane rectangle projected on the sign. 
d.  For wall and projecting signs, the computation of the area of the sign copy shall include the full sign structure, including channel letters, cabinets, back plates, and any portion of the sign not integral to the structure of the building. 
e.  The computation of area of sign copy for all other signs shall not include the structure, supports, or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those portions contained within the rectangle that delimits the sign copy or a sign module. 
f.  Changeable copy signs. For any sign on which any of the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are routinely changed or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements may be placed, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
g.  Treatment of open spaces. Any open space contained within the limits of the rectangle delimiting the sign copy, sign module, or sign structure shall be included in the computation of the area of such sign copy, sign module, or sign structure. 
h.  Double-faced signs. For double-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are, parallel (back-to-back), or where the smallest angle formed between the two faces is 60 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For double-faced signs where the interior angle formed by the faces is more than 60 degrees, the area of the sign shall be the total area of all sides. 
(b)  Multi-faced signs. For sign structures having three faces and the interior angle formed between each of the faces is 60 degrees, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs with three or more sides, the area of the sign shall be the largest total of all faces that are joined by an interior angle of more than 60 degrees that can be viewed from any one direction. 
(c)  Location of Sign. 
(1)  No sign or sign structure shall extend into or above, or be anchored or placed in any portion of a public right-of-way except as specifically provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Signs shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the back of curb/edge of pavement or one foot onto private property, whichever results in the greater setback. Any signs not located adjacent to a street shall be setback a minimum of five feet from property lines. 
(3)  See Section 230-7 for sight distance and visibility at intersections. 
(d)  Measurement of distance. Minimum distances required hereunder shall be measured along the shortest straight line from the nearest point on a sign structure to the nearest point on a property line, sign structure, building or structure to which the minimum distance requirement applies. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-8. - Signs allowed by zoning district. 
(a)  Residential zoning districts. Only the following types of signs are allowed within the residential zoning districts in the City (NR-1, NR-2, and residential uses in NR-3 and VR): 
(1)  Ground signs, per Subsection 260-9(f). 
(2)  Flags, per Subsection 260-9(j). 
(3)  Property address signs, per Subsection 260-9(l). 
(4)  Standard informational signs, per Subsection 260-10(a). 
(b)  All Sign types are permitted in the NC-1, NC-2, CC, CVC, VC, TOD, MU-BC, IT, PUD, I, and A districts in accordance with the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-9. - Permanent signs. 
(a)  Wall signs. Wall signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Wall signs may not project higher or lower than the wall or surface it is attached to. 
(2)  Wall signs may not project more than 18 inches from the wall surface 
(3)  Single occupant buildings: 
a.  Maximum sign area per façade shall be two square feet per linear foot of the subject facade, or 200 square feet total, whichever is less. 
b.  For facades less than 200 feet in length, a maximum of one sign is permitted per facade. 
c.  For facades greater than 200 feet in length, one additional wall sign is permitted per façade. 
d.  A maximum of two facades may contain wall signage. 
(4)  Planned centers and Mixed-Use Buildings (with separate entrances): 
a.  Maximum sign area per tenant shall be one square foot per linear foot of the subject facade, or 200 square feet, whichever is less. 
b.  For tenant facades less than 100 feet in length, a maximum of one sign is permitted per facade. 
c.  For tenant facades greater than 100 feet in length, one additional wall sign is permitted per tenant façade. 
d.  A maximum of two tenant facades may contain wall signage. 
(5)  Multi-tenant buildings (with shared space and common entrances): 
a.  Maximum sign area per building shall be two square feet per linear foot of the subject facade, or 200 square feet total, whichever is less. 
b.  For facades less than 200 feet in length, a maximum of one sign is permitted per facade. 
c.  For facades greater than 200 feet in length, an additional wall sign is permitted per façade. 
(6)  A maximum of two facades may contain wall signage. 
(b)  Projecting signs. Projecting signs may be provided in lieu of wall signs as prescribed below: 
(1)  Size: 
a.  Projecting signs shall not project more than 48 inches beyond the face of the building. 
b.  Maximum sign area shall be per wall sign requirements. 
(2)  Quantity: Per wall sign requirements. 
(3)  Location: 
a.  Projections shall be at a 90-degree angle to the building face or corner. 
b.  Signs shall provide a minimum of eight feet of clearance from ground level to the bottom of the sign. 
c.  Signs shall not project into the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Other standards: All sides of a projecting sign shall be finished. 
(c)  Awning signs. Awning signs may be provided in lieu of wall signs as prescribed below: 
(1)  Size: Per wall sign requirements. 
(2)  Quantity: Per wall sign requirements. 
(3)  Location: 
a.  Per wall sign requirements. 
b.  Awnings shall provide a minimum of eight feet of clearance from ground level to the bottom of the sign. 
(d)  Under-canopy signs. 
(1)  Size: Under-canopy signs shall be limited to four square feet in area. 
(2)  Quantity: A maximum of one under-canopy sign is permitted per tenant. 
(3)  Location: Signs shall provide a minimum of eight feet of clearance from ground level to the bottom of the sign. 
(e)  Signs associated with drive-through windows. 
(1)  Size: A sign associated with a drive-through window shall not exceed twenty-four square feet in aggregate area. 
(2)  Quantity: A maximum of three signs per drive-through establishment subject to the aggregate area limitation above. 
(3)  Location: Such signs shall not be oriented toward the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Other standards: 
a.  Signs associated with a drive-through windows shall be permanently affixed and rigidly mounted to the building or freestanding structure. 
b.  All signs associated with drive-through windows must be framed and constructed of metal or other sturdy material. 
(f)  Monument signs. 
(1)  Size: 
a.  Residential and multifamily uses: 
1.  Maximum sign area shall be 40 square feet. 
2.  Maximum height shall be eight feet. 
b.  All other uses: 
1.  Maximum sign area for buildings with under 200 feet of continuous street frontage is 40 square feet. 
2.  Maximum sign area for buildings with 200 feet or more of continuous street frontage is 64 square feet. 
3.  Maximum height shall be eight feet. 
(2)  Quantity and Location: 
a.  Residential and multifamily uses: A maximum of two single-sided or one double-sided ground signs permitted per project entrance from a street. 
b.  All other uses: 
1.  One ground sign is permitted per street frontage per parcel. 
2.  On any street with more than 500 feet of frontage, one additional monument sign is permitted. 
(3)  Other Standards: 
a.  Ground signs only are permitted as monument signs. 
b.  Monument signs shall be constructed with a brick, stucco, or stone base and frame. 
c.  The ground-mounted base shall be equal to or greater than the length of the sign face including the cabinet or any other structure within which the copy is located. 
d.  The monument sign shall be surrounded by a planting bed of two feet in depth radiating from the base of the sign with shrubs and supplemental ground cover. 
e.  Monument signs shall display the street number of the property. Within a planned center where multiple addresses exist, the highest and lowest street address numbers shall be identified. Street numbers shall be of contrasting colors against the background and visible from both directions of travel along the street. 
f.  Where an existing pole sign has been grandfathered on a lot, no new ground sign shall be erected on that same parcel until the existing pole sign is removed. 
(g)  Freestanding canopy signs. Canopy signs are restricted to one canopy sign per road frontage with a maximum area of 50 s.f. per frontage. 
(h)  Window signs. Window signs shall not obstruct more than 20 percent of the window area. No window sign may be handwritten, nor shall such signs be made of paper or cardboard. Each window sign is limited to a maximum size of eight square feet. 
(i)  Miscellaneous ground signs. 
(1)  Size: Each miscellaneous ground sign shall not exceed three square feet in copy area nor be erected more than three feet in height. 
(2)  Quantity: 
a.  There shall be a maximum two directions signs allowed per driveway entrance. 
b.  For planned centers, there shall be no more than two such signs per curb cut, with no more than three additional such signs per lot. 
(3)  Location: 
a.  Within the area between a street and the minimum front yard setback for principal buildings required for the zoning district, directional signs shall be located within three feet of driveways that provide access into, within, or from the property. 
b.  No setback from the right-of-way line is required, but such signs shall be placed on private property with the owner's permission. 
(j)  Flags. 
(1)  Size: Flags shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(2)  Quantity: No more than one flagpole is permitted per lot. 
(3)  Location: Shall not be located on flagpoles that exceed the building height limitation of the zoning district for the property where the flag is displayed. 
(4)  Other standards: A flag pole more than 20 feet tall shall be subject to a building permit if located in a property not zoned NR-1, NR-2 or NR-3. 
(k)  Incidental Signs. Incidental signs shall be no more than one square foot, provided that the aggregate of all such signs on a property may not exceed 16 square feet unless a larger aggregate area is required by law or government regulation. 
(l)  Property address signs. Property address signs shall consist of numerals at least four inches but no larger than eight inches in height. 
(m)  Official signs. Such signs are authorized within all rights-of-way and on other properties controlled by such governmental body, agency, board of education or public authority; and at such other locations as provided by statute or ordinance. Where physical characteristics of official signs are prescribed by statute or ordinance, such as signs shall meet those standards. In the absence of statutory standards, official signs shall comply with the physical standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-10. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Standard informational signs. 
(1)  Size and height limitations: 
a.  Standard informational signs are limited to five and one-half square feet in sign area per lot. 
b.  Standard informational signs shall not be erected to a height exceeding three feet. On non-residential properties zoned other than NR-1, R-2, NR-3 and VR, one standard informational signs may be erected in the window of a tenant for no more than 15 weeks. 
(2)  Aggregate allowance: There is no maximum number of standard informational signs on a lot. The quantity of signage is limited by the aggregate area permitted on the lot. 
(3)  Other standards: 
a.  Nonpermanent but water-resistant construction materials may be used, such as but not limited to, poster board, foam core board or illustration board. 
b.  The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that convey the sign's message shall be permanently applied to the sign's face. 
c.  Changeable copy is not allowed on standard informational signs. 
(4)  Lighting. Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
(b)  Sale or lease of a building or premises. 
(1)  Allowance and size. 
a.  During the period a building or premises is available for sale or lease, one additional sign is permitted in VC, TOD, MU-BC, CVC, CC, A, IT, I and PUD zoning districts. 
b.  Such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, and eight feet in height if freestanding. 
c.  Such sign shall be removed within 10 days of a closing of the sale on or execution of a lease of the property. 
(2)  Quantity and location. 
a.  One freestanding sign per street frontage may be placed on a property that is available for sale or lease. For a planned center, one additional building sign may be placed on each tenant space that is available for sale or lease. 
b.  During construction of a residential or nonresidential subdivision, one additional sign may be placed at each entrance into the subdivision that does not exceed 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height. Such signs shall be removed when the last lot or house has been sold or if no building permit has been issued for construction within the subdivision or development during a period of 12 months, whichever comes first. 
(3)  Lighting. Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
(c)  Sandwich board signs. 
(1)  Duration: Sandwich board signs shall be designed to be portable, folding in nature and must be removed to the interior of a building or structure at the close of business each day. 
(2)  Size: Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and shall be no greater than four feet in height. 
(3)  Quantity: A maximum of one sandwich board sign is permitted per tenant. 
(4)  Location: 
a.  A sandwich board sign may not be placed in the right-of-way or in parking areas, unless they are positioned in the supplemental zone. 
b.  The placement of a sandwich board sign shall not interfere with pedestrian movement and shall be placed such that at least five feet of unobstructed sidewalk width remains for pedestrian travel. 
c.  Sandwich board signs shall be located a maximum of 10 feet from the tenant entrance. 
(5)  Other standards: All sandwich board signs shall be constructed of wood, metal or other sturdy material and shall not contain reflective elements or fluorescent colors. 
(6)  Lighting: Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
(d)  Banners. 
(1)  Duration: 
a.  Per tenant in a planned center: No banner shall be displayed for more than 14 consecutive days, with no more than three such 14-day periods being permitted per calendar year per tenant. 
b.  Per lot for a planned center, multi-tenant building with shared space, and single occupant buildings: No banner shall be displayed for more than 14 consecutive days, with no more than three such 14-day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. 
(2)  Size: Each banner shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
(3)  Quantity: 
a.  Per tenant in a planned center: No more than one banner shall be displayed on any tenant space at one time; 
b.  Per lot for a planned center, multi-tenant building with shared space, and single occupant buildings: No more than one banner shall be displayed on any lot at one time. 
(4)  Other standards: 
a.  All banners must be maintained in good condition. 
b.  Each banner must be securely attached to poles, mast arms, fences, building facade or other similar structures on either the entirety of two ends of the banner or on all four corners of the banner. 
(5)  Lighting: Banners shall not be illuminated. 
(e)  Building construction or remodeling. 
(1)  Quantity, location and duration: 
a.  One sign per street frontage shall be permitted upon issuance of a land disturbance permit or building permit authorizing the demolition or construction of a building within the CC, CVC, VC, TOD, MU-BC, A, IT, I and PUD zoning district where no existing ground sign exists. 
b.  Such sign(s) shall be removed within ten days after issuance of the certificate of occupancy/completion or final building inspection, whichever occurs first. 
c.  Alternatively, in lieu of the ground sign(s) described in subsection (e)(1)a., the property developer may elect to place one sign per street frontage on an opaque fabric that provides a visual screen along a temporary construction fence as provided in Subsection 230-6(g). 
(2)  Size: The signs authorized by this subsection shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, and eight feet in height if freestanding. 
(3)  Lighting: Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-11. - Illumination of signs. 
(a)  Types of illumination. 
(1)  Externally-illuminated sign. An externally illuminated sign shall have concealed wiring and controls, and shall have shielded and screened external light sources. 
(2)  Internally-illuminated sign. Internally illuminated signs must completely shield the source of light from direct view. 
(b)  Hazards. Illumination devices shall be placed, filtered, and shielded so direct rays will not be cast into the eyes of drivers or pedestrians. 
(c)  Light pollution. Sign illumination shall not cast light directly upon adjacent properties or roadways. No illuminated signs are allowed within 100 feet of any residential zoning district or property occupied by a dwelling. Mixed-use properties shall be illuminated in such a manner as to not cast light directly into residential units. 
(d)  U.L. listing. All components of an illuminated sign shall be U.L. listed, or the equivalent thereof, with an identification label, that shows the manufacturer of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-12. - Changeable copy signs. 
(a)  Changeable copy signs, including electronic sign faces, are allowed on commercial and industrial properties developed in the VC, CVC, CC, IT or I zoning districts. For properties zoned NR-1, NR-2, CR, VR, NC-1, NC-2 changeable copy signs, including electronic sign faces, may be utilized for places of worship, public buildings or at public or private schools,; provided that, such signs are limited to fronting on streets designated as Boulevards, Primary, or Secondary streets. Changeable copy signs shall be permitted only on monument signs that conform to all standards of this section. Existing tri-vision signs may be continued subject to the standards of section 260-18. No new tri-vision signs shall be erected within the City. 
(b)  The changeable copy portion of a sign is limited to 70 percent of the total sign area. 
(c)  Electronic sign faces with traveling messages that travel at a rate slower than 16 light columns per second or faster than 32 light columns per second are prohibited. 
(d)  No sign message shall be displayed for a period of time less than 30 seconds. 
(e)  Transition from one message to another message shall require no more than one second for electronic sign faces and no more than three seconds for tri-vision signs. 
(f)  Each sign message shall be complete in itself and shall not continue on a subsequent sign message. 
(g)  Tri-vision signs that are mechanically changed shall contain a default design that will freeze the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs. 
(h)  Any maximum size limitations shall apply independently to each side of an electronic sign face. 
(i)  Standards of Illumination: 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a sign permit for a sign with an electronic sign face, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed the standards shown in Table 260-12 and that the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by password-protected software or other method as deemed appropriate by the director. 
Table 260-12: Standards of Illumination for Electronic Sign Faces 

 
(2)  Electronic sign faces shall utilize automatic dimming technology to adjust the brightness of the sign relative to natural ambient light conditions in order to reduce the level of illumination during nighttime hours and other times of low natural ambient light. 
(3)  All signs with an electronic sign face shall contain a default mechanism that will cause the sign to revert immediately to a black screen if the sign malfunctions. 
(4)  All electronic sign faces shall require a certification by a lighting expert that the sign face, as installed and operating, meets the lighting standards of Table 260-12 above. Such certification shall be provided upon completion of installation and at least every two years thereafter. 
(5)  If the Development Director finds that a sign with an electronic sign face or otherwise illuminated display exceeds the lighting standards set out above or otherwise causes glare or impairs the vision of drivers of motor vehicles or otherwise interferes with the safe operation of motor vehicles, the Director shall have a notice of violation issued to the sign owner identifying the problems with the sign and specifying corrective action required. The owner of the sign shall within 48 hours reduce the intensity of the sign to a level that meets standards and does not cause such disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-13. - Sign permits and applications. 
(a)  Sign permit. In addition to a building permit as may be required under the building code, a sign permit shall be obtained prior to installation, relocation, expansion, construction or structural alteration of any sign regulated under this chapter except for those signs specifically exempted under Section 260-4. 
(b)  Issuance of a sign permit. 
(1)  Sign review required. For any sign requiring issuance of a sign permit under the provisions of this chapter, sign review shall be required prior to installation, relocation, renovation, expansion, construction, panel exchange or reconstruction of the sign. The sign application, with the nonrefundable application fee established by the Mayor and Council, shall be submitted to the Development Director. 
(2)  Sign permit application. Applications for sign permits shall be filed by the sign owner or his agent in the Development Department upon forms furnished by this office. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
a.  The type of the sign as defined in this chapter. 
b.  The street address of the property upon which the subject sign is to be located, and the proposed location of the subject sign on the subject property. 
c.  The area of the sign face and the sign structure and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
d.  The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
e.  The written consent of the owner or his agent granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the subject sign. 
f.  A sketch or print drawn to scale showing all pertinent information required by the technical codes adopted by the City, this Chapter and other City ordinances, such as wind pressure requirements and display materials. The Development Director may require additional information on such print or sketch to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
g.  The name, address, telephone number, copy of insurance certificate, and business license number of the sign contractor. 
h.  The name, address, telephone number, and business license number of the tenant. 
i.  A site plan or elevation drawing showing the placement of the sign in relation to other signs, buildings and structures on the property. 
j.  Conformance to building codes. 
1.  Plans required for issuance of a sign permit shall be certified as to conformance with all structural and wind-load resistive standards of the building code by a qualified structural engineer, or be prepared using standard drawings prepared by a structural engineer or other qualified professional meeting or exceeding all requirements of the building code, if applicable. 
2.  All signs involving internal lights or other electrical devices or circuits shall display a label certifying it as being approved by the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. 
3.  All electrical service to a sign shall comply with the electrical code. A licensed electrical contractor must obtain an electrical permit and wire the sign to code. 
4.  Clearance from all electrical power lines shall be in conformance with the requirements of the electrical code. 
k.  Any additional information deemed necessary by the Development Department to determine compliance with ordinance standards. 
(3)  Issuance of sign permit. 
a.  The City shall process all sign permit applications within 30 days of the City's actual receipt of a complete application for a sign permit. 
1.  The Development Director shall reject any application as incomplete that does not include all items required for a sign permit application as set forth under Subsection 260-14(a). 
2.  The Development Director shall reject any application containing any false material statements or omissions. Any rejected application later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been resubmitted on the date of resubmission instead of the original date of submission. 
b.  Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, the Development Director shall: 
1.  Issue the permit; or 
2.  Inform the applicant, in writing, of denial of the permit, stating the reasons why the permit cannot be issued. 
c.  Upon determination that the application fully complies with the provisions of this chapter, the building code, and all other applicable laws, regulations and ordinances of the City, the sign permit shall be issued. 
d.  If the City does not process an application for a sign permit within 30 days as set forth in Section 260-13, then the application shall be considered approved; provided this approval shall not authorize the violation of any standards of City ordinances regulating such sign and vests no rights in the owner of a sign in violation of city ordinances. 
e.  Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an application containing a false material statement, the Development Director shall revoke the subject sign permit and the subject sign shall be removed. See Section 260-14. 
(4)  Permit fee. 
a.  No sign permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the Development Director and fees have been paid per the fee schedule adopted by City Council. 
(5)  Sign identification labels. 
a.  With each sign permit, the Development Director shall issue a sticker bearing the same number as the permit with which it is issued. It shall be the duty of the permittee or his agent to affix such sticker to the sign so it will be easily seen. The absence of a proper sticker shall be prima facie evidence that the sign has been or is being erected or operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a sign decal to any sign for which it was not issued, or to remove, tamper with, deface or mutilate any sign identification label or sticker issued or placed pursuant to this section. 
(6)  Sign Permit Expiration Date. A sign permit shall expire if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been erected, installed, and completed within six months after the date of permit issuance, provided, however, that one 90-day extension of the permit shall be granted if an additional permit extension fee has been paid prior to the expiration date of the initial permit. 
(7)  Administrative adjustments. 
a.  No adjustment shall be allowed from any dimensional, material, structural, or durational requirement of this chapter, except that the Development Director may grant an administrative adjustment of up to 10 percent from the dimensional standards of this chapter, provided the resulting signage is consistent with the purpose of this chapter, and the proposed adjustment will ameliorate the decreased effectiveness clearly resulting from: 
1.  Natural conditions on the property that limit placement of the sign; 
2.  Lot configuration; 
3.  The presence of easements or rights-of-way that interfere with placement of the proposed sign; or 
4.  A threat to public safety. 
b.  No adjustment under this section shall be allowed where the hardship is the result of the owner or applicant's actions. 
(8)  Appeals. 
a.  Appeals. An applicant whose permit application has been denied, a permittee whose permit has been revoked, or any other person dissatisfied with a determination of the Development Director provided to them in response to a request for such determination may appeal the decision to the Mayor and Council pursuant to the provisions of Article 6 of Chapter, 280, Section 280-41 et seq., governing notice and procedures for hearing appeals. In making its determination on any appeal, the Mayor and Council shall base its decision on the express standards of the sign ordinance and shall overrule the decision of the Development Director only in those instances where the Director has committed an error in application or interpretation of the sign ordinance. 
b.  Further review by certiorari. Any person against whom an appeal has been adversely decided by the Mayor and Council may petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17; Ord. No. 748 , 3-20-18) 
Section 260-14. - Business license and insurance for sign contractors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs within the City unless and until such person has obtained a business license issued in the state and a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state evidencing that the person has in effect public liability and property damage insurance providing coverage in the sum of $25,000.00 for property damage for any one claim and public liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for injuries, including accidental death, to one person. The certificate of insurance shall state that the insurance carrier will notify the City 30 days in advance of any termination or restriction of the coverage. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-15. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs; defined. 
(1)  A nonconforming sign is a sign that was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption or amendment of Chapter 260, and which by reason of such adoption or amendment no longer conforms to one or more of the applicable regulations and restrictions of Chapter 260 as adopted or amended. 
(2)  Any sign that was not lawfully erected in accordance with the sign regulations in effect at the time of the sign's construction, or was subsequently altered in a way inconsistent with the sign regulations in effect at the time of its alteration, is considered an illegal sign and shall not be granted legal nonconformity status. 
(b)  Retention of legal nonconformity status. 
(1)  A nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its nonconforming designation and become an illegal sign if: 
a.  The sign is altered in any way that would make the sign less in compliance with the requirements of this chapter than it was before the alteration; 
b.  The sign is relocated on the property, unless the relocation results in the sign becoming conforming; 
c.  The sign structure is replaced; 
d.  The deterioration of the sign or damage for any reason to the sign makes it a hazard to public safety; or 
e.  The sign has deteriorated or been damaged to such extent that repairs required to restore the sign would cost more than 50 percent of its current replacement value; provided that where damage to the sign results from Act of God or other circumstances beyond the control of the sign owner, the sign may be restored regardless of cost; in such instance, timely reconstruction shall result in retention of nonconforming status. 
(2)  Nothing in this Section shall prevent the owner of a nonconforming sign from continuing to maintain such sign, nor to prevent an owner from making routine changes to the copy or text of an existing legal nonconforming sign so long as the degree of such change does not enlarge the size or height of the sign face, does not change the nature of the sign structure, and does not so alter the sign that it would require a building permit or electrical permit. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-16. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Development Director. The Development Director is responsible for general administration of this chapter; the receipt, review and processing of all applications for sign permits; and all sign variance requests filed with the City. 
(b)  Citations. Any violation of this chapter may be tried upon a citation issued by an authorized representative of the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and state law. Without limitation, businesses, organizations, builders, developers, contractors, property owners, and such other parties responsible for the violation may be cited for violation of any provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Removal of illegal or abandoned signs. The Development Director may order the removal of any sign in violation of this chapter, or any sign abandoned for six consecutive months or more, by written notice to the permit holder; or if there is no permit holder, then to the owner of the sign; or if the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then to the property owner, sign erector and any party that procured the erection of the sign. If a permit was issued, such notice shall operate to revoke the permit. The removal order shall be issued only after the appropriate party fails to comply within seven days after the City gives written notice of noncompliance. 
(1)  Procedure following removal order. An aggrieved party may appeal the removal order within 15 days from the date that the notice was mailed. Such appeal shall be made to the Mayor and Council. If the sign is not removed within 30 days after the order of removal (or 30 days after the date any appeal becomes final), the Development Director is authorized to remove or cause to be removed the sign and to collect the costs thereof as provided below. 
(2)  Removal without notice. 
a.  The Development Director or any other agent of the City having jurisdiction under the circumstances may remove or direct the removal of any sign in violation of this chapter, without giving notice to any party, if: 
1.  Said sign is illegally placed upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property; or 
2.  Said sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. 
b.  Following such removal, the City may collect the costs as provided in the following subsection (c)(3). 
(3)  Costs of removal. 
a.  Removal of any sign found in violation shall be without liability to the City, its officers, agents, and employees. The permit holder shall be primarily responsible for the costs of removal. If there is no permit holder, then the sign owner shall be responsible. If the sign owner cannot be determined, then the costs of removal shall be the responsibility of any party that procured the erection of the sign or the property owner. 
b.  If payment or arrangement to make payment is not made within 60 days after the receipt of a statement of removal costs, the Development Director shall certify the amount thereof for collection to the City Attorney. 
c.  Costs of removal shall be charged in accordance with the actual cost to the City. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 260-17. - Severability. 
In the event any section, paragraph, phrase or sentence of this chapter is invalidated by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the remaining sections, paragraphs, phrases or sentences of this chapter, it being the intention of the Mayor and Council that provisions of this chapter are severable to the maximum extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
CHAPTER 270. - NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS 

Section 270-1. - Purpose and intent. 
Within the districts established by Title 2 of the Chamblee Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) and in other provisions and amendments thereto, there exist lots, uses of land, structures, and development features that were lawfully established before the UDO was adopted or amended, but that would be prohibited under the terms of Title 2 or future amendment. They are collectively referred to herein as "nonconforming situations." 
Nonconforming structures include nonconforming buildings. An example of a nonconforming structure would be a building that was legally permitted prior to the enactment of this ordinance or prior to annexation that now fails to meet the setback limits established in this UDO. 
An example of a nonconforming use of land would be a food processing plant that is located in a VC district. It was legally permitted in the M district in 1982; however, the use is not permitted in the current VC district. 
Common examples of nonconforming development features are off-street parking or loading areas that contain fewer spaces than required by current regulations and sites that do not comply with current landscaping or screening requirements. 
Such nonconforming situations are hereby declared to be incompatible with authorized and permitted uses and regulations within the district(s) involved. It is the intent of the City to require the cessation of certain of these nonconforming situations and to allow others to continue on a limited basis until they are otherwise removed or cease. Furthermore, the City intends that nonconforming situations not be used as grounds for adding other buildings, structures, or uses of land prohibited by this Title 2 of the UDO, and that such nonconforming situations not be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 270-2. - Increase of nonconformity prohibited. 
Unless otherwise specifically authorized, no nonconforming situation shall be enlarged, expanded, moved or otherwise altered in any manner that increases any aspect of the existing degree of nonconformity. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 270-3. - Determination of nonconformity status. 
(a)  The burden of proving a nonconformity was lawfully established rests entirely with the subject landowner. 
(b)  A preponderance of evidence must be provided by the subject landowner and be sufficient to show that the nonconformity was lawfully established before adoption of the subject regulations. Evidence must also indicate that the nonconformity has been continuous and that the situation has not lost its nonconforming status. Examples of reliable evidence include: occupational tax certificates; building permits; zoning compliance permits; city/county billing records; utility billing records; assessment, tax or rent records; and directory listings. 
(c)  The Development Director shall determine whether adequate proof of nonconforming status has been provided by the subject landowner. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 270-4. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  An undeveloped lot that has an area, frontage, or other characteristic that does not conform to the requirements of the district in which it is located but was legally subdivided as a lot of record at the time it was permitted may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which it is now located; however, any use or structure built on this lot subsequent to the enactment of this UDO and any further subdivision of this lot or combination of this lot with another lot shall conform to all other standards of this UDO. 
(b)  Where land is taken for public purposes from a lot of record that was conforming at the time of such taking but becomes nonconforming due to said taking, the lot remaining shall be construed as a nonconforming lot of record. Such lot is subject to the provisions of Subsection (a) of this Section 270-4. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 270-5. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  A nonconforming use of land may be continued so long as it is and remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land or floor area than was occupied prior to the date of adoption or amendment of the zoning ordinance making such use nonconforming. 
(2)  Unless otherwise specifically authorized, no nonconforming use of land shall be moved, enlarged, or extended, in whole or in part, onto any portion of the lot or parcel other than that portion occupied by such use prior to the date of adoption or amendment of the zoning ordinance making such use nonconforming. 
(3)  If any nonconforming use of land is discontinued for any reason for a full year, any subsequent use of land shall conform to the regulations specified by this UDO for the district in which such land is located. 
(4)  Vacancy or non-use shall constitute discontinuance regardless of the intent of the owner, tenant, or lessee. Such restriction shall not apply for any period of time that such cessation is a direct result of governmental action impeding access to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 270-6. - Nonconforming structures. 
(a)  A nonconforming structure may be continued so long as it is and remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases any aspect of its existing degree of nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be enlarged or altered if the degree of its nonconformity remains the same or is decreased, provided such structure is used for a permitted use. 
(2)  Standards applicable to specific structure types. 
a.  Detached single-family and two-family residential primary and accessory structures: Should a nonconforming one- or two-family residential structure or nonconforming portion of such structure be destroyed in whole or in part, by any means except by willful act of the owner or tenant, in whole or in part, it may be reconstructed, provided said reconstruction does not increase any aspect of the previously existing aspect of nonconformity and further provided that said reconstructed structure is used for a permitted use. 
b.  All other primary and accessory structures: Should any other nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means except through a willful act of the owner or tenant, to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. Should such structure or portion thereof be so destroyed to an extent of 50 percent or less of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it may be reconstructed, provided said reconstruction does not increase any aspect of the previously existing aspect of nonconformity; said reconstructed structure is used for a permitted use, and; said reconstruction complies with Section 270-7. 
(3)  A nonconforming structure may be moved on its own lot only if such movement reduces the degree of nonconformity or eliminates such nonconformity. 
(4)  Where a nonconforming structure is moved off its previous lot, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(5)  In cases where land is taken for public purposes from lots of record that are conforming at the time of such taking in such manner as to reduce setback(s) previously provided in relation to a portion of a structure below setback requirements applicable within the district, the portion of the structure involved shall be construed to be nonconforming. 
(b)  Unsafe buildings. Nothing in this UDO shall prevent the maintenance, strengthening, or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the Chief Building Official or other proper authority. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 270-7. - Nonconforming development features. 
(a)  Nonconforming development features may remain except as otherwise expressly stated in this UDO, but the nature and extent of nonconforming site features may not be increased except as otherwise expressly stated in this UDO. 
(b)  No change to any nonconforming development feature shall be made which increases the degree of nonconformity with the requirements of the UDO, but changes may be made which result in the same or a lesser degree of nonconformity, subject to compliance with the provisions of Section 270-9. In cases where land is taken for public purposes in such a manner as to reduce existing off-street parking, loading or other development features that is required by the regulations for the current district, the deficiency thus created shall be construed as a nonconforming development feature. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 270-8. - Buildings and structures where construction has begun. 
See Section 100-4 for regulations applying to buildings and structures where construction has begun. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 270-9. - Redevelopment thresholds. 
The requirements of the UDO shall apply to all zoning districts, unless otherwise exempted by this section. 
(1)  Renovations, alterations, adaptations, additions, restorations, repairs, or other redevelopment of a structure, or portions of a structure, that was in existence prior to the adoption of this UDO, shall be subject to the provisions of this UDO in accordance with the Redevelopment Thresholds Summary Table (Figure 270-9 below). 
(2)  In determining redevelopment thresholds, costs shall be calculated using methods outlined on forms provided by the Development Department. 
(3)  The phrase "redevelopment costs" in this section shall encompass all costs, including phased project costs, for a cumulative period of 36 months after the date of the initial redevelopment application. 
(4)  Exemptions: The provisions of Section 270-9 shall not be mandatory for nonconforming detached single-family and two-family residential structures reconstructed following destruction pursuant to Subsection 270-6(a)(2)a. 
(5)  Limitations. 
a.  Notwithstanding the above requirements, the redevelopment cost of mandatory compliance of such redevelopment with the provisions of Subsection 270-9(2), shall not exceed 125 percent of the fair market value of the structure immediately prior to such redevelopment or $20,000.00, whichever is greater. In such cases, the provisions requiring completion shall be applied in the order listed in the table below until the 125 percent cap is met. 
b.  Relaxed compliance with regulations in the UDO pursuant to this section shall only apply to existing features. For any new development features or building additions, the provisions of each applicable section of this code apply, regardless of whether they are triggered by the Redevelopment Thresholds. For example, additional parking spaces shall comply with all parking lot landscaping requirements, and a new dumpster shall comply with all dumpster setback and screening requirements. 
Figure 270-9. Redevelopment Thresholds Summary Table 

 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17; Ord. No. 748 , 3-20-18) 
CHAPTER 280. - PROCEDURES 
ARTICLE 1. - COMMON PROCEDURAL PROVISIONS 

Section 280-1. - Applicability. 
The common provisions of this chapter apply to all of the review and approval procedures of this UDO, unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-2. - Georgia Zoning Procedures Law. 
The review and approval procedures of this UDO are intended to comply with the provisions of the Georgia Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., which is incorporated by reference in its entirety. If any provision of this UDO is in conflict with any provision of the zoning procedures law or if this UDO fails to incorporate a provision required for the implementation of the zoning procedures law, the zoning procedures law controls. These procedures do not apply to Sign Ordinance review outlined in Chapter 260. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-3. - Outside agency reviews. 
(a)  Developments of regional impact. If a proposed development qualifies as a Development of Regional Impact (DRI) pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.1, no action may be taken by the administrative bodies detailed in this Chapter 280 until such DRI report is received from the Atlanta Regional Commission and comments, if any, are addressed to the satisfaction of the Development Director. 
(b)  MARTA area plan review. If a proposed development qualifies for MARTA Area Plan Review (APR) pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-8-80(2), by being located within 200 feet of the centerline of the existing MARTA rapid transit track or within a quarter mile (1,320 feet) of an existing MARTA rapid transit station, no action may be taken by the administrative bodies detailed in this Chapter 280 until such a MARTA Area Plan Review Report is received from the Atlanta Regional Commission and comments, if any, are addressed to the satisfaction of the Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-4. - Summary of review and decision-making authority. 
The following table provides a summary of review and decision-making authority under this UDO. In the event of conflict between this summary table and the detailed procedures identified in this UDO, the detailed procedures govern. 
Figure 280-4. Summary of Review and Decision-Making Authority 

 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-5. - Applications and fees. 
(a)  Form of application. 
(1)  Applications required under this UDO must be submitted on such forms as required by the Development Director. 
(2)  The Development Director shall develop checklists of application submittal requirements and make those checklists available to the public. 
(b)  Application filing fees. Applications must be accompanied by the fee amount indicated in the fee schedule that has been approved by Mayor and City Council. Application filing fees are nonrefundable once the application has been accepted and determined to be complete. 
(c)  Application completeness, accuracy, and sufficiency. 
(1)  An application will be considered complete and ready for processing only if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes all required information and supporting documentation, and is accompanied by the required application filing fee. 
(2)  The Development Director shall make a determination of application completeness in accordance with the schedule established pursuant to section 280-6. 
(3)  If an application is determined to be incomplete, the Development Director shall provide written notice to the applicant along with an explanation of the application's deficiencies. 
(4)  No further processing of incomplete applications will occur, and incomplete applications will be pulled from the processing cycle. When the deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed in the next processing cycle. 
(5)  Applications deemed complete by the Development Director will be considered to be in the processing cycle and will be reviewed by city staff, affected agencies, and other review and decision-making bodies in accordance with applicable review and approval procedures of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-6. - Application processing cycles. 
(a)  The Development Directors authorized to promulgate reasonable application processing cycles and schedules for processing applications under this UDO. Processing cycles may establish: 
(1)  Deadlines for receipt of complete applications; 
(2)  Timeframes for determination of application completeness; 
(3)  Dates of regular meetings; 
(4)  Timing of staff reviews and reports; 
(5)  Estimated timeframes for completion of reviews and decision-making; 
(6)  Timelines for consideration of comprehensive plan amendments (e.g., annual or semiannual); and 
(7)  Other information regarding administrative practices and customs that will assist applicants and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-7. - Denial and withdrawal of applications. 
(a)  Successive applications. 
(1)  If an amendment or DCI application is denied, a successive application for an amendment or DCI affecting all or a portion of the same property may not be submitted within 6 months measured from the date of final action by the mayor and city council. 
(2)  If a variance application is denied, an application to vary the same zoning ordinance provision for the same portion of the subject property may not be resubmitted for six months from the date of the denial. 
(b)  Withdrawal of applications. 
(1)  Applications may be withdrawn at the discretion of the applicant and with approval by the property owner without prejudice at any time before the legal advertising. The applicant is required to submit the request to withdraw in writing to the Development Director. 
(2)  Applications may be withdrawn without prejudice after the legal advertising but before the authorized decision-making body votes on the matter by majority vote of the City Council at the advertised public hearing. The applicant shall not request a refund after the legal advertising. 
(c)  Deferral of applications. 
(1)  Applications may be placed on an administrative hold by the Development Director and deferred to a later meeting if new information has become available about a request or additional information is needed related to the request. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-8. - Public hearings. 
(a)  Hearing procedures. Public hearing bodies shall adopt and publish written rules governing their hearing procedures, which shall be made available to the public at the public hearing. 
(b)  Applicant attendance. Applicants shall appear at public hearings in person or be represented in person by their authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-9. - Action by mayor and city council. 
(a)  The mayor and city council may take any action that is consistent with: 
(1)  The regulations of this UDO; 
(2)  All rules and by-laws that apply to the decision-making body; and 
(3)  The notice that was given. 
(b)  Mayor and city council is authorized to defer action or continue a hearing in order to receive additional information or further deliberate. An action by the mayor and city council to defer a final decision shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the proposal will be considered. 
(c)  Mayor and city council is authorized to refer matters back to the Architectural Review Board for further deliberations or to obtain additional information. 
(d)  Mayor and city council is authorized to defer action, continue the hearing, deny, or table an application whenever the applicant fails to appear for a scheduled and advertised hearing or whenever the applicant fails at more than one meeting to provide the information or documentation necessary for a competent evaluation of the plan's or application's compliance with applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-10. - Conditions of approval. 
(a)  When decision-making bodies approve applications with conditions, the conditions must relate to a situation created or aggravated by the proposed use or development and must be roughly proportional to the impacts of the use or development. No condition in the form of a development exaction for other than a project improvement may be imposed within the meaning of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act. Any conditions imposed must comply with the following: 
(1)  Conditions may be imposed to mitigate any possible adverse impacts of the proposal on neighboring persons or properties, consistent with the purposes of this UDO, the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan and state law. 
(2)  Once imposed, conditions run with land and will be enforced on all present and future property owners and successors in interest. 
(3)  Except as otherwise expressly stated, amendments or changes to approved conditions may be approved only by following the same procedures as the original approval. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-11. - Reserved. 
Section 280-12. - Architectural review board. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The intent of this section is to establish an Architectural Review Board ("board") or "ARB" and to provide procedures for the review and recommendation of all Developments of Community Impact to the City Council in accordance with Section 280-24 for Developments of Community Impact, as well as the applicable review and approval criteria for concurrent variances and concurrent waivers. 
(b)  Duties and procedures. 
(1)  The ARB shall consist of at least six members appointed by the mayor and city council. Members shall be residents, merchants, or property owners in the city, none of whom shall hold any other public office or position with the city. They shall be appointed yearly by the mayor and city council. Members do not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. Any vacancy in the membership of the review board will be filled in the same manner as the initial appointment. The mayor and city council may seek advice and recommendations for membership appointments from business, civic, and cultural organizations, as well as from citizens at large. Desirable special qualifications of the members would include an understanding of and skills in architectural design, landscape architecture, urban planning, real estate, or engineering. 
(2)  The review board members shall elect a chair and vice chair. The board shall adopt rules and guidelines for the review of proposals. The Development Director shall facilitate and keep minutes of the meetings and records of the development proposals. Meetings of the review board shall be held once a month and at such other times as the board may determine. The Development Director or the chair may suspend meetings if there is no business. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(3)  The review board shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and consideration of applications, shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings, and for the calling of special meetings. A quorum for any meeting shall consist of four members. A majority vote of the members attending any meeting shall carry a recommendation. Regardless of whether the proper number of votes is secured to carry a recommendation, an application shall proceed to Mayor and City Council review with reporting of the ARB as to its consideration and recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
ARTICLE 2. - AMENDMENTS 

Section 280-13. - Applicability. 
(a)  The procedures of this article apply to future development map amendments, zoning map amendments, zoning ordinance text amendments, and modifications of conditions attached to previously approved amendments. 
(b)  Concurrency with zoning map amendments. No zoning map amendment shall be considered if it is not consistent with the future development map. Pursuant to the future development map, an applicant may submit an amendment to the map, either separately or concurrently with a proposed zoning map amendment. If the applications are submitted concurrently, the Mayor and City Council shall consider the requests in a manner such that a decision on the application for a future development map amendment shall be rendered prior to the decision on the application for a zoning map amendment. If a future land use map amendment is denied, the associated zoning map amendment shall be considered withdrawn. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-14. - Authority to initiate. 
Amendments to the future land use map, the zoning map, modifications of conditions of approval, and the text of this zoning ordinance may be initiated by the Mayor following a motion and a second, any member of the city council following a motion and a second, or by the Development Director acting on behalf of the mayor and city council. In addition, amendments to the future land use map and the zoning map or modifications to conditions of approval may be initiated upon application by the owner of the subject property or the subject property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-15. - Public hearing notices. 
(a)  Published notice. At least 15 days before but not more than 45 days before the date of the public hearing to be held by the mayor and city council, notice of the public hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. This required notice must indicate the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. In the case of proposed amendments initiated by a party other than the city, the notice must also identify the location of the subject property and the property's existing and proposed zoning classification. 
(b)  If a proposed zoning decision is for a zoning map amendment, change of conditions, or major site plan modification is initiated by a party other than the Mayor and City Council, then: 
(1)  The notice, in addition to the requirements of Subsection 280-15(a), shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; and 
(2)  Posted notice. One or more signs shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the property, not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. At least one sign shall be posted along each street on which the subject property has frontage. One additional sign shall be posted for each additional 500 feet of frontage or fraction thereof in excess of 500 feet of frontage on each street on which the subject property has frontage. Each sign shall contain the time and place of the public hearing before the mayor and city council and the nature of the proposed change; and 
(3)  Written notice. Written notice shall be mailed by first class mail to all owners of property within 250 feet of the boundaries of the subject property; as such property owners are listed on the county's tax records, at least 15 days before the public hearing before the mayor and city council. The notice shall state the nature of the proposed change and the time and place of the public hearing before the Mayor and City Council. 
(c)  When a proposed zoning decision relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, a public hearing shall be held by the mayor and city council on the proposed action. Such public hearing shall be held at least six months but not more than nine months prior to the date of final action of the zoning decision by the mayor and city council. The hearing required by this section shall be in addition to the hearing required under Section 280-8. 
(1)  Notice of this hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the manner required by Subsection 280-15(a) above, and sign(s) shall be posted on the property in the manner required under Subsection 280-15(b), above. 
(2)  Notice as required under Subsections 280-15(a) and (b), both posted and published, shall include a prominent statement that the proposed zoning decision relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency. The published notice shall be at least six column inches in size and shall not be located in the classified advertising section of the newspaper. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-16. - City council public hearing and decision. 
(a)  Upon receipt of recommendations from staff, the mayor and city council shall hold a public hearing on proposed amendments. 
(b)  When a proposed zoning map amendment relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, the mayor and city council public hearing must be held at least six months before and not more than nine months before the date of final action on the application. 
(c)  The following policies and procedures shall govern the conduct of the public hearing held by the Mayor and City Council pursuant to this section. Printed copies of those policies and procedures shall be available for distribution to the general public: 
(1)  The hearing shall be presided over by the Mayor. After calling the hearing to order, the mayor shall request that the parcels of property which are the subject of the zoning proposal be identified and read. Following such identification and reading, the Development Director's recommendation shall be presented. The Mayor and City Council shall cause the director's written recommendation to be made a part of the record. 
(2)  Proponents of each proposed zoning decision shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the zoning decision. If all ten minutes are not used, the proponents' remaining time may be reserved for rebuttal. Opponents of each proposed zoning decision shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning each zoning decision. The presentation times may not be reduced but may be extended by majority vote, provided they are expanded equally for proponents and opponents. 
(d)  A meeting of the Mayor and City Council for the purposes of reviewing and making final decisions on amendments shall be conducted either no more than five days after the date of the public hearing, or at the next scheduled meeting of the mayor and city council. 
(1)  At said meeting, the Mayor and City Council shall review the analysis and materials submitted by the initiating party, the recommendations of the Development Director, other matters of record and materials, data, evidence and opinion submitted, and the corresponding review standards and criteria set forth in Section 280-17 in making a final decision on each amendment. 
(2)  The mayor and city council shall act by simple majority vote to approve the proposed amendment, approve the proposed amendment with conditions, deny, defer, or table the proposed amendment. 
(3)  The Mayor and City Council may approve an amendment that includes approval of specific variances or waivers to the provisions of the UDO, provided such variances and waivers were noticed with the amendment and are specifically enumerated and approved in their action. Such variances shall be articulated as a part of the letter of intent and development plans. Variances and waivers shall be approved in accordance with the concurrent review process of Section 280-35. 
(e)  If the zoning is for property to be annexed into the city then: 
(1)  The Mayor and City Council shall complete the required procedures for such zonings, except for the final vote of the mayor and city council, prior to the adoption of the annexation zoning ordinance or resolution or the effective date of any local Act but no sooner than the date the notice of the proposed annexation is provided to the governing authority of the county as required under the O.C.G.A. § 36-36-6. 
(2)  The public hearing required by Section 280-16 shall be conducted prior to the annexation of the subject property into the city. 
(3)  In addition to any other notice requirements, the city shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the county wherein the property to be annexed is located, a notice of the hearing as required under the provisions of Subsection 280-15(a). 
(f)  The zoning classification approved by the mayor and city council following the hearing required by this Subsection 280-16(c) shall become effective on the later of: 
(1)  The date the zoning is approved by the mayor and city council; 
(2)  The date that the annexation becomes effective pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-36-2; or 
(3)  Where a county has interposed an objection pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-36-11, the date provided for in O.C.G.A. § 36-36-11(b)(8). 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-17. - Review and approval criteria. 
(a)  Future land use map amendments. The following review and approval criteria shall be used in reviewing and taking action on all comprehensive plan land use map amendments, including changing conditions to existing zoning: 
(1)  Whether the land use amendment proposal is compatible with the surrounding future land uses as identified in the future development map. 
(2)  Whether the land use amendment proposal can be adequately served by existing transportation facilities and other infrastructure, such as schools, water and sewer. 
(3)  Whether the land use amendment proposal negatively impacts natural and historic resources identified by the City. 
(4)  Whether the land use amendment proposal is in the best interest of the City and the public good and whether the proposal protects the health and welfare of its citizens. 
(5)  Whether the property to be affected by the land use amendment proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently designated on the future development map. 
(6)  Whether the land use amendment proposal meets the policies and intent established in the future development map. 
(b)  Zoning map amendments. The following review and approval criteria shall be used in reviewing and taking action on all zoning map amendments, including changing conditions to existing zoning: 
(1)  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property; 
(2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by their particular zoning restrictions; 
(3)  The extent to which the possible reduction of property values of the subject property promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
(4)  The relative harm to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; 
(5)  The suitability of the subject property for the zoning proposed; 
(6)  The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property; 
(7)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(8)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(9)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(10)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
(11)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the future development map; and 
(12)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which gives supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-18. - Modifications of approved amendment site plans. 
(a)  Minor site plan modifications. 
(1)  Modification of any of the following site plan characteristics, if attached to an approved amendment, constitute a "minor site modification" for purposes of interpreting this section. For the purposes of this section, a minor modification in the approved amendment means a slight alteration or change in layout, such as, but not limited to, small shifts in the location of buildings, streets, driveways, sidewalks, trails, utilities, easements or other similar features that do not negatively impact adjacent property, the public health and safety, the quality of materials, the appearance of the project, or the health and quality of the natural environment. All other site modifications are considered major site modifications: 
a.  The movement of any building or structure within the site, provided the movement of the structure is not closer to the boundary line of the property to which it is adjacent; 
b.  Any increase in the minimum size of residential units; 
c.  Any addition in any buffer requirement; 
d.  Any decrease in building or structure height; 
e.  Any change in the proportion of floor space devoted to different authorized uses by less than 5 percent; 
f.  Decrease in the land area of the subject property or project; 
g.  Relocation of site features that do not exceed any other minor site modification thresholds; or 
h.  Any request authorized to be administratively granted by the UDO that does not exceed any other minor site modification threshold. 
(2)  Modification of conditions attached to an approved amendment that are not classified as a minor site modification pursuant to subsection (a)(1), constitute a "major modification" for purposes of interpreting this section. 
(3)  The Development Director is authorized to approve minor site modifications. 
(4)  Any request for minor site modification must be made in writing to the Development Director. If an approved site plan exists, the request for minor site modification must be accompanied by copies of the revised site plan. 
(b)  Major site plan modifications. 
(1)  Any modification request that exceeds the thresholds for a minor site plan modification or any modification the Development Director determines to be substantial enough to require Mayor and City Council review is considered a major site plan modification. 
(2)  Any major site plan modification, as well as requests to approved amendments shall be processed as a new amendment application in accordance with the procedures of this article, including the requirement for fees, notices, and hearings. 
(3)  Any alterations of conditions attached to an approved amendment shall be processed as a new amendment application in accordance with the procedures of this article, including the requirement for fees, notices, and hearings. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
ARTICLE 3. - DEVELOPMENTS OF COMMUNITY IMPACT 

Section 280-19. - Applicability. 
(a)  Any development or building project with an aggregate of 20,000 square feet or more of new buildings or a site consisting of two acres or more shall proceed through the Development of Community Impact (DCI) process. 
(b)  The purpose of the DCI shall be to: 
(1)  Provide for unified approaches to the development of land; 
(2)  Provide for the development of stable environments that are compatible with surrounding areas of the community; and 
(3)  Provide for architectural review and approval for individual large-scale structures not subject to other legislative review. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-20. - Authority to file. 
Applications for DCIs may be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-21. - Application filing. 
(a)  At a minimum, the application shall be completed on forms provided by the Development Department and shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  Table of contents for the application and supporting materials; 
(2)  Location map; 
(3)  Narrative description of the nature and intent of the application, characteristics of the site, and a quantitative and qualitative description of the uses, buildings, and structures included in the proposed development; 
(4)  Development plans as described in Subsection 280-21(b); 
(5)  Justification for using the Review and Approval Criteria in Section 280-23; 
(6)  Variances and waivers shall be submitted in accordance with the concurrent variance process outlined in Section 280-35. 
(b)  The following development plans drawn, stamped, and sealed by a state-registered professional surveyor, civil engineer, landscape architect or land planner: 
(1)  Analysis of existing site conditions. An analysis of existing site conditions including a boundary survey and topographic map of the site at a minimum 1 inch = 40 feet scale shall include information on all existing manmade and natural features, utilities, all streams and easements, and features to be retained, moved or altered. The existing shape and dimensions of the existing lot to be built upon including the size, measurement and location of any existing buildings or structures on the lot shall be included. 
(2)  Master plan. A master plan at a minimum 1 inch = 40 feet scale showing compliance with all regulations and calculations required by the zoning ordinance which shall include, but not be limited to, information on all proposed improvements including proposed building footprints, doors, densities, parking ratios, open space, height, sidewalks, yards, under and over-head utilities, internal circulation and parking, landscaping, grading, lighting, drainage, amenities, and similar details including their respective measurements. 
(3)  Landscape plan. A site plan at a minimum 1 inch = 40 feet scale showing compliance with all regulations and calculations required by the zoning ordinance which shall include, but not be limited to, information on landscaping, tree species and the number of all plantings and open space including the landscaping that is being preserved, removed and that which is replacing the landscaping that is removed. 
(4)  Architectural design. Preliminary architectural plans and all elevations with sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with all design criteria of this Chapter as well as the regulations and calculations required by the zoning ordinance shall include, but not be limited to, scaled floor plans and elevation drawings of proposed buildings and structures and information on building materials, features, exterior finish legend, windows, doors, colors, and items affecting exterior appearance, such as signs, air conditioning, grills, compressors, and similar details including their respective measurements. 
(5)  Phasing plan. Should a DCI be expected to require five years or longer to complete, a phasing plan shall be provided by the applicant that indicates the timeframe for construction and development of each phase of the DCI. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-22. - City council public hearing and decision. 
(a)  Upon receipt of recommendations from staff and ARB, the mayor and city council shall hold a public hearing on proposed DCIs. 
(b)  The following policies and procedures shall govern the conduct of the public hearing held by the Mayor and City Council pursuant to this section. Printed copies of those policies and procedures shall be available for distribution to the general public: 
(1)  The hearing shall be presided over by the Mayor. After calling the hearing to order, the mayor shall request that the parcels of property which are the subject of the zoning proposal be identified and read. Following such identification and reading, the Development Director's recommendation shall be presented. The Mayor and City Council shall cause the director's written recommendation to be made a part of the record. 
(2)  Proponents of each proposed zoning decision shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the zoning decision. If all ten minutes are not used, the proponents' remaining time may be reserved for rebuttal. Opponents of each proposed zoning decision shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning each zoning decision. The presentation times may not be reduced but may be extended by majority vote, provided they are expanded equally for proponents and opponents. 
(c)  A meeting of the Mayor and City Council for the purposes of reviewing and making final decisions on DCIs shall be conducted either no more than five days after the date of the public hearing, or at the next scheduled meeting of the mayor and city council. 
(1)  At said meeting, the Mayor and City Council shall review the analysis and materials submitted by the initiating party, the recommendations of the Development Director and ARB, other matters of record and materials, data, evidence and opinion submitted, and the corresponding review standards and criteria set forth in Section 280-23 in making a final decision on each DCI. 
(2)  The mayor and city council shall act by simple majority vote to approve the proposed DCI, approve the DCI with conditions, or deny the DCI based on the applicable review and approval criteria of Section 280-23. 
(3)  The Mayor and City Council may approve a DCI plan that includes approval of specific variances or waivers to the provisions of the UDO, provided such variances and waivers are noticed with the hearing notification and are specifically enumerated and approved in their action. Such variances shall be articulated as a part of the letter of intent and development plans. Variances and waivers shall be approved in accordance with the concurrent review process of Section 280-35. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-23. - Review and approval criteria. 
(a)  The following review and approval criteria must be used in reviewing and taking action on all DCIs: 
(1)  Design shall be in harmony with the general character of the neighborhood and surrounding area, considering factors such as mass, placement, height, changing land use patterns, and consistency of exterior architectural treatment, especially in areas of historic and special design interest. 
(2)  Design components shall be planned such that they are physically and aesthetically related and coordinated with other elements of the project and surrounding environment to ensure visual continuity of design. 
(3)  Design shall protect scenic views, particularly those of open space, and utilize natural features of the site. 
(4)  Design shall protect adjacent properties from negative visual and functional impacts. 
(5)  Design shall respect the historical character of the immediate area as integral parts of community life in the city and shall protect and preserve structures and spaces which provide a significant link within these areas. 
(6)  All exterior forms, attached to buildings or not, shall be in conformity with, and secondary to, the building. 
(7)  The proposed development is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
(8)  The proposed development does not adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
(9)  The proposed development does not result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools. 
(10)  The proposed development is in conformance with the applicable zoning district. 
(11)  The proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of the future development plan articulated in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Site planning. Site planning in the proposed DCI shall give consideration to the topography, the location of structures, buffers, screening, stream buffers, floodplains, wetlands, setbacks, transit, pedestrian and bike access, and street design that demonstrates multi-modal access and connectivity of the development with its surrounding areas. 
(2)  Service and emergency access. Access and circulation shall adequately provide for firefighting and other emergency equipment, service deliveries and refuse collection. 
(3)  Utilities. Provision shall be made for acceptable design and construction of electric and natural gas utilities, water supply, wastewater collection, and stormwater management facilities, as required by Chapter 340 of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-24. - Modifications of approved DCI site plans. 
(a)  Minor site plan modifications. 
(1)  Modification of any of the following site plan characteristics, if attached to an approved DCI, constitute a "minor site modification" for purposes of interpreting this section. For the purposes of this section, a minor modification in the approved DCI means a slight alteration or change in layout, such as, but not limited to, small shifts in the location of buildings, streets, driveways, sidewalks, trails, utilities, easements or other similar features that do not negatively impact adjacent property, the public health and safety, the quality of materials, the appearance of the project, or the health and quality of the natural environment. All other site modifications are considered major site modifications: 
a.  The movement of any building or structure within the site, provided the movement of the structure is not closer to the boundary line of the property to which it is adjacent; 
b.  Any increase in the minimum size of residential units; 
c.  Any addition in any buffer requirement; 
d.  Any decrease in building or structure height; 
e.  Any change in the proportion of floor space devoted to different authorized uses by less than 5 percent; 
f.  Decrease in the land area of the subject property or project; 
g.  Relocation of site features that do not exceed any other minor site modification thresholds; or 
h.  Any request authorized to be administratively granted by the UDO that does not exceed any other minor site modification threshold. 
(2)  Modification of conditions attached to an approved DCI constitute a "major modification" for purposes of interpreting this section. 
(b)  Major site plan modifications. 
(1)  Any modification request that exceeds the thresholds for a minor site plan modification or any modification the Development Director determines to be substantial enough to require Mayor and City Council review, as well as any modification to required conditions is considered a major site plan modification. 
(2)  Any major site plan modification request for attached to approved DCIs shall be processed as a new DCI application in accordance with the procedures of this article, including the requirement for fees, notices, and meetings. 
(3)  Any alterations of conditions attached to an approved amendment shall be processed as a new DCI application in accordance with the procedures of this article, including the requirement for fees, notices, and meetings. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-25. - Expiration of approval. 
(a)  Unless established otherwise by the Mayor and City Council in a regular business meeting, a plan approved for a DCI, any modifications of conditions of approval, or any related variances and waivers shall expire in two years from date of approval by the Mayor and City Council, unless a land disturbance permit has been granted by the Development Department. A one-year extension may be granted by action of the Mayor and City Council in a regular business meeting. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Subsection 280-25(a), a plan approved for a DCI shall expire five years from the date of approval of the Mayor and City Council. An extension may be granted by action of the Mayor and City Council in a regular business meeting. A DCI may extend beyond the five years, without the need for an extension, if accompanied by a phasing plan established pursuant to Subsection 280-21(b)(5). 
(c)  DCI plans, any modifications of conditions of approval, or any related variances and waivers that expire pursuant to this section shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
ARTICLE 4. - VARIANCES 

Section 280-26. - Applicability. 
Any variations to strict compliance with the regulations of this UDO require review and approval by the mayor and city council in accordance with the variance procedures of this article. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-27. - Prohibited variances. 
(a)  The variance procedures of this UDO may not be used to: 
(1)  Allow a structure or use not authorized in the subject zoning district or a residential floor area ratio that is not authorized within the subject district; 
(2)  Waive, vary, modify or otherwise override a site plan or condition of approval attached to an amendment, DCI, or other development approval under this UDO; 
(3)  Permit the expansion or enlargement of any nonconforming use; 
(4)  Permit the reestablishment of any nonconforming use that has been abandoned or lost its nonconforming rights; 
(5)  Vary the home occupation regulations; 
(6)  Vary permitted uses based on zoning district; 
(7)  Allow a decrease in the minimum lot area. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-28. - Authority to file. 
Applications for variances shall be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-29. - Application filing. 
Variance applications shall be filed with the Development Director. The application shall be completed on forms provided by the Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-30. - City council public hearing and decision. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall hold a public hearing to consider all variance applications; 
(b)  Following the close of the hearing and consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence and matters of record, the mayor and city council shall act by simple majority vote of members present and voting to approve the variance, approve the variance with conditions or deny the requested variance. The mayor and city council is also authorized to defer action on the variance or allow the applicant to withdraw the variance without prejudice. The council's final decision must be made within a reasonable period of time but in no event more than 60 days from the date of the close of the hearing; 
(c)  Published notice. At least 15 days before but not more than 45 days before the date of the public hearing to be held by the mayor and city council, notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. This required notice shall indicate the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. The notice shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the nature of variances sought; and 
(d)  Posted notice. One or more signs shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property, not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. At least one sign shall be posted along each street on which the subject property has frontage. One additional sign shall be posted for each additional 500 feet of frontage or fraction thereof in excess of 500 feet of frontage on each street on which the subject property has frontage. Each sign shall contain the time and place of the public hearing before the mayor and city council and the nature of the variances sought; and 
(e)  Written notice. Written notice shall be mailed by first class mail by the Development Director to all owners of property within 250 feet of the boundaries of the subject property; as such, property owners are listed on the county's tax records, at least 15 days before the public hearing before the mayor and city council. The notice shall state the nature of the proposed change, and the time and place of the public hearing before the Mayor and City Council. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-31. - Review and approval criteria. 
(a)  The mayor and city council may authorize variances from the provisions of this UDO only after making the following findings: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular property in question because of its size, shape or topography; and 
(2)  The application of this UDO to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
(4)  Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the property owner; or 
(5)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good nor impair the purposes or intent of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-32. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a final variance decision of the mayor and city council, including any officer, department, board or agency affected by such decision, may seek review of such decision by petitioning the superior court for a writ of certiorari, setting forth the alleged errors. The petition must be filed within 30 days of the date that the mayor and city council renders its final decision. 
(b)  When a petition for a writ of certiorari is filed, the mayor and city council shall be designated the respondent in certiorari and the city the defendant in certiorari. The secretary of the mayor and city council is authorized to acknowledge service of a copy of the petition and writ on behalf of the mayor and city council, as respondent. Service upon the city as defendant must be as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-33. - Transfer of variances. 
Approved variances, and any attached conditions, run with the land and are not affected by changes in tenancy or ownership. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-34. - Amending conditions of approval. 
A request for changes in conditions of approval attached to an approved variance must be processed as a new variance application in accordance with the procedures of this article, including the requirements for fees, notices and hearings. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-35. - Concurrent review process. 
(a)  Concurrent review for variance and waiver applications may be filed with an amendment, major modification, or DCI application. The concurrent reviews shall be filed in accordance with the filing deadline for the parent application. 
(b)  A separate variance or waiver application is not required to submit for concurrent review. The variances and waivers requested for the concurrent review process shall be listed in the letter of intent and justified using the Review and Approval Criteria with the parent application. 
(c)  Any development features shown contrary to the UDO on any site or development plan and not listed in the application as a specific concurrent variance or waiver request will not be considered automatically approved through the process. 
(d)  The mayor and city council may consider and approve, approve with conditions, or deny variances that would otherwise require separate approval under Article 4 simultaneously (i.e., concurrent variance) with an amendment or DCI application. In such cases, the ARB must make a recommendation on the concurrent review request in addition to the companion DCI application. Amendment applications with concurrent reviews do not require ARB recommendation, unless they are also running concurrently with a DCI application; however, the amendment request itself does not require ARB recommendation. 
(e)  Any application for a variance or waiver that is not processed simultaneously with an amendment or DCI application must be processed as a separate variance request in accordance with the procedures of Article 4. 
(f)  In taking action on concurrent variance and waiver requests, the Mayor and City Council shall apply the variance review and approval criteria of Section 280-31 and the waiver review and approval criteria of Section 300-8. 
(g)  Any person aggrieved by a final concurrent review decision of the mayor and city council, including any officer, department, board or agency affected by such decision, may seek review of such decision by petitioning the superior court for a writ of certiorari, setting forth the alleged errors. The petition must be filed within 30 days of the date that the mayor and city council renders its final decision on the variance. Service upon the city must be as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
ARTICLE 5. - ADMINISTRATIVE VARIANCES 

Section 280-36. - Applicability. 
(a)  Relief from strict compliance with the regulations of this UDO may be reviewed and approved by the Development Director in accordance with the variance procedures of this article. The authority to grant such administrative variances shall be limited to a variance from the following requirements: 
(1)  Front yard or street side yard. Variance not to exceed ten percent of the required setback. If contextual setbacks are required, this relief may be granted for the minimum or maximum setback in the range. 
(2)  Side yard. Variance not to exceed 2.5 feet deducted from the required setback. In no case shall the structure be located closer than five feet to the property line unless a variance is granted by Mayor and City Council. 
(3)  Rear yard. Variance not to exceed five feet deducted from the required setback. In the NR-1 residential district, a variance not to exceed 120 square feet addition to the rear of a principal building; provided, however, that no addition shall be located within 20 feet of the rear property line. 
(4)  Building height. Not to exceed five feet for a mixed-use building built upon a parking deck or two feet for other uses except single-family detached residential. This provision may not be used to reduce the required minimum building façade heights set forth in Subsection 230-27(c) except in order to facilitate the adaptive reuse of an existing building that the Development Director determines to be of exceptional architectural character. 
(5)  Minimum required parking spaces. Reduction up to 5 percent or 10 spaces, whichever is less. 
(6)  Maximum required parking spaces. Up to 10 percent or 50 parking spaces, whichever is less. 
(7)  Reduction or increase in number of compact parking spaces. Up to 10 percent or 25 parking spaces, whichever is less. 
(8)  Parking permitted in the front yard. Up to 50 existing parking spaces to be accessed from a single driveway parallel to the street for adaptive reuse of an existing building. 
(9)  Fenestration. Variance not to exceed 10 percent of the required fenestration. 
(10)  Landscape zone. Variance not to exceed two feet deducted from the required minimum width. 
(11)  Sidewalk clear zone. Variance not to exceed two feet deducted from the required minimum width. 
(12)  Supplemental zone. Variance not to exceed two feet deducted from the required minimum width. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17; Ord. No. 748 , 3-20-18) 
Section 280-37. - Authority to file. 
Applications for approval of administrative variances may be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-38. - Application filing. 
Administrative variance applications shall be filed with the Development Director. The application shall be completed on forms provided by the Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-39. - Development director decision. 
(a)  The Development Director shall make a decision for the application. 
(b)  The decision of the Development Director regarding an administrative variance shall state the reasons for approval or denial and shall be considered the "final decision." Said final decision shall be made no later than 60 days following filing of a complete application, unless extended by agreement of the applicant. 
(c)  Appeals from a final decision on an administrative variance by an aggrieved party shall follow the appeals procedure of Article 6. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-40. - Review and approval criteria. 
(a)  The Development Director shall have the authority to grant limited minor administrative variances from certain provisions of this zoning ordinance unrelated to parking, where the Development Director determines that: 
(1)  The strict application of the requirements of this zoning ordinance would cause undue and unnecessary hardship to the property owner or authorized agent; and 
(2)  The intent and continued integrity of the zoning ordinance can be achieved with equal performance and protection of public interests through grant of the administrative variance. 
(b)  The Development Director shall have the authority to grant limited minor administrative variances from the minimum parking space requirements listed in Section 250-2, where the Development Director determines that: 
(1)  Because of unique circumstances including the shape, topography, soils and vegetation of the site, the provision of the minimum or maximum number of required spaces would cause the applicant to suffer unique and undue hardship. 
(2)  The site is located in an environmentally sensitive area, such as a water supply watershed, where stormwater runoff should be minimized. 
(3)  The unique circumstances of the use make the minimum or maximum number of parking spaces excessive for actual needs. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
ARTICLE 6. - APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS 

Section 280-41. - Applicability. 
The procedures of this article apply to appeals of decisions made by any city official pursuant to the interpretation and decision-making authority enumerated in the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-42. - Authority to file. 
Any person or entity aggrieved by an administrative decision may appeal the decision. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-43. - Application filing. 
(a)  Decisions by the Development Director or any other city official made pursuant to this article may be appealed to the mayor and city council by filing a request with the Development Director within 15 days of the administrative decision. 
(b)  Appeals shall be in accordance with procedures and conditions of this article. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complete application of appeal, the Development Director or other city official whose decision is being appealed must transmit to the mayor and city council all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken. 
(d)  If no appeal is made within the 15-day period, the decision of the Development Director is final. 
(1)  If an appeal is made to the mayor and city council, the mayor and city council shall set a hearing date and hold a hearing for the appeal within 45 days of the appeal being requested, and the decision of the mayor and city council is final. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-44. - Effect of appeal. 
The filing of a complete notice of appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the official whose decision is being appealed certifies to the mayor and city council, after the appeal is filed, that, because of facts stated in the certification, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the superior court on notice to the official whose decision is being appealed and on due cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-45. - Hearing notice. 
Mailed and emailed notice of the mayor and city council hearing shall be provided to the appellant and applicant at least 7 days before the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-46. - City council public hearing and decision. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall hold a hearing to consider all appeals of administrative decisions. 
(b)  The mayor shall request that the appeal be identified and read. The aggrieved party shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the appeal. If all ten minutes are not used, the aggrieved party's remaining time may be reserved for rebuttal. The acting party and those in opposition to the appeal shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the order, requirement, decision or determination. The presentation times may not be reduced but may be extended by majority vote of the Mayor and City Council, provided they are expanded equally for the aggrieved party and the acting party. 
(c)  Following the close of the hearing and consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence and matters of record, the mayor and city council shall make a decision. The decision shall be made within a reasonable period of time but in no event more than 60 days from the date of the close of the hearing. Final action on an appeal requires a simple majority vote of the mayor and city council members present and voting. 
(d)  In exercising its powers, the mayor and city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. To that end, the Council has all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct approvals, including, but not limited to the issuance of a permit, provided all requirements imposed by all other applicable laws are met. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-47. - Review and approval criteria. 
An appeal shall be sustained only upon a finding by the mayor and city council that the administrative official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact or that the administrative official acted in an arbitrary manner. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-48. - Appeals. 
(a)  The action of the Mayor and City Council on an appeal of administrative decision shall be final. 
(b)  An aggrieved party may seek review of such decision by petitioning the superior court for a writ of certiorari, setting forth the alleged errors. 
(1)  The petition shall be filed within 30 days of the date that the mayor and city council renders its final decision. 
(2)  When a petition is for a writ of certiorari is filed, the mayor and city council shall be designated the respondent in certiorari and the city the defendant in certiorari. 
a.  The secretary of the mayor and city council is authorized to acknowledge service of a copy of the petition and writ on behalf of the mayor and city council, as respondent. 
b.  Service upon the city as defendant must be as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
ARTICLE 7. - TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SALES 

Section 280-49. - Applicability. 
A permit is required for temporary outdoor sales events, as defined in Chapter 110. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-50. - Authority to file. 
Applications for temporary outdoor sales event permits may be filed by the owner of the subject property, the property owner's authorized agent, or a tenant authorized to conduct the activity on the property. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-51. - Application filing. 
(a)  Permit applications shall be filed with the Development Director on forms provided by the Development Department. 
(b)  Any applicant for a temporary outdoor sales permit shall have the written authorization of the owner of the property to use the property for temporary outdoor seasonal retail sales and services. 
(c)  Application fees shall be included on the City Fee Schedule adopted by the Mayor and City Council. 
(d)  Any applicant applying for a permit on a lot shall have an occupational tax certificate for a permanent business on the subject property, unless the applicant is a U.S. Veteran, a nonprofit organization or a farmer selling their own produce. 
(e)  Applicant shall submit a scaled drawing indicating boundary of the site, parking and location of associated activities and/or structures shall be provided. 
(f)  Applicant shall submit a refuse and debris clean-up plan. 
(g)  Any signs erected on the property shall receive a separate temporary sign permit and be in accordance with Section 260-10, Temporary signs. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-52. - Review and approval criteria. 
(a)  Applicants shall demonstrate compliance with aesthetic standards established by Section 240-14; 
(b)  No temporary outdoor sales permit shall be approved for the same lot or any portion thereof for more than 5 consecutive days; 
(c)  No more than 4 temporary outdoor sales permits shall be approved for the same lot or any portion thereof in a calendar year; 
(d)  Temporary outdoor sales events shall be permitted only on lots that have access to paved parking with a curb cut; 
(e)  Temporary outdoor sales display activities are prohibited on vacant parcels; 
(f)  No operator, employee or representative shall solicit directly to the motoring public; and 
(g)  No temporary outdoor sales may be located within or encroach upon any drainage easement, public sidewalk or right-of-way, required parking spaces, fire lanes, designated loading areas, driveways, maneuvering aisles, or ADA minimum sidewalk width within private sidewalks or other areas intended for pedestrian movement. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 280-53. - Development director decision. 
(a)  The Development Director shall have the authority to grant temporary outdoor sales permits upon a determination that the event or activity meets all application requirements in Sections 280-50 and 280-51. 
(1)  Would not cause substantial detriment to the public good; 
(2)  Would not interfere with another event for which a permit has been issued; 
(3)  Would not negatively affect the safety and welfare of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and 
(4)  Would not impair the purposes or intent of this UDO. 
(b)  If no building permit is required in association with the special permit application, the Development Director shall have up to ten business days following the date of receipt of a written request for such a permit to make a decision on the issuance of the permit. 
(c)  If the Development fails to act on the issuance before the expiration of the ten business day period, the Development Director shall be deemed to have denied the permit request. 
(d)  The approved permit shall be located on the subject site at all times of operation of the temporary outdoor sales event. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
TITLE 3. - DEVELOPMENT AND PERMITTING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 743 , adopted Dec. 19, 2017, amended title 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former title 3, §§ 300-1—350-53 pertained to pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 682 of 6-16-15; Ord. No. 698 of 12-15-15; Ord. No. 707 of 6-21-16; Ord. No. 709 of 7-19-16; Ord. No. 712 of 7-19-16; Ord. No. 716 of 8-16-16; Ord. No. 724 of 10-18-16; Ord. No. 726 of 11-15-16; and Ord. No. 729 of 12-20-16. 

CHAPTER 300. - SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL 

Section 300-1. - Authority and purpose. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Title of the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) is to establish procedures and standards for the development and subdivision of land which facilitates the creation of functional neighborhoods enhancing the quality of life for the immediate residents, adjoining neighborhoods, and the City as a whole. This Title aims to achieve the following: 
(1)  Orderly growth and development of new and redeveloped neighborhoods; 
(2)  Coordination of streets within proposed neighborhoods with existing or planned streets and other public facilities; 
(3)  General distribution of population and traffic in a manner that will avoid congestion and overcrowding; 
(4)  Dedication or reservation of parks, squares, and recreational areas, accessible to all residents to serve as community focal points; 
(5)  Set standards for landscaping and detailing of the public domain of streets, parks, and squares to promote a pedestrian oriented atmosphere and civic awareness; and to 
(6)  Provide for pleasing visual environments to ensure public health, safety and the general welfare to residents of the city. 
(b)  This Title is designed to facilitate adequate provision for water, sewer, stormwater management facilities; for the dedication of rights-of-way or easements for streets and utility purposes; to ensure the proximity of residential areas to centers of employment and shopping; to facilitate the further subdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land; and to provide proper land records for the convenience of the public and for better identification and permanent location of real property boundaries. 
(c)  This Title is also designed to protect and enhance the quality of the natural environment of the City by encouraging the preservation and protection of significant existing trees (in accordance with the City Tree Preservation and Replacement Regulations, Chapter 320, Article 4); assisting in the natural control of solar heat; reducing the impact of development on the community's storm drainage system; assisting in soil conservation and flood control; reduction of air emissions and noise; conserving the city's water supply; and enhancing the visual and aesthetic appearance of the community. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-2. - Applicability of subdivision and development standards. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. These regulations govern all property within the corporate limits of the City. 
(b)  General Provisions. All development within the jurisdiction of this Chapter shall conform to the general provisions of this Title 3 of the UDO. 
(c)  No construction or installation of improvements shall commence in a proposed development until the land disturbance permit has been approved and all applicable preliminary plats, construction plans and specifications have been approved by the appropriate authorities. 
(d)  No building or other permits shall be issued for erection of a structure on any lot not of record until all requirements of this Title have been met. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-3. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of interpreting this Title, certain words and terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
Accidental discharge: A prohibited discharge into the city's municipal separate storm sewer system which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Addition (to an existing building), as used in Chapter 330 Floodplain Management: Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common roof or wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Adjacent to the future-conditions floodplains as used in Chapter 330 Floodplain Management: Those areas located within the defined horizontal distance from the future-conditions floodplain boundary that are at or lower in elevation than either three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc. with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation). 
Applicant, as used in Chapter 340 Stormwater Management: A person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Aquifer: Any stratum (rock layer) or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. (Note: This is the same definition used in the Groundwater Use Act). 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard: The land area that would be inundated by the one percent annual chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding: A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard: The land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood-prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the DeKalb County FIRM), all floodplain and flood-prone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other flood-prone areas as referenced in Chapter 340. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Authorized representative, as used in Chapter 340 Stormwater Management: 
(1)  If the discharger is a business, an owner, partner, corporate officer or highest ranking employee of the business employed at the facility from which the discharge or connection was made; 
(2)  If the discharger is a federal, state or local government facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or that person's designee. 
A-weighting (dBA): The electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human hearing frequency sensitivity. See Section 310-43. 
Basal area: The cross-sectional area of a tree trunk at diameter breast height (DBH) expressed in terms of "units" per acre. 
Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation: The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Best management practices (BMPs): Sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia", published by the GSWCC. This term also includes a wide range of stormwater management regulations, procedures, engineering designs, activities, prohibitions or practices which control the quality and/or quantity of stormwater. 
Board as used in Chapter 310, Article 1 Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution: The Georgia Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer, as used in Chapter 310, Article 2 Stream Buffer Protection: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Buffer, as used in Chapter 310 Environmental Standards: With respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by Subsection 310-18(a)), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Caliper: A forest standard of tree trunk measurement for understory or replacement trees. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken at six (6) inches above the ground for trees up to and including four (4) inch caliper size, and breast height (DBH) for trees larger than four (4) inch caliper (see DBH ). 
Certified personnel, as used in Chapter 310, Article 1 Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
City of Chamblee Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System: See "Municipal separate storm sewer system". 
City of Chamblee Stormwater Management Program: That program of activities and procedures for stormwater management as set forth in the application for the permit, as approved by the Georgia EPD, and any amendment or modification thereto. 
Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Closing, as used in Chapter 310, Article 3 Nuisances: Causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Commission, as used in Chapter 310, Article 1 Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
Construction activity: Activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition. 
Construction activity area (zone): An area 20 feet around the building footprint. 
Cooling water, as used in Chapter 340 Stormwater Management: Water used exclusively as a cooling medium in an appliance, device or apparatus. 
Cover area as used in Chapter 320 Buffers, Landscaping, and Tree Protection: That area which falls within the drip line of any tree. 
Credit, as used in Chapter 340, Article 5 Stormwater Utility: A conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. Credits for on-site stormwater systems shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the peak rate of runoff from the site. 
Critical Root Zone (CRZ): The minimum area beneath a tree, 70% of which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The CRZ will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to one and one-half (1.5) times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. 
Customer of the stormwater utility: All persons, properties and entities served by and/or benefitting from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities and activities related thereto, and persons, properties and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
C-weighting (dBC): The electronic filtering in sound level meters that measures the peak sound pressure level. See Section 310-43. 
DBH (Diameter at Breast Height): The standard measure of tree size (for trees existing on a site) measured in caliper inches. The tree trunk is measured at a height of four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half (4.5) feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. Trees with less than four and one-half (4.5) feet of clear trunk shall be measured as the diameter of the largest vertical branch or leader at breast height. 
Density factor, as used in Chapter 320 Buffers, Landscaping and Tree Protection: A unit of measure used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage on a site. The site density factor for areas within the corporate limits of the City of Chamblee is assigned in Chapter 320. 
Design professional, as used in Chapter 310, Article 1 Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Detention: The temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention, extended: The detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Detention facility: A detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developed land: Property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of impervious surface as defined in this UDO. 
Development, major: Any alteration of the natural environment which requires the approval of a development or site plan and issuance of a building permit. By way of illustration, but not limitation, major development shall also include the removal or destruction of trees incidental to the development of land or to the marketing of land for development, the removal or destruction of trees in conjunction with any grading activity, including the removal or filling (stockpiling) of soil or the removal of trees not in conjunction with an ongoing forest management program. 
Development, minor: Any alteration of the natural environment, which may or may not require development, site plan approval or issuance of a building permit, but which would possibly cause the removal or destruction of any tree(s). Any removal of trees that constitutes major development as that term is herein defined shall not constitute minor development. 
Development, new: A land development activity on a previously undeveloped site, or on a site which previous buildings or structures were completely removed. 
Discharge: The spill, draining, dumping, deposit, seeping, disposal, placement, release or loss of any material or substance to the City of Chamblee Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. 
Discharger: Any person who discharges to the City of Chamblee Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, either directly or indirectly, including, without limitation, the owner and occupant of the property where the discharge occurs and the person responsible for or performing the discharge. For purposes of notice, "discharger" shall include the authorized representative of such discharger. 
District, as used in Chapter 310, Article 1 Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division, as used in Chapter 310, Article 1 Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage easement: An easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Drip line: The peripheral limits of the horizontal crown of a tree spread vertically to the ground; provided, however, that the same shall not be less than a circle with a five-foot radius measured from the center of the tree. 
Dwellings, buildings or structures, as used in Chapter 330 Floodplain Management: Any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Emergency as used in Chapter 310, Article 4 Noise: Any occurrence or set or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Emergency work as used in Chapter 310, Article 4 Noise: Any work or action performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU): The unit of measure which provides the basis for comparing the runoff generated by one parcel with that generated by another. An ERU shall be the median impervious coverage of a statistical sampling of single detached dwelling lots in the county, which has been determined to be 3,000 square feet of impervious area. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7 that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in Chapter 310. 
Existing construction, as used in Chapter 330 Floodplain Management: Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 1, 2006. 
Extreme flood protection: Measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Federal Clean Water Act or Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, presently codified at 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
Final stabilization as used in Chapter 310, Article 1 Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution: All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: Planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished floor elevation (FFE): The elevation of the lowest floor level that is entirely at or above the ground. The FFE is set at the top of the foundation wall, and does not refer to the floor elevation of the basement since it is below grade. 
Flood or flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard area: Any site designated by the Federal Emergency Management Authority (FEMA) as susceptible to flooding, and shown on the official flood hazard boundary map and/or flood insurance rate maps for the Belmont area. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM: The official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Association, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS: The official report by the Federal Emergency Management Association evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain as used in Chapter 310, Article 2 Stream Buffer Protection: Any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Floodplain or "Flood-prone area" as used in Chapter 330 Floodplain Management: Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway: The channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent, as used in Chapter 330 Floodplain Management: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future-conditions flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation: The flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology: The flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill and excavation. 
Georgia EPD: The Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Georgia Water Quality Control Act or Water Quality Control Act: The Georgia Quality Control Act, as amended, presently codified at O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
Greenspace: Permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Groundwater: Water beneath the Earth's surface between saturated soil and rock. 
Groundwater recharge area (synonymous with aquifer recharge area): An area of the Earth's surface where water infiltrates the ground, thereby replenishing the groundwater supplies within an aquifer. See also "Groundwater recharge areas, significant." 
Groundwater recharge areas, significant: Areas mapped by DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and form of the rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contact, geologic structure, presence of "karst" topography (sinkholes, caves and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks), and potentiometric surfaces. 
Historic structure: Any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Hotspot: An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic response: The manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area, the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property, antecedent moisture conditions, and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG): A natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Illegal connection as used in Chapter: Either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain, or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain, or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge: Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in Section 340-18. 
Industrial activity: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14). 
Industrial stormwater permit: A national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration: The process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement: A written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices, including their associated landscaping measures on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Interested parties: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Jurisdictional wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Maintenance, as used in Chapter 340 Stormwater Management: Any action necessary to preserve stormwater conveyances in proper working condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this appendix or to prevent structural failure of such conveyances. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system: Any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the City; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929: A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit: A permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Naturalized, as used in Chapter 320 Buffers, Landscaping, and Tree Protection: Adapted or acclimated to a new environment; introduced and established as if native. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
New construction, as used in Chapter 330 Floodplain Management: Any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after July 1, 2006 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
Noise: Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Noise disturbance: Any sound that: 
(1)  Endangers the safety or health of any person; 
(2)  Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or 
(3)  Endangers personal or real property. 
Noise sensitive facility: Any facility whose operations may be detrimentally impacted by excessive sound levels. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, hospitals and places of worship. 
Nonpoint source pollution: A form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Notice of termination (NOT): A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Nuisances: Any activity that endangers the health, welfare or good order of the community. 
(1)  Stagnant water on any premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds or vegetation, or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon any premises, which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewer system which would be damaging thereto, or the pollution of public water or the injection of matter or other non-stormwater discharges into the separate stormwater sewer; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Any unauthorized accumulation of garbage or trash on any premises; 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent such activities; and 
(10)  Unused freezers, refrigerators and the like, unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed. 
Octave band: All the components in a sound spectrum whose frequencies are between two sine wave components separated by an octave. 
Off-site, as used in Chapter 320 Buffers, Landscaping, and Tree Protection: For tree relocation and tree replacement, means any location in excess of one (1) mile from the tree's original location. 
Off-site facility, as used in Chapter 340 Stormwater Management: A stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site, as used in Chapter 320 Buffers, Landscaping, and Tree Protection: For tree relocation and tree replacement, means any location one (1) mile or less from the tree's original location. 
On-site facility, as used in Chapter 340 Stormwater Management: A stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on-site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Overbank flood protection: Measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Overstory trees: Those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet (40'). 
Permit, as used in Chapter 340 Stormwater Management: The national pollution discharge elimination system permit for discharges from the City of Chamblee Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System issued by the Georgia EPD or such subsequent permit or authorization for discharges from the City of Chamblee Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System to waters of the state. 
Pollutant: Anything, which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution or polluted: The contamination or other alteration of any of water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including, but not limited to, change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters; or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into the City of Chamblee Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render any waters contained therein or discharged into waters of the state harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or general welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Pollution susceptibility: The relative vulnerability of groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dumpsites, animal waste from agricultural operations of pollution generated by other human activities. 
Pollution susceptibility map(s): Maps prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) that shows the relative susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the State into areas of high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Post-development: The time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development: The time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. However, if removal and replacement of impervious surfaces occur on more than 50 percent of the site, then the pre-development condition shall be characterized hydrologically with an SCS curve number of 60 or a rational method runoff coefficient of 0.30, unless stated otherwise within this appendix. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Procedure, as used in Chapter 340 Stormwater Management: A procedure adopted by the department to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this appendix, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this appendix or other chapters of this Code, or other ordinances or resolutions of the city or other agencies. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual), published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Protected zone: All lands which fall outside the buildable area of a parcel, all areas of a parcel required to remain in open space, and/or all areas required as yards, buffers or landscaped areas according to provisions of the city zoning ordinance or conditions of zoning or variance approval. 
Protection area, or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream: The combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Public or private property (as used in Chapter 340, Article 3 Litter Control): The right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial or farm properties. 
Real property line: The line, including its vertical extension that separates one parcel of real property from another. 
Recompense: The dollar value to the city of a tree on private or public property used for the purpose of calculating cash recompense for removal or destruction. 
Redevelopment: A land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility: Stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Required decommissioning date: Twelve months after a previously permitted SES no longer is in operation as a power generating facility. 
Reservation: A reservation of land does not involve any transfer of property rights. It simply constitutes an obligation to keep property free from development for a stated period of time. 
Resident: Any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
Riparian: Belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Runoff: Stormwater runoff. 
Sanitary sewer system: The complete sanitary sewer system of the city which discharges sanitary sewerage directly or indirectly into the sewage treatment plant, including sanitary sewer pipelines, manholes and flushing inlets and appurtenances to the foregoing, but shall exclude any portion or facilities of the sewage treatment plant. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Service fees: The stormwater management service fees applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be used to fund the city stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission or the City of Chamblee, in accordance with the approved Memorandum of Agreement. 
Sound level meter (SLM): An instrument used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to type 1 or type 2 standards as specified in ANSI Standard Sl.4-1983 or the latest version thereof. 
Stabilization, as used in Chapter 310, Article 1 Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future, pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Stormwater: Any type of stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface or subsurface runoff or drainage. 
Stormwater better site design: Nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater conveyance: Natural or constructed stormwater conduits, features, facilities or best management practices designed or used for the collection, conveyance or treatment of stormwater through open or closed drainage systems, including, but not limited to, pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, roads with drainage systems, highways, rights-of-way, county streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains, detention ponds, retention ponds, infiltration devices, oil/water separators, sediment basins, modular pavement or other such devices. 
Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity: The discharge from any stormwater conveyance which is directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage areas at an industrial facility. The term includes, but is not limited to, stormwater discharges from industrial facility yards; immediate access roads and rails lines used or traveled by carriers of raw materials, manufactured products, waste materials or by-products used or created by the facility; material handling sites; refuse sites; sites used for the storage and maintenance of material handling equipment; sites used for application or disposal of process wastewaters; sites used for residual treatment, storage, or disposal; shipping and receiving areas; manufacturing buildings; storage areas (including tank farms for raw materials, and intermediate and finished products); and areas where industrial activity has taken place in the past and significant materials remain and are exposed to stormwater. 
Stormwater management: The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. Stormwater management shall include a system of vegetative or structural measures, or both. 
Stormwater management facility: Any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure: Any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan: A document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this appendix. 
Stormwater management system: The entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit: A stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff: The direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff or drainage or other concentrated flow that enters a stormwater conveyance during and following precipitation. 
Stream: A flowing body of water, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of more than 25 acres, the city may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank: The sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel: The portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Stream, ephemeral: A stream that flows only briefly during and following a period of rainfall in the immediate area. 
Stream, Intermittent: A stream that flows for only part of the year or seasonally. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication, "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Structural stormwater control: A structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Substantial improvement: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Tree: Any self-supporting, woody perennial plant which has a trunk diameter of two inches or more when measured at a point six inches above ground level and which normally attains an overall height of at least ten feet at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
(1)  Boundary tree: A tree on adjacent property whose root save area intrudes across the property line of the site under consideration. 
(2)  Destroyed tree: When there is over 30 percent impact to the critical root zone of a tree, it shall be considered destroyed. 
(3)  Hardwood tree: Any leaf-bearing (not needle-bearing) tree that is not coniferous (cone-bearing). This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
(4)  Hazardous tree: A tree certified by a horticultural professional as having a major structural fault that could lead to catastrophic loss and could injure or damage property or human targets. Major structural faults may include, but not be limited to, large vertical cracks, decayed areas or columns, including bark areas, forks, dead wood/branches, hollows, significant leans, openings to the inner portions and mechanically damaged areas. Minor faults (correctable faults requiring care) may include things such as pavement buckles, surface roots, small dead wood, tree litter, animal/insect activities, entrapment, face-level branches, and destruction of surrounding property. 
(5)  Public tree: Any tree which exists on publicly owned or controlled property or right-of-way. 
(6)  Softwood trees: Any coniferous (cone-bearing) tree, such as pine, fire, hemlock, cedar, etc. This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
(7)  Specimen tree or specimen tree stand: Any tree or group of trees within the protected zone which has been determined to be of high value because of its species, size, age or other definable criteria. 
(8)  Understory tree: Those trees that grow beneath the overstory, and will generally reach a mature height of less than forty feet (40'). 
Tree protection zone: An area encompassing one and one-half times the diameter of a tree, which is protected by some physical method. 
Tree removal: Any act, which causes a tree to die within two (2) years after commission of the act, including but not limited to, damage inflicted upon the root system in the Critical Root Zone or trunk, as the result of: 
(1)  The improper use of machinery on the trees; 
(2)  The storage of materials in or around the trees; 
(3)  Soil compaction; 
(4)  Altering the natural grade to expose the roots or to cover the tree's root system with more than four (4) inches of soil; 
(5)  Causing the infection or infestation of the tree by pests, fungus or harmful bacteria; 
(6)  Pruning judged to be excessive by the Administrator or not in accordance with the standard set forth by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA); 
(7)  Paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious surface within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree or its root system; and 
(8)  Application of herbicides or defoliants to any tree without first obtaining a permit. 
Tree save area: All areas designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving specimen trees, and/or preserving natural buffers. 
Tree species selection list: The City of Chamblee's recommended species of trees. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for water quality control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Undeveloped land: Land in it unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no more than 100 square feet of impervious surface. 
Undeveloped property: Property upon which no building, structure, pavement or other improvements have been placed. 
Unpolluted: The absence of pollution. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures found in the publication, "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the city's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water quality: Those characteristics of stormwater that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
Water quantity: Those characteristics of stormwater that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater, both surface and subsurface. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash, in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Watershed: The land area that drains into a particular stream. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-4. - Priority of conditions of zoning over these regulations. 
Whenever there is a discrepancy between the requirements of this UDO and those contained in adopted building codes applicable regulations of the state or federal government, the most restrictive shall apply. In those instances where a specific project is subject to a condition of zoning approval that is more restrictive, the requirements of the zoning conditions shall control. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-5. - Incorporation of standard drawings and design guidelines. 
(a)  The City hereby incorporates by reference the standard drawings of DeKalb County and the Georgia Department of Transportation for water, sewer and transportation infrastructure. Development proposals within the City of Chamblee shall be consistent with these standard drawings except as provided below. 
(b)  Exceptions to Subsection 300-5(a) may be made for selected street details, bike paths, alleys, and streetscapes as specified by the City. In the case of conflicts between DeKalb County standards and the standards in Title 3 or Addendas 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0 of this UDO, the Development Director may determine that the City's standards will govern. 
(c)  Additional guidelines for erosion control, tree preservation, and stormwater management shall also apply as provided in Chapters 310, 320 and 340. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-6. - Pre-application conference. 
(a)  Applications for preliminary plats and land disturbance permits shall not be submitted or accepted by the City until a pre-application meeting is held with the Development Director. 
(1)  The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to assist in the applicant's understanding of this UDO and its requirements; to educate the applicant on community design policies and standards; and to inform the applicant of all necessary application materials required by the zoning ordinance. No final decision on the application or assurances that a particular proposal will be approved shall be made. 
(2)  The applicant may be required to present preliminary plans to the Development Director that demonstrates how the pending application adheres to the requirements of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-7. - Permit expiration. 
(a)  A development permit is valid for two years from its date of issuance, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  If the work authorized in any development permit has not begun within 180 days from the date of permit issuance, the permit expires and has no further effect. 
(2)  If the work described in any development permit has not been substantially completed within two years of the date of permit issuance, the permit expires and has no further effect. 
(3)  Written notice of the permit expiration must be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the expired permit may not proceed until a new development permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-8. - Waivers. 
Where, because of severe topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, strict adherence to the provisions of this Title 3 would cause an unnecessary hardship that is not caused by the owner, the Mayor and City Council may, after considering the written recommendation of the Development Director, authorize a waiver from the terms of this Title 3 only to the extent that is absolutely necessary and not to an extent which would violate the intent of this Title 3. Request for waiver shall be submitted per application requirements outlined on forms produced by the Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS 

Section 300-10. - Land development, subdivision and site design. 
(a)  Project access improvements. Except as provided in Section 300-21, every land development in the City shall provide the project access improvements required in this UDO and other pertinent codes, ordinances, and regulations of the City of Chamblee. Project improvements and associated rights-of-way or easements shall be provided at no cost to the City of Chamblee and shall be dedicated or otherwise transferred, as required, to the public in perpetuity and without covenant or reservation, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  Right of refusal of dedication. Whenever a developer proposes the dedication of land to public use, and the Development Director or the appropriate agency finds that such land is neither required nor is it suitable for public use, the Development Director shall refuse such dedication and may require the rearrangement of lots to include such land in private ownership. Any lot or lot remnant that does not meet the standards of a buildable lot shall be restricted by a conservation easement in a manner approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-11. - Land suitability. 
(a)  Land subject to flood hazard, improper drainage, erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for use as determined by the Development Director, shall not be platted for any use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety or property unless the hazards can be and are corrected. 
(1)  Flood hazard area development. Land within designated flood zones as shown on FEMA maps for the Chamblee area shall be identified on all plats, see Subsection 330-5(e). No structures or fill shall be placed in the floodway which would interfere with the natural watercourse except when shown to have no downstream impact by competent study of a licensed hydrologic engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. Streets and utility lines and structures may be placed within the flood hazard area only if their elevation is raised above maximum flood heights or if they are otherwise flood protected. 
(2)  Demolition landfill development. Areas that have been used for the disposal of solid waste shall not be subdivided into commercial or residential building sites. This includes areas that have been used for the disposal of trash, demolition waste, and other waste materials. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-12. - Design of lots. 
(a)  With the exception of lots created under the provisions of a conservation subdivision (Section 300-14), no lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or depth, front, side or rear yards, lot area or buffer specification table dimensional requirements of this UDO are not maintained, unless approved through a variance authorized by the UDO. Lots created after the effective date of this UDO shall meet said minimum size and dimensional requirements established by this UDO. This section shall not apply when, and to the extent that, a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
(b)  The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall comply with the requirements established in Title 2 of the UDO. Lots should be designed generally such that they are no more than four times as deep as they are wide at the building setback line, unless excepted by the Development Director. 
(c)  Corner lots. See Section 230-1, Dimensional Standards of zoning districts. Both Front and Street Side Yard would apply. See Section 230-3, Contextual Lot and Building Standards for Infill Development, if applicable. 
(d)  Through lots. When through lots are required for residential subdivisions abutting boulevards, primary or secondary streets a vehicular no-access easement of at least ten feet in width shall be required abutting the back of curb of such thoroughfare, across which there shall be no right of access except approved bicycle or pedestrian pathways. The vehicular no-access easement may be incorporated into the design of the required sidewalk zone and/or landscape zone for the streetscape or landscape strip along such major thoroughfare. See Section 320-22 for landscaping requirements of vehicular no-access easements. 
(e)  The Development Director may approve an unbuildable lot of record in a proposed subdivision only for the following purposes: 
(1)  No lot shall be reduced in size so that minimum lot width or depth, size of yards, or any other lot requirement is not maintained. This limitation shall not apply when a portion of a lot has been lawfully acquired for public purpose or for unbuildable lots used exclusively for subdivision identification signage or subdivision entrance landscape features or stormwater facilities. 
(2)  To provide a location for a ground sign permitted in Chapter 260. 
(3)  To provide a location for a stormwater management facility as provided in Section 340-39, Post-Development Stormwater Management Performance Criteria. 
(4)  Common areas. 
(f)  The establishment of any new split-zoned lot is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-13. - Reserved. 
Section 300-14. - Conservation subdivisions. 
(a)  Purposes. 
(1)  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(2)  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(3)  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(4)  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
(5)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(6)  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
(7)  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(8)  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(9)  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(10)  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(11)  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(12)  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(b)  General regulations. 
(1)  Applicability of regulations. This conservation subdivision option shall be limited to the NR-1 zoning district. Applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except for minimum lot size. Minimum lot size may be reduced, provided that all minimum setback and building spacing requirements are met, without the need for a variance. 
(2)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided shall be held in single and separate ownership. If it is to be sold in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(3)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the Development Director or his/her designee: 
a.  Calculation: The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
1.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
2.  The 100-year floodplain; 
3.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; or 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
b.  Yield plan. The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations pertinent to a conventional subdivision. When using this method, the developer is entitled to achieve a yield that is equivalent to that shown on the yield plan multiplied by the factor of 1.2, provided all setback regulations are met or appropriate variances are obtained. 
(c)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, the applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
a.  Property boundaries; 
b.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
c.  Stream buffer requirements of Chapter 310, Article 2 of this Title 3; 
d.  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
e.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in Subsection 300-14(d)(2) of this article; 
f.  General vegetation characteristics; 
g.  General soil types; 
h.  The planned location of protected open space; 
i.  Existing roads and structures; and 
j.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(2)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in Subsection 300-14(d), shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(3)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in Subsection 300-14(d), shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(4)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying city zoning code. 
(d)  Open space. 
(1)  Definition. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(2)  Standards to determine open space. 
a.  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 30 percent of the gross tract area. 
b.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
1.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
2.  Buffer zones of at least 75-foot width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
3.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
5.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
6.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
c.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
1.  Important historic sites; 
2.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
3.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; and 
4.  Existing or proposed trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
d.  Above ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 30 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
e.  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
f.  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(3)  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
a.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
b.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
c.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of pervious paving materials; 
d.  Passive recreation areas; 
e.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
f.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
g.  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
h.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
i.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
(4)  Prohibited uses of open space. 
a.  Golf courses; 
b.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
c.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
d.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(5)  Ownership and management of open space. 
a.  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
b.  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
1.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
2.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by Chamblee City Council; and 
3.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
c.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowner's association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowner's association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(6)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
a.  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
1.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
(i)  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented, nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
(ii)  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this article. If the entity accepting the easement is not [the jurisdiction], then a third right of enforcement favoring [the jurisdiction] shall be included in the easement. 
2.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
3.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the City. 
b.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this Article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-15. - Access and right-of-way. 
(a)  Access. 
(1)  New streets shall be constructed to the roadway construction standards of Section 350-3 of this UDO. 
(2)  The number and location of driveways and other vehicle access points shall be governed by Section 350-2 or GDOT, where applicable. Vehicular access easements may be provided from a public street indirectly via easement in any one or more of the following circumstances: 
a.  The easement shall be in a location and the access driveway shall have a width and alignment acceptable to the DeKalb County Fire Rescue Department. 
b.  The property is a lot of record, as defined herein, but does not meet the minimum frontage requirement of the applicable zoning district. The property must be served by an exclusive access easement which shall be limited to the provision of access to only one principal use or structure. 
c.  The access easement serves a single-family residence on a lot which is otherwise a buildable lot of record, and which is sharing a common driveway with no more than one other single-family residence. 
d.  The access easement coincides with a private roadway approved under the code, ordinances, or regulations of the City of Chamblee. All new private roadways must be constructed to the roadway standards of this UDO, and their ownership and maintenance responsibility by private party(s) must be clearly established on the final plat of the development. 
e.  The access easement serves a buildable lot of record which meets the minimum frontage requirements of Title 2 of this UDO, but at which point the access is not achieved. 
(b)  Dedication of Street Right-of-Way. Right-of-way for all project public streets, existing and proposed, shall be dedicated in accordance with the street classifications and specifications of Chapter 350 of this Title 3 and the provision of Section 300-24, Final Plat Procedures. Dedication of right-of-way for all private streets shall be done in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 350-3(b) Private Streets. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-16. - Utility easements. 
(a)  The following easements shall be provided: 
(1)  Utility easements. Easements for underground or above ground utilities shall be provided for and centered along rear or side lot lines, and shall be at least ten feet in width. Easements for water lines, sanitary sewers, and storm drains shall be centered on the pipe and at least 20 feet in width. See Subsection 340-39(a)(7). 
(2)  Landscape easements. The Mayor and City Council may require landscape easements for certain developments where industrial or commercial uses abut residential uses. 
(3)  Sidewalk easements. Easements for sidewalks shall be provided along the exterior and interior streets of the development. Sidewalk specifications and design shall be constructed in compliance with this Title. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-17. - Design of blocks. 
(a)  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  The provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated, and adequate public open spaces accessible and visible to residents; 
(2)  Zoning requirements and design criteria; 
(3)  Needs of non-vehicular and vehicular traffic circulation and the control and safety of such traffic; 
(4)  Opportunities and constraints of topography, with convenient access to important physical and topographical features such as lakes and rivers, significant areas of trees and other natural features, and areas of high ground offering scenic views; 
(5)  Newly created blocks shall not be less than 200 feet, nor more than 600 feet, as measured from street curb to street curb unless site and topography or other special circumstances are present as determined by the director and approved by the Mayor and City Council; 
(6)  Streets used to divide properties into blocks shall meet all of the street and sidewalk designations of this UDO; 
(7)  Lots zoned for uses other than for single-family residential units shall provide for interparcel access as provided in Subsection 350-2(c). 
(b)  Pedestrian access. In blocks over 500 feet long the director shall require alleys, pedestrian ways, or bike paths to be constructed on access easements to provide necessary pedestrian and bicycle access to public gathering spaces, transit stops and to achieve a connected network of pedestrian and bicycle pathways between desirable destinations. 
(c)  Nonresidential and mixed-use developments with more than 600 feet of frontage along a single street shall be divided by streets into blocks having a maximum length of 400 feet measured from street curb to street curb. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-18. - Monumentation. 
The Technical Standards for Property Surveys of the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors shall apply when conducting surveys of subdivision; to determine the accuracy for surveys and placement of monuments, control corners, markers, and property corner ties; to determine the location, design, and material of monuments, markers, control corners, and property corner ties; and to determine other standards and procedures governing the practice of land surveying for subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-19. - Assignment of street names and addresses. 
Assignment of names and addresses shall be administered by DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
ARTICLE 3. - SUBDIVISION AND SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES 

Section 300-20. - Policies and purposes. 
(a)  Policies. 
(1)  It is declared to be the policy of the city to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided land as subject to the control of the city pursuant to the city's official comprehensive plan in order to promote the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the city. 
(2)  Land to be subdivided must be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace. 
(3)  The existing and proposed public improvements must conform to and be properly related to the proposals shown in the comprehensive plan, official map, the capital improvement budget and other adopted city plans, and it is intended that these regulations supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in building codes, UDO, the comprehensive plan, official map and land use plan, and the capital improvement budget and other plans of the city. 
(b)  Purposes. The city's subdivision regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(2)  To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the comprehensive plan; 
(3)  To protect and conserve the value of land and the economic stability of all communities in the city and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the city through appropriate growth management techniques, including consideration of the timing and sequencing of development, consideration of infill development in existing neighborhoods and nonresidential areas with adequate public facilities; 
(4)  To guide public policy and both public and private actions in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and public services and support facilities; 
(5)  To provide for the safe and efficient circulation of motorized and non-motorized traffic throughout the city; 
(6)  To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both motorized and non-motorized, in new land developments; 
(7)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land; 
(8)  To ensure to the extent legally possible that public facilities and services are available concurrent with development and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision; 
(9)  To protect and restore the highest quality of the city's air and water resources, to ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities, to safeguard the water table, and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the city and the value of the land; 
(10)  To preserve the natural beauty, environment, and topography of the city and to ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  No person may record any subdivision plat until it has been approved and accepted by the Development Director, nor may any lot be sold by reference to any subdivision plat whether recorded or not, if the plat is made after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, unless it has been approved and accepted by the Development Director. The recording of a plat must be based on an approved plat and may not be recorded solely on the basis of a metes and bounds description. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-21. - Exemptions from provisions of preliminary plat procedures. 
(a)  General requirements. For the purpose of this UDO, the types of activities contained in this Section shall be considered subdivisions, but exempt from the preliminary plat requirements of Article 3 of this Chapter, except as noted. Each such subdivision shall be drawn in accordance with Final Plat standards in Section 300-24 of this UDO and shall be submitted with the appropriate fees to the Development Department for review and approval. Upon approval, the Development Director shall authorize the applicant to record the Exemption Plat with the Clerk of Superior Court of DeKalb County and grant the issuance of building permits pursuant to the Codes and Ordinances of the City. 
(b)  Recombinations. The combination or recombination of all of two or more buildable lots of record, where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots or parcels are in compliance with Title 2 of this UDO. 
(c)  Minor residential subdivision. The division of a buildable lot of record into five or fewer lots is subject to the following: 
(1)  Each proposed lot complies with all requirements of Title 2 of this UDO and is limited to single-family detached residential use. 
(2)  Does not include the installation of any public infrastructure. 
(3)  Each proposed lot abuts an existing public street or previously approved private street. 
(4)  All project related slope and utility easements as well as necessary street right-of-way as determined by the Department are provided at no cost to the City. 
(5)  Platted open space or common areas that are not a part of an individually owned lot are not created. 
(6)  Does not create any unbuildable lots, unless permitted pursuant to Subsection 300-12(e). 
(7)  Approval of County Board of Health if occupied structures will be served by on-site septic systems. 
(d)  Nonresidential subdivisions. Lots for the purpose of sale within a nonresidential development, provided: 
(1)  Each proposed lot complies with applicable requirements of Title 2 of this UDO. 
(2)  Does not include the installation of any public infrastructure. 
(3)  Each proposed lot abuts upon and has access from an existing public street or previously approved private street. 
(4)  All project related slope and utility easements as well as necessary street right-of-way as determined by the Department are provided at no cost to the City. 
(5)  Each lot thus created may not be resubdivided pursuant to the provisions of this Subsection. Such resubdivision shall be accomplished only through the procedures contained in Article 3 of this Chapter. 
(6)  Each proposed lot shall comply with the requirements of the DeKalb County Watershed Protection Department or the Environmental Health Department, as appropriate, whose certification of approval shall be required prior to approval of the Exemption Plat by the Department. 
(7)  A Record Survey certified by a Land Surveyor currently registered in the State of Georgia shall be submitted to and approved by the Department showing the lot. 
(e)  Nonresidential project management. Lots may be created for recording within a nonresidential development, provided: 
(1)  The nonresidential development is a single multi-phase or multi-use project under the unified control of a single developer, is zoned for such use or development, and a Concept Plan for the entire project has been approved by the Director. 
(2)  The proposed subdivision is intended to transfer title for financing or building management purposes and not for the sale of the property for future development, and an affidavit to this fact signed by the owner(s) is submitted with the final plat application. 
(3)  The proposed lot has been approved by the Department to be provided permanent vehicular access established by easement or acceptable covenant prior to or concurrently with recording of the Exemption Plat. 
(4)  The proposed lot must encompass a principal structure which has been granted a building permit and which is under construction or has been completed. 
(5)  The Exemption Plat shall be drawn to include the entirety of the overall development and shall clearly identify those lots to be recorded, those lots previously recorded and the remainder of the development which shall be labeled "not included." All easements, dedications, etc., shall be shown as appropriate or as required. Each lot shall be consistent with the zoning approved for the overall development and the applicable requirements of Title 2 of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-22. - Subdivision plat application and review process. 
(a)  Application and filing procedures. 
(1)  All subdivisions as defined in Chapter 110 of this UDO shall adhere to the requirements of this section of the UDO in regards to application and procedure, except as otherwise provided in Section 300-21, above. 
(2)  The Mayor and City Council shall adopt from time to time, a schedule of fees for application and approval processing as specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Applicability. This Section 300-22 is applicable to all subdivisions of land involving any of the following: 
(1)  Street dedication; 
(2)  Public infrastructure; 
(3)  Utility extensions; 
(4)  Platted open space or common areas that are not part of an individually owned lot; and 
(5)  All other subdivisions not exempt in Section 300-21. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-23. - Preliminary plat procedures. 
(a)  Application and plat required. The owner of the land where the proposed development is to occur, or his authorized agent, must file a plat with the Development Department along with an application for approval. The application must: 
(1)  Be made on forms prepared by the Development Department; 
(2)  Be accompanied by a plat prepared by a Georgia licensed civil engineer, surveyor, architect, or landscape architect, as described in these regulations and complying in all respects with these regulations; and 
(3)  Be accompanied by an application fee in the amount set by the city council. 
(b)  Plat information. The following information must be shown on the preliminary plat: 
(1)  The boundary, as determined by survey, of the area to be subdivided with all bearings and distances shown and the location within the area, or contiguous to it, of any existing streets, railroad lines, watercourses, easements or other significant features of the tract. 
(2)  Scale denoted both graphically and numerically with north arrow and declination. 
(3)  Complete construction plans, in accordance with the requirements in Section 300-34, as applicable, prepared by a registered engineer and approved by the city and the appropriate state agency. 
(4)  The location of proposed streets, alleys, easements, lots, parks or other open spaces, reservations (i.e., school sites), property lines with street dimensions, tentative lot dimensions, lot and block numbers, and the location of any building restriction areas, i.e., flood hazard areas, watershed protection districts, wetlands. Site calculations shall include total acreage of tract, acreage in parks and other nonresidential uses, total number and acreage of parcels, and the total number of housing units. 
(5)  The proposed name of the subdivision, street names, the owners name and address, signature of the owner or owner's duly authorized agent, the name of the surveyor, the names of adjoining subdivisions or property owners, the name of the city, county, and state in which the subdivision is located, the date of plat preparation, and the zoning classification of the tract to be subdivided and of adjoining properties. 
(6)  Typical cross sections of proposed streets showing rights-of-way, pavement widths, grades, and design engineering data for all corners and curves. Where a proposed street is an extension of an existing street the profile of the street shall include 300 feet of the existing roadway, with a cross section of the existing street. Where a proposed street within the subdivision abuts a tract of land that adjoins the subdivision and where said street may be expected to extend into said adjoining tract of land, the profile shall be extended to include 300 feet of the said adjoining tract. 
(7)  The location of any existing or proposed demolition landfills in the site. Such sites shall not be used for building. 
(8)  A timetable for estimated project completion for each phase covered by the preliminary plat. 
(9)  The following wording must be shown on the preliminary plat: 
"This preliminary plat has been submitted to and approved by the City of Chamblee, on this ________ day of ____________ , ____________ ____________ .  By: ____________ ____________ (By Dir.) 
Development Director, City of Chamblee, Georgia" 
(10)  Any additional information deemed necessary by the Development Department to determine compliance with ordinance standards. 
(c)  In addition to the above required information, the following additional information may be necessary for unique sites: 
(1)  Original contours at intervals of not less than five feet for the entire area to be subdivided and extending into adjoining property for a distance of 300 feet at all points where street rights-of-way connect to the adjoining property. 
(2)  Where a proposed water and sewer system does not contemplate the use of facilities owned and operated by the city or a sanitary district, the proposed facility plans as approved by the appropriate agency, shall be submitted with the preliminary application. 
(d)  Application submittal. 
(1)  An application will be considered complete and ready for processing only when it fully complies with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  If the application and preliminary plat are not accepted, the Development Director must inform the applicant of the deficiencies and request the applicant to resubmit the application and preliminary plat with the additional information. 
(e)  Referral of preliminary plat for review. 
(1)  Upon official acceptance of the application and the preliminary plat, the Development Department, Public Works, and any other city or county department the Development Director determines should be consulted for the particularities of the proposed subdivision, shall review the preliminary plat. As part of its review, each such department and receiving entity must make comments and recommendations regarding any required changes necessary to comply with all applicable regulations. Once the Development Director has received each department's comments and recommendations, the Development Director must either notify the applicant that the preliminary plat has been approved or notify the applicant that revisions to the plat are required. 
(2)  The Development Director shall approve the preliminary plat if the application and preliminary plat conform to all requested revisions, the requirements of this Code and state law and must deny the preliminary plat if the application and preliminary plat do not conform to all requested revisions, and the requirements of this Code or state law. 
(3)  If a preliminary plat is not approved within 180 days of the official acceptance of the application, the application and preliminary plat is considered withdrawn without further action by the city. 
(f)  Compliance with design and improvement standards and approval criteria. 
(1)  Subdivisions are subject to compliance with all applicable land development regulations in Title 3. 
(2)  The Development Director may require the applicant to submit a site plan for any lot to demonstrate that the lot contains adequate buildable area that is suitable for the intended use. 
(g)  After review of the preliminary plat and related comments, and where, in the judgment of the Development Director, the preliminary plat conforms to all of the requirements of this UDO, the preliminary plat shall stand approved. 
(h)  Effect of approval. The preliminary plat does not constitute nor provide assurance of approval of the final plat or building or development permits, but is to be used as the development design for the subdivision and for the acquisition of a development permit as provided for in the UDO. The preliminary plat must be submitted to the Development Department in a digital format acceptable to the city, prior to or simultaneous with an application for a development permit. 
(i)  Lapse of approval. The preliminary plat expires 24 months from the date of its approval. If more than 50 percent of linear feet of total road in the entire development shown on the preliminary plat is complete at the expiration of 24 months from the date of the approval of the preliminary plat, then the Development Director is authorized to grant a one-time, one-year extension of the approval of the preliminary plat. An expired preliminary plat is null and void and is of no effect. An expired preliminary plat may not be renewed. 
(j)  Preliminary plat amendments. If the approved preliminary plat is amended or altered by the applicant after approval as a preliminary plat, then the applicant is required to note any discrepancies on the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-24. - Final plat procedures. 
(a)  All subdivisions of land exempted from the Preliminary Plat process in Section 300-21 and all Preliminary Plats shall proceed through the Final Plat process. 
(1)  No final plat shall be approved unless and until the subdivider has installed all improvements required by this chapter, or appropriate sureties have been secured pursuant to Section 300-27. The final plat and a fee in the amount established by the city council must be filed with the city. The final plat and as-built drawings must also be submitted in a digital format acceptable to the city. 
(2)  The final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor, licensed to practice in the State of Georgia and shall meet the requirements of the city, the county register of deeds office, the minimum standards and specifications adopted in the rules and regulations of the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors for plats to be filed and recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court. The final plat shall constitute all portions of the preliminary plat site which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time. 
(b)  Plat information: 
(1)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, a caption shall be provided including the following information: 
a.  A title or name; 
b.  The city, land district and lot, and subdivision, if property lies within a particular subdivision; 
c.  The date of plate preparation and the date of the field survey; 
d.  The scale, stated and shown graphically; 
e.  The name, address, telephone number and registration number of the land surveyor or the statement that he or she is the county surveyor and is not required by law to be a registered surveyor; and 
f.  All reproductions of original maps or plats shall bear the signature of the registrant placed across the registration seal in order to be a valid or recordable map or plat. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all maps or plats that are sealed by a land surveyor which depict and describe real property boundaries. Maps and plats which do not meet the requirements of this subsection shall not be sealed nor recorded by the clerk of the superior court. 
(2)  The exact boundary of the tract of land being subdivided showing clearly the disposition of all portions of the tract. 
(3)  North arrow and declination. 
(4)  A vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision with respect to adjacent streets and properties. 
(5)  As built drawings and plans of all water, sewer, and storm drainage system facilities, illustrating their layouts and connections to existing systems. Such plans shall show all easements and rights-of-way, to demonstrate that the facilities are properly placed and the locations of all fire hydrants, blow offs, manholes, pumps, force mains, and gate valves are indicated. This information shall not be placed on the final plat but must be submitted at the time of request for final plat approval or prior to certificate of occupancy/completion. 
(6)  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce accurately on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street, alley line, lot line, building line, easement line, and setback line. All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and all angles to the nearest second. 
(7)  The lines and names of all streets, alley lines, lot lines, lot and block numbers, lot addresses, building setback lines, easements, reservations, common areas, open space, on-site demolition landfills and other areas dedicated to public purpose with notes stating their purposes. All lots subject to flooding shall be noted. 
(8)  Compliance with the tree preservation ordinance of the city, Chapter 320 of this UDO. 
(9)  The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments, markers and control points. 
(10)  The deed restrictions or any other similar covenants proposed for the subdivision, if any. 
(11)  The subdivision, the name of the owner, the name, registration number, and seal of the registered surveyor under whose supervision the plat was prepared, and the date of the plat. 
(12)  Private street easements and maintenance agreements required in Subsection 350-3(b), if applicable and payment in lieu of underground utilities improvements (Section 350-25) (if applicable). 
(13)  In addition to all certification required by the county the following certification must also appear on the final plat: 
Certificate of Approval for Recording. I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the Subdivision Regulations for Chamblee, Georgia, and that this plat has been approved by the Chamblee Development Director for recording in the office of the register of deeds of DeKalb County. 
____________  Date 
________________  Development Director, Chamblee, Georgia 
(c)  Application submittal. 
(1)  An application will be considered complete and ready for processing only when it fully complies with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  If the application and final plat are not accepted, the Development Director must inform the applicant of the deficiencies and request the applicant to resubmit the application and final plat with the additional information. 
(3)  Material specifications. The final plat shall meet all provisions of the Georgia Plat Act, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67. 
(4)  Compliance with UDO. The final plat must comply with the requirements of the city UDO and all conditions of zoning for the subject property. If the final plat is inconsistent with any portion of the preliminary plat, the applicant is required to note any discrepancies on the final plat. 
(d)  Referral of final plat for review. 
(1)  Upon official acceptance of the application and the final plat, the Development Department, Public Works, and any other city or county department the Development Director determines should be consulted for the particularities of the proposed subdivision, shall review the preliminary plat. As part of its review, each such department and receiving entity must make comments and recommendations regarding any required changes necessary to comply with all applicable regulations. 
(2)  Once the Development Director has received each department's comments and recommendations, the Development Director must either notify the applicant that the final plat has been approved or notify the applicant that revisions to the plat are required. 
(3)  If a final plat is not approved within 180 days of the official acceptance of the application, the application and final plat is considered withdrawn without further action by the city. The Development Director must approve the final plat if the application and final plat conform to all requested revisions, the requirements of this Code and state law and must deny the final plat if the application and final plat do not conform to all requested revisions, the requirements of this Code or state law. 
(e)  Recording the final plat. 
(1)  The approved final plat must be recorded with the clerk of the county superior court by the applicant and returned to the Development Director. 
(2)  The filing and recording of the final plat will, upon completion of the improvements by the applicant and compliance with all procedures of this chapter, be deemed an acceptance of the dedication of the streets and other public land as shown upon the plat on behalf of the public. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-25. - Revised final plat. 
When it becomes necessary to revise an original recorded final plat due to some error, required adjustment or desired adjustment, the applicant must confer with the Development Director to determine what steps are necessary to revise the final plat. When determined to be minor, some requirements may be determined to be unnecessary based on the applicability of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-26. - Reserved. 
Section 300-27. - Guarantees and sureties. 
(a)  Guarantees and sureties. Three types of guarantees and sureties may be provided for as a part of the final plat approval and development permitting process: 
(1)  Performance guarantees. 
(2)  Maintenance guarantees. 
(3)  Maintenance Agreements. 
(b)  Performance guarantees. Performance sureties shall be allowed for required public improvements not yet completed. In lieu of requiring the completion, installation, and dedication of any and all improvements (e.g., water, sewer, street lights, landscaping, etc.) prior to approval of a final plat or certificate of occupancy/completion (CO), the City may enter into a written agreement with the developer or subdivider whereby the developer or subdivider shall agree to complete all required improvements prior to the release of the performance guarantee. Once said agreement is signed by both parties and the security required herein is provided, the final plat or CO/CC may be approved, if all other requirements of this chapter are met. To secure this agreement, the developer or subdivider shall provide either one, or a combination of the following guarantees equal to 1-1/2 times the entire cost of the improvements secured: 
(1)  Surety performance bond(s). The developer or subdivider shall obtain a performance bond(s) from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the state. The bond shall be payable to the City and shall be in an amount equal to 1-1/2 times the entire cost, as estimated by the developer or subdivider and verified by the City, of installing all required improvements. The duration of the bond(s) shall be for no longer than 12 months or until such lesser time that the improvements are accepted by the city. Any expenses associated with the cost verification by the City shall be paid entirely by the developer or subdivider. 
(2)  Cash or equivalent security. The developer or subdivider shall deposit cash, an irrevocable letter of credit, or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the city or in escrow with a financial institution designated as an official depository of the city. The amount of deposit shall be equal to 1-1/2 times the entire cost, as estimated by the developer or subdivider, and verified by the city, of installing all required improvements, unless stated otherwise in this UDO. The duration of this instrument shall be for no longer than 12 months or until such lesser time that the improvements are accepted by the City. Any expenses associated with the cost verification by the city shall be paid entirely by the developer or subdivider. 
(3)  If cash or other instrument is deposited in escrow with a financial institution as provided above, then the developer or subdivider shall file with the Development Department an agreement between the financial institution and the developer or subdivider guaranteeing the following: 
a.  That said escrow amount will be held in trust until released by the Development Director and may not be used or pledged by the developer or subdivider in any other transaction during the term of the escrow; and 
b.  That in case of a failure on the part of the developer or subdivider to complete said improvements, the financial institution shall, upon notification of the city to the financial institution of an estimate of the amount needed to complete the improvements, immediately pay to the city the funds estimated to complete the improvements, up to the full balance of the escrow account, or deliver to the City any other instruments fully endorsed or otherwise made payable in full to the City. 
(c)  Maintenance guarantees. 
(1)  Maintenance guarantees shall be provided as required in this UDO for the ongoing maintenance of public improvements, stormwater management facilities and landscaping for a period of 24 months following the date of approval of development conformance. The amount of deposit shall be equal to 60 percent of the construction value. 
(2)  The Agreement shall be accompanied by a bond, letter of credit, or other acceptable surety providing for the maintenance as provided in of all installation and public improvements required by this UDO. 
(d)  Sustainable Certification Close-out guarantees. 
(1)  A performance bond in accordance with the bonding requirements of this section and the terms of Sustainable Certification in Section 230-9 shall be submitted. 
(e)  Default. Upon default, meaning failure on the part of the subdivider or developer to complete the required improvements in the time allowed by this chapter or as spelled out in the performance or maintenance bond or escrow agreement, then the surety, or financial institution holding the escrow account, shall, if requested by the city, pay all or any portion of the bond or escrow fund to the city up to the amount needed to complete the improvements based on an estimate by the city. Upon payment, the city, in its discretion, may expend such portion of said funds as it deems necessary to complete all or any portion of the required improvements. The City shall return to the subdivider any funds not spent in completing the improvements. 
(f)  Release of guarantee security. The city may release a portion of any security posted as the improvements are completed or maintenance period completed and approved by the Development Director. When the Development Director approves said improvements, the Development Director shall inspect the premises and if work is found to be completed and satisfactory, the Development Director shall release the portion of the security posted which covers the approved cost of the improvements and maintenance of satisfactorily completed work that was subject to the security. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to petition the city for release of guarantees and sureties and to warrant that all improvements subject to the guarantee or surety have been completed to fulfill the requirements of this UDO. 
(g)  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of any project close-out or certificate of occupancy/completion requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the City requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the City prior to approval, and recorded in the deed records of the clerk of superior court of the county. The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(2)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice, including their associated landscaping measures. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(3)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in Section 340-41 of this Article. 
(4)  The City, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this Article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(h)  Stormwater Performance and maintenance bonds. Either the land owner or the developer, prior to project close-out, certificate of occupancy/completion, or final plat shall post a bond or other security in sufficient amount to guarantee the performance of all construction and/or maintenance obligations hereunder. A maintenance bond for the project's stormwater management measures in the amount of $5.00/cubic foot of storage for a two-year time period shall be provided. 
(i)  As-built drawings and plans of all water, sewer, and storm drainage system facilities, illustrating their layouts and connections to existing systems. Such plans shall show all easements and rights-of-way, to demonstrate that the facilities are properly placed and the locations of all fire hydrants, blow offs, manholes, pumps, force mains, and gate valves are indicated. This information shall not be placed on the final plat but must be submitted at the time of request for final plat approval or prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy/completion, whichever comes later. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 300-28—300-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND INSPECTIONS 

Section 300-34. - Construction plans. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Prior to initiating land-disturbing activity or accompanying an application for Preliminary Plat, the applicant shall submit an application for approval of site construction plans to the director for all site development and improvements. 
(2)  No permit for development or site construction activity shall be issued prior to approval of site construction plans subject to Section 300-45. 
(3)  See Section 300-45, Land disturbance permits for development thresholds requiring submittal of a land disturbance permit. 
(b)  Application Requirements. 
(1)  The applicant for site construction plan approval shall submit an application, accompanied by the appropriate fees, and the required number of site construction plans and related documentation, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  A boundary survey showing current topography, state waters, structures, easements and other existing conditions prior to proposed development. 
b.  Landscaping, Buffer and Tree Protection Plan - Section 300-35. 
c.  Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan - Section 300-36. 
d.  Stormwater Management Plan - Subsection 340-38(c). 
e.  Grading Plan - Section 300-37. 
f.  Storm Drainage Profile Drawing - Section 300-38. 
g.  Street Plan/Profile Sheets - Section 300-39. 
(2)  All site construction drawings and other engineering data, except for the landscaping, buffer, and tree protection plan and shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia. 
(3)  Multi-phase developments may submit construction plans in phases. 
(4)  After receiving an application for approval of site construction plans, the Development Director or his/her designee shall confirm that the application is complete. If the application is determined to be incomplete or insufficient, the Development Director shall notify the applicant in writing and shall require that missing components be resubmitted prior to further review. 
(c)  Review of construction plans. 
(1)  The Development Director or his/her designee shall review site construction plans with respect to their consistency with the City of Chamblee Comprehensive Plan, conditions of approval for any legislative or quasi-judicial process, and each of the standards and requirements of this section and all other applicable standards and specifications of this UDO. 
(2)  Within 20 working days of receipt for the completed application for site construction plans approval, the Development Director shall notify the applicant to document approval or disapproval of the site construction plans. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-35. - Landscaping, buffer and tree protection plans. 
(a)  All projects which require a land disturbance permit must comply with the Unified Development Ordinance and the tree preservation and replacement regulations in Chapter 320, Article 4. Some projects may be subject to additional landscape requirements defined by the city zoning ordinance, stipulated as a condition of rezoning, or established as a matter of policy in this document. Required landscape plans for these situations shall include the following: 
(1)  All information required by the tree preservation and replacement regulations in Chapter 320, Article 4 and tree preservation administrative guidelines; 
(2)  Landscape plans shall be prepared by and signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect; 
(3)  The plans shall show background information on existing and proposed contours, existing trees to remain and those to be removed, proposed trees and other vegetation, proposed utilities, proposed temporary and permanent drainage features, proposed drives and other permanent structures to be demolished, etc., in the appropriate line weight and line type so that the plans can be read and understood as a representation of water flow, vegetation, silt fence, and other features as they ought to be working together to prevent excess land disturbance and runoff, erosion, siltation, and damage to trees to remain; 
(4)  Planting details for each type of plant; 
(5)  A delineation and designation of any required landscaped or undisturbed buffers; 
(6)  A detail plant list indicating the size, type, and spacing, of and other requirements for all trees, and shrubs and ground covers; and 
(7)  Every effort should be made to landscape so as to minimize all maintenance required and minimize fertilizer water, plant food, and herbicide applications. Natural vegetation indigenous to the City of Chamblee should be promoted where appropriate; exotic invasive vegetation should shall not be used be avoided. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-36. - Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. 
The erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan shall follow the version of the NPDES Erosion, Sedimentation, and Pollution Control Plan Checklist as required by the Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-37. - Grading plan. 
(a)  All information required under Subsection 300-24(b) (unless included elsewhere in the plans); 
(b)  Topographic layout proposed grading of the development must be at two-foot (maximum) contour intervals based on mean sea level datum; 
(c)  Site grading plans superimposed over existing drainage structures. Drainage area that contributes to each existing structure shall be specified or shown; 
(d)  Location, and construction details, and design criteria of accessory structures (headwalls, drainage ditches, catch basins, junction boxes, drop inlets, retention areas, and retention outlet controls) shall be provided on plan and/or detail sheet; 
(e)  Maximum cross-slope on sidewalks is three percent, on other pavement, six percent; 
(f)  Northern and eastern coordinates shall be shown for all stormwater and sanitary sewer appurtenances; 
(g)  Specify bicycle and/or pedestrian safe grates as appropriate for all drain inlets; 
(h)  Indicate top and bottom elevations of all walls, steps and ramps; 
(i)  Drainage at intersections indicated by flow arrows on plan; 
(j)  The 100-year floodplain limits and elevations, or note absence (specify latest floodplain map and panel); 
(k)  Structural detail and dimension of the detention pond including section through detention pond, dam or wall; 
(l)  All retaining walls over four feet in height must be certified by a structural engineer licensed in the State of Georgia; 
(m)  Ingress/egress easement from a public street to stormwater detention structure and maintenance easement to include the surface area ten feet outside the area inundated by the 100-year storm event. The ingress/egress easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide with a grade of 20 percent or less; 
(n)  Detail of outlet control structure; 
(o)  Show limits of actual grading (plus ten-foot grading buffer at the bottom of proposed slopes) outside of the root protection zone for all trees to remain; 
(p)  Establish easements for dedication of all stormwater drainage features directing concentrated flows across property lines as directed by the City; 
(q)  All development must satisfy the requirements of this UDO concerning potential flood areas; 
(r)  Show or indicate whether the site is part of and in compliance with a master/parent stormwater management plan; 
(s)  Water quality BMPs as recommended in the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volumes 1, 2 and 3. For any project that requires a land disturbance permit the project shall consider water quality. The following BMPs may be used: 
(1)  Wet ponds (extended detention for less than 20 acres)—ED-micro pool; 
(2)  Extended dry detention ponds; 
(3)  Wetland-constructed; 
(4)  Infiltration trenches; 
(5)  Dry swales; 
(6)  Sand filter; 
(7)  Bio-retention; 
(8)  Vegetated filtration systems; and 
(9)  Any other best management practice approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-38. - Storm drainage profile drawing. 
(a)  All information required under Subsection 300-24(b) (unless included elsewhere in the plans); 
(b)  Storm drainage profiles must be prepared to a scale no smaller than one inch = 100 feet horizontal × one inch = ten feet vertical; 
(c)  Each profile should be labeled consistent with the labeling scheme used on the drainage plan view; 
(d)  No main line storm pipe shall be less than 15 inches diameter; (roof laterals and landscape drainage are exempted from this requirement); 
(e)  No pipe shall have a slope greater than 12 percent; 
(f)  If a drop in a structure is greater than five feet, a reinforced base shall be provided for that structure; 
(g)  The 25-year hydraulic grade line shall be shown for all storm pipes. The 100-year HGL shall be shown for all pipes within road rights-of-way; 
(h)  No corrugated metal pipe shall be used in any road right-of-way; 
(i)  All utility crossings shall be shown on storm profiles; 
(j)  All structures shall be labeled as to type and function using standard county or GDOT call outs; 
(k)  No outfall pipe shall have a slope greater than one percent. Maximum allowable velocity for storm sewer exit pipe is ten feet per second when flowing full or half-full based on Manning's Formula. Energy dissipater is required for exit velocity in excess of five feet per second; 
(l)  Rip-rap and/or concrete aprons other acceptable aprons shall be shown for all outfalls; 
(m)  A pipe chart representing all sizing and capacity calculations, including but not limited to pipe size, capacity, drainage area, velocity, and pipe material, shall be included; 
(n)  The profile must show the existing and proposed elevations along the length of the drainage system; 
(o)  Open channel design must show the grade of the flow line of the channel and include a typical ditch section that provides a non-erodible velocity at design flows. Channel slopes less than one percent may be grassed; for channel shapes greater than 12 but less than three percent the designer must demonstrate calculated velocity at or less than five feet per second including a channel lining for design to accommodate the design philosophy; channel slopes over three percent must be approved by the city; 
(p)  Channel lining (i.e., grass, concrete, etc.) must be specified along the profile; 
(q)  Pipe material and bedding shall be specified; 
(r)  Crown elevations must be matched at each junction structure or the upstream crown must be higher than the downstream crown; and 
(s)  Shall be compliant with the requirements of Chapter 340, Article 4, Post-Development Stormwater Management. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-39. - Street plan and profile sheets. 
(a)  Plan and profile sheets shall be provided for all streets. 
(1)  All traffic control devices, signs, signals and markings (striping) to be used shall conform to the requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (MUTCD), latest edition. 
(2)  A state department of transportation (GDOT) permit may be required on state-maintained routes. Provide a copy of the GDOT approved plan or a letter stating that the permit is not required on all state routes. 
(b)  The street plan/profile sheets shall contain at a minimum: 
(1)  All information required in Subsection 300-24(b) (unless included elsewhere in the plans); 
(2)  Provide plans and profiles for proposed streets including intersections (scale to be one inch = 50 feet or 100 feet horizontal and one inch = ten feet vertical); 
(3)  Show and state percent grade of streets and length of vertical curves; 
(4)  Profiles shall show all utility crossings; 
(5)  Label all tangents, PIs, PCs, vertical and horizontal curves, K values, curve lengths, stations and chord bearings; 
(6)  Minimum K value is ten; 
(7)  No road shall have a grade greater than 14 percent for longer than 1,000 feet; 
(8)  No road shall have a grade greater than 15 percent; 
(9)  All intersections shall have a 50-foot vertical tangent approach at a maximum slope of 2.00 percent; 
(10)  All intersections shall have a 50-foot horizontal tangent; 
(11)  Vertical and horizontal sight distance shall be shown graphically at all major intersections in accordance with GDOT regulations; 
(12)  Minimum stopping sight distance requirements must be satisfied at all vertical curves; 
(13)  Proposed vertical curves must be adequate for grades shown; 
(14)  Show curve data necessary to reproduce street centerline; 
(15)  Provide typical roadway cross section and pavement specifications; 
(16)  Provide typical cul-de-sac detail which includes right-of-way and pavement radius. All cul-de-sac dimensions shall match current city standards; 
(17)  Provide sidewalks and planting strips as required by the city zoning ordinance, latest revision. Show on plans and include detail; 
(18)  Provide handicap ramps at all intersections, driveways, and curb encroachment locations. Show on plans and include detail; 
(19)  Show and state all names and right-of-way (existing and proposed) sizes from centerline and pavement widths of all roads, which appear on plans; 
(20)  Provide right-of-way miter with ten-foot legs at all intersections within subdivision. A 20-foot miter is required at major street intersections; 
(21)  Developments with roadways requiring decel lanes or one additional lane widening shall require 1:20 scale construction plans for the intersection approaches; 
(22)  Dimension improvements (in feet) from street centerline to back of curb; 
(23)  Indicate tapers beyond projected property lines or end of decel, as appropriate; 
(24)  Tapers are not to be curbed (transition curbing down unless tying to existing curb); 
(25)  Show all existing and proposed grades and slopes at maximum two-foot contour intervals; 
(26)  Provide appropriate spot elevations; 
(27)  Clearly indicate curb type to be used and indicate transition locations. Show on plan and include detail; 
(28)  All markings to be thermoplastic; 
(29)  Depending upon the complexity and size of the development, separate roadway signing, marking and traffic signal plans may be required; 
(30)  All traffic signal plans must be submitted to and approved by the DeKalb County DOT or GDOT if it is a state highway. 
(c)  For driveways, the following information shall be shown: 
(1)  Show proper widths of all driveways; 
(2)  State driveway radius; 
(3)  Provide spot elevations from edge of pavement along centerline of proposed drive(s); 
(4)  Provide driveway/intersection profiles; 
(5)  On one-way drives, show one-way arrows and provide details; and 
(6)  Show all streets and non-single-family driveways near the proposed access on both sides of the road. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-40. - Effect of construction plan approval. 
Approval of the site construction plans shall entitle the applicant to schedule a pre-construction conference with the Development Director and to obtain land disturbance permits for construction of site improvements required in this chapter and other requirements of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-41. - Initiation of development activities. 
(a)  Initial Activities Required. Following the issuance of any permit authorizing clearing and grading of a site: 
(1)  The Development Department shall schedule a pre-construction conference. The applicant shall contact the Department at least 72 hours prior to initiating land disturbance activities. 
(2)  Required erosion control measures, including soil sedimentation facilities must be installed where practical by the developer, operational, inspected and approved by the Department prior to actual grading or removal of vegetation, (See Chapter 310, Article 1). All control measures shall be in place as soon after the commencement of activities as possible and in coordination with the progress of the project. 
(3)  Areas required to be undisturbed by this UDO, conditions of zoning approval or other ordinance or regulation shall be designated by survey stakes, flags, or other appropriate markings and shall be inspected and approved by the Development Department prior to the commencement of any clearing or grading activities. 
(b)  Tree Protection Areas. Prior to the initiation of land disturbance activities and throughout the clearing and grading process the following must be accomplished for a designated tree protection area in accordance with any approved Buffer and Landscape Plan or Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan for the property, as set forth in Chapter 320 of this UDO: 
(1)  For those trees which are not to be removed, all protective fencing, staking, and any tree protection area signs shall be in place. These barriers must be maintained throughout the land disturbance process and should not be removed until landscaping is begun. 
(2)  The tree protection areas shall not be utilized for storage of earth, construction materials, or other materials resulting from or used during the development process. 
(3)  Construction site activities such as parking, materials storage, concrete washout, burning, etc., shall be arranged to prevent disturbances within the tree protection areas. 
(c)  Stabilization for Erosion Control. If for any reason a land disturbance permit expires after land disturbance activities have commenced, the developer shall be responsible for stabilizing the site for erosion control, under the direction of the Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-42. - Development inspections. 
(a)  Development inspections. Oral notification shall be made by the developer or contractor to the Development Inspections Section of the Department at least 24 hours prior to commencement of activity for each of the following phases as authorized by any development permit. Inspections shall be made by the Department and passed prior to continuation of further activity or proceeding into new phases. 
(1)  Clearing or clearing and grubbing of the site or any portion included under the permit. 
(2)  Grading and initial installation of stormwater infrastructure, detention, or other stormwater facilities. 
(3)  Installation of sanitary sewer and water main extensions. This notification will be made by the approved utility contractor after obtaining a utility construction permit DeKalb County in a manner determined by DeKalb County. 
(4)  Curbing of roadways. Inspection should be requested before the forms have been set (if used). Roadway width will be spot checked by string line between curb stakes. 
(5)  Sub-base or subgrade of streets. After compaction, the subgrade will be string-lined for depth and crown. The subgrade shall be roll tested and shall pass with no movement, to the satisfaction of the Development Department. 
(6)  Street base. The base will be string-lined for depth and crown, and shall pass a roll test with no movement to the satisfaction of the Development Department. 
(7)  Paving. A Development Department inspector shall be on site during the paving process to check consistency, depth, and workmanship, as applicable. For asphalt paving, the temperature of the material will be spot-checked, and the roadways will be cored after completion to check thickness. 
(8)  Stream Buffers. If applicable, see Section 310-18. 
(b)  Responsibility for quality and design. The completion of inspections by authorized officials or employees and authorization for work continuation shall not transfer responsibility for the quality of the work performed or materials used from the contractor or developer, no imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for project design or engineering from the professional corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
(c)  Final Inspections. Final inspections are required to verify compliance with all approved plans and conditions by all personnel related to landscaping and engineering and planning requirements. All requirements shall be addressed prior to obtaining project closeout or certificates of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-43. - Stop work orders. 
(a)  The Development Director is authorized to issue a stop work order when a violation of a permit occurs, see Section 310-24, Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. Unless more time is needed for corrective action to prevent imminent public danger or property damage, if the violation has not ceased within 30 minutes of the issuance of the stop work order, the Development Director shall take any or all of the following actions: 
(1)  Immediately revoke the permit. 
(2)  Issue a citation subject to enforcement by the municipal court. 
(3)  Institute a civil action for injunctive relief. 
(4)  Take other enforcement steps authorized in this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - DEVELOPMENT PERMITS 

Section 300-45. - Land disturbance permits. 
(a)  A major land disturbance permit is required for all land-disturbing activities in the City not otherwise exempted by this Title. 
(b)  Land disturbance associated with a building permit shall require a separate land disturbance permit. Construction associated with single-family detached residential development, not part of a common project, shall not require a separate land disturbance permit. 
(c)  Major land disturbance permits shall meet the application requirements for construction plans located in Article 4 and any other requirements contained on applications and forms provided by the Development Department. 
(d)  A minor land disturbance permit is required for all other land-disturbing activities over 500 square feet. Land-disturbing activities under 500 square feet may require a permit if determined necessary by the Development Director. 
(e)  Minor land disturbance permit shall meet requirements contained on applications and forms provided by the Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 300-46—300-48. - Reserved. 
Section 300-49. - Driveway permits. 
A permit shall be required from the Department of Public Works prior to creating cuts in the curb or installing a driveway connecting a property to a public roadway. The permit shall assure that access management, erosion control, stormwater regulations and other development regulations of this Title 3 are met. Depending on the roadway, additional driveway permits will be required by the Georgia Department of Transportation and or the DeKalb County Department of Transportation. See Section 350-2 for driveway design standards. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-50. - Moving and demolition of buildings. 
(a)  Moving of Buildings. 
(1)  No dwelling unit or other permanent structure shall be relocated within the City unless, when relocated, it meets all requirements of this zoning ordinance and other City Code requirements, and prior to the transportation of the structure, the relocation has been approved by moving permit issued by the City. 
(2)  Where application for a permit to move a structure or a portion thereof has been filed and the requisite moving permit fee paid, where written agreement regarding cleanup of the site has been signed and where all other applicable ordinances of the City have been complied with and all other permit fees paid, the Development Director shall be authorized to issue a moving permit to the applicant. 
(3)  A permit to move a structure or any portion thereof from inside the City to a point inside or outside the City shall not be issued until the applicant has posted performance surety in the amount of $5,000.00 with the Development Department. The performance surety may be in the form of cash deposited with the City, or a bond, irrevocable letter of escrow or letter of credit from a bank or other financial institution in a form acceptable to the Development Director or Development Director. The performance surety shall be released to the applicant after the structure has been moved, and any damages to City property caused by the move have been repaired by the applicant. In the event the permit holder should fail to comply with these requirements, all or any portion of the performance surety shall be applied by the City to the cost of the City performing the work to the premises or location from where the structure was moved or performing the repairs to City property damaged as a result of the move. In the application for the moving permit, the applicant shall grant in writing unto the City, its agents or employees, the right to enter upon the premises to perform the work. 
(4)  The application for a moving permit shall include information as to the route, date, and time of the move which shall be subject to the approval of the Development Director. 
(5)  The mover shall, in writing, indemnify the City and hold the City harmless from any and all damages which the City may suffer and from any and all liability claims including interest thereon, demands, attorney's fees, and costs of defense, or judgment against it, arising from damages caused by the move of the structure. 
(b)  Demolition of Buildings. 
(1)  Whenever any person desires to demolish any house, dwelling, apartment or other similar structure formerly used for human habitation or any commercial, industrial or other structure formerly used in the conduct of any trade or business, he or she shall, before being entitled to the issuance of a demolition permit, agree in writing that he or she shall, following the demolition of the structure, take all necessary action, including that specified in this Section 300-52, to ensure that the premises or location where the structure is demolished shall be left in a sanitary condition and free from all trash, debris and structures which might become a harboring place for insects, rodents or vermin. 
(2)  The applicant shall also be responsible for proper removal of all hazardous material in compliance with U.S. Environmental Protection Agency regulations contained in 40 CFR 61, Subparts A and M and 29 CFR 1910 and 1926. The applicant shall further be responsible for the proper disposal of solid waste containing asbestos in accordance with the "Georgia Asbestos Safety Act" and the "Georgia Air Quality Act of 1978." 
(3)  A temporary fence may be erected to keep out trespassers during demolition and cleanup. 
(4)  A permit or bond shall not be required for the demolition of barns, sheds or other accessory buildings where the structure was not used for human habitation or any commercial, industrial, trade or business purpose, or any building not having gas, water, electricity and other utilities connected. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to demolish any house, dwelling or other similar structure formerly used for human habitation or any commercial, industrial or other structure formerly used in the conduct of any trade or business without a permit. 
(c)  Duty to Restore Premises to Safe and Sanitary Condition. After the removal of the structure as set forth in Subsection 300-50(b), the owner of the location or premises on which the structure was located shall be required to take necessary action to ensure that such location or premises shall be left in a safe and sanitary condition and shall be specifically required to do the following: 
(1)  Remove all trash, debris, garbage and other similar material. 
(2)  Fill all holes and depressions caused by the removal of any part of the structure, or caused as a result of compliance with this Section 300-50, which might become a harboring place for insects, rodents or vermin. 
(3)  Tear down and remove all underpinnings, pilasters, steps, plumbing connections and fixtures above ground level. 
(4)  Seal, close-off, and make gastight and watertight all water, gas and sewer lines. 
(5)  Fill or cover all wells with a concrete cap. 
(6)  Remove any temporary fencing installed to keep out trespassers during demolition and cleanup. 
(d)  Time Limits for Premises Restoration; Failure to Restore Premises. All persons to whom this Section is applicable shall comply with the provisions of this Section within 30 calendar days following the date of the removal of any structure specified in this Section. 
(e)  Transporting of Structures; When Structure May be Transported; Insurance Coverage; Removal and Replacement of Roadway Obstacles; Removal of Trees; Law Enforcement Officer Escort; Notification of Move. 
(1)  Structures regulated in this Section shall only be moved on Mondays through Thursdays between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. unless otherwise approved in writing by the Development Director. 
(2)  Any individual, firm or corporation transporting any house, dwelling, apartment or other structure formerly used for human habitation, or any commercial building or other structure formerly occupied in the conduct of any trade or business across or along the public roads or highways of the County, shall be required to furnish proof that it has, in effect, public liability insurance in the amount of at least $500,000.00 combined single limit; to protect the property and persons who may be damaged as a result of the moving of the structure. 
(3)  All mail boxes, highway signs, and other movable obstacles to the move of the structure and located in the street right-of-way shall be removed as the structure approaches such an obstacle and re-erected immediately after the structure passes such obstacles in equal or better condition than prior to removal. 
(4)  Trees located in the street right-of-way shall not be removed or trimmed without the written permission of the County Department of Transportation. 
(5)  During the move, all structures shall be provided with an escort by a City law enforcement officer at the mover's expense. 
(6)  For moving a structure or any portion of a structure for which a moving permit has been issued, the mover shall provide at least two calendar days' notice to the Police Department prior to the date of moving. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 300-51. - Model home permits. 
(a)  Up to four model homes may be permitted for construction and issued prior to the approval of a final plat. 
(b)  The building permit shall not be issued until the roads are paved (base coarse installed). 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 300-52—300-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - APPEALS 

Section 300-60. - Appeals of administrative decisions. 
Appeals of Title 3 shall be made pursuant to the process outlined in Chapter 280, Article 6. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 300-61—300-100. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 310. - ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS 
ARTICLE 1. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION 

Section 310-1. - Applicability. 
(a)  In order to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation pollution of streams, springs, flat water bodies, or other drainage networks, all land-disturbing activities shall comply with all requirements of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources standards and specifications and any locally adopted sediment control ordinances. 
(b)  Land-disturbing activities shall cause all grading, excavations, open cuts, side slopes, and other land surface disturbances to be mulched, seeded, sodded, or otherwise protected. Temporary erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be placed as seen fit by the City. 
(c)  Erosion and sedimentation from land disturbance activities of less than one acre shall be controlled with silt fencing to prevent siltation of adjoining parcels, lots and streets. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-2. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the "Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director of the environmental protection division (EPD) of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) or an authorized representative may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b), and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by City; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "Definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in Subsection 310-3(c)(15) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than 5,000 square feet of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a plan disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent City from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1)—(7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT), the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority (SRTA); or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or SRTA which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where GDOT, the Georgia Highway Authority, or SRTA is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the City shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6, as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case City of shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6, as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-3. - Minimum requirements. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by the ordinance from which this article derives, shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director of the EPD of DNR or an authorized representative or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) below, or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this section the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the City or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director of the EPD of DNR or an authorized representative. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the City or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director of the EPD of DNR or an authorized representative may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Georgia Board of Natural Resources reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The City may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activity shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible; provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in Subsection (b) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in Subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director of the EPD of DNR or an authorized representative determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director of the EPD of DNR or an authorized representative pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specification, and are implemented along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year-round; for which groundwater is not a source of water and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along any ephemeral stream, the buffers, as defined in Chapter 110, of at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 5, pt. 6, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director of the EPD of DNR or an authorized representative as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director of the EPD of DNR or an authorized representative may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another, shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-4. - Application and permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The City shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. The City shall consult the UDO and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Chamblee without first obtaining a permit from the City of Chamblee to perform such activity as provided in Chapter 300, Article 5 and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD, if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City of Chamblee and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data as provided in Section 300-36, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of Subsections 310-3(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-17(9) or (10), shall be submitted in full to the division. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the City shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the City. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by Subsections 310-3(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per Subsection 310-4(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the City and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the City to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The City with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the City with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  The City may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application. 
(6)  The City may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof, of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the City may call the bond or any part thereof, to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the City with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Subsections 310-3(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required in Section 300-36 and from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the City of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the City unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the City has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by Subsections 310-3(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per Subsection 310-4(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by the City shall be subject to the same requirements of this ordinance, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the City. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the City, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The permit is effective until completion of the permitted land-disturbing activity project. However, if the permitted land-disturbing activity project is not complete or initiated within 12 months from the date of permit issuance, the permit will become null and void; the person originally issued the expired permit may apply to reissue the permit for up to 12 months. In no case shall a land disturbance permit be valid for more than a total of 24 months. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-5. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The City will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the City shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein, has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The City shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the City, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-6. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director of the EPD of DNR or an authorized representative shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director of the EPD of DNR or an authorized representative or the City shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director of the EPD of DNR or an authorized representative or the City shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director of the EPD of DNR or an authorized representative or the City shall issue an immediate stop work order; 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; and 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the City or by the director of the EPD of DNR, an authorized representative or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the City or by the director of the EPD of DNR, an authorized representative, or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of Subsection 310-4(b)(6). The City may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director of the EPD of DNR or an authorized representative issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-7. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on-site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on-site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said subsection. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-8. - Validity and liability. 
(a)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(b)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the City or DeKalb County Soil and Water Conservation District for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder, or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 310-9—310-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - STREAM BUFFERS 

Section 310-16. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Chamblee Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-17. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)  Findings. The City finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(b)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this article to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-18. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in Chapter 110. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(b)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that was zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. 
(2)  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. 
(4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this article. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property: 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; or 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in Subsection 310-18(b)(1) above. 
(3)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
(4)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the (review and permitting authority) on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the (review and permitting authority) to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land-disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-19. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
Figure 310-19. Stream Buffers 

(b)  Variance procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this article, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the (review and permitting authority) finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the City Council may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the City Council shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance as provided in Subsection 280-15 and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote. The City shall give public notice of each such public hearing as provided in Subsection 280-15. 
(3)  Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in this article would create an extreme hardship. 
(4)  Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(c)  Variance application requirements. At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
(1)  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
(2)  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(3)  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
(4)  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
(5)  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
(6)  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
(7)  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
(8)  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(d)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
(1)  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(2)  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
(3)  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
(4)  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
(5)  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
(6)  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-20. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-21. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
(a)  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback. 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the Council and Mayor may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
(4)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. See Section 300-24, Final plat specifications. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-22. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the City, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-23. - Inspection. 
(a)  The Development Department may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the Development Department in making such inspections. The City shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-24. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the City determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Development Director by filing a written notice of appeal in the office of the City Clerk within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Development Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Development Department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The Development Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The Development Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The Development Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the Development Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the Development Department shall deem appropriate except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the Development Department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the Development Director may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremediated after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the Development Director may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court of the City to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-25. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the Development Department, may appeal to the Mayor and City Council as provided in Section 280-15. Such appeal shall be submitted in writing to the City Clerk's office within ten days after the issuance of such decision or order. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the Mayor and Council, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county, see Section 120-8, Judicial Review. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 310-26—310-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - NUISANCES 

Section 310-30. - Nuisances prohibited. 
It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain a nuisance as defined in Chapter 110 of the Unified Development Ordinance. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-31. - Jurisdiction of municipal court. 
The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health or welfare, and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances, as prescribed in Section 1-6 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-32. - Complaints; order to date. 
Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the City Police Department, which shall investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal court, after five days' notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon, and, upon finding that a nuisance does exist, shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the municipal court judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-33. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate a nuisance in the time specified pursuant to this article, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the municipal court judge, that it must be immediately abated, the municipal court judge may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. The chief of police, in such case, shall keep a record of the expenses and cost of abating the nuisance, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for City revenues. 
(b)  Other City departments shall assist the chief of police as necessary in abating nuisances under this section. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-34. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The Mayor and Council finds and declares that within the city limits there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the city where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which rendered adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the City finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this article shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the city. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-35. - Nuisance abatement procedures. 
(a)  Continued use of other laws and ordinances. It is the intent of the Mayor and Council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the City to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charger, or ordinance or regulation, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation or regulation. 
(b)  Applicable codes, as referenced in this Section 310-35, shall include the following: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 2; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2 after October 1 provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
(c)  Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(1)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwellings, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(2)  The Mayor and Council of the City hereby appoint or designate the Development Department, City Fire Marshal, City Police Chief, and his/her designees as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(3)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearings shall be held not less than 15 days, nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(4)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon any interested party that has answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
a.  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
b.  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property as provided in Subsection 300-50(b) of this UDO; 
c.  For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 41, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(5)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement actions shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13, or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(6)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the City are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(7)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or City revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
a.  The lien provided for in Subsection (7) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c). The clerk of the superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
b.  Upon final determination of costs, fees and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this article shall transmit to the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or City revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interest parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of the completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or City revenue officer, who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of municipal taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or City revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the county or municipality whose lien is being collected. 
c.  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this article may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or City revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
d.  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this article shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this article together with interest, penalties and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, municipal tax collector, or City revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
e.  The county tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq., unless such costs are waived by resolution of the county. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
f.  The City may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
g.  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
h.  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
i.  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(d)  Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other facilities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time by adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(e)  Powers of public officers. The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(f)  Service of complaints. 
(1)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(3)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(4)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this Code section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 310-36—310-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - NOISE 

Section 310-40. - Sound level limitations. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any sound source in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits set forth in the Sound Level Limits by Receiving Property Table below when measured at or within the real property line of the receiving property using the slow response setting unless otherwise noted. Such a sound source would constitute a noise disturbance. 
Sound Level Limits by Receiving Property Table 

 
(b)  If the noise is an impulsive sound, the fast response setting shall be used and the daytime (7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m.) limits of the Sound Level Limits by Receiving Property Table above shall be increased by ten dBA. 
(c)  In a multifamily dwelling, it shall be unlawful to create or permit to be created, any noise that exceeds the daytime (7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m.) limit of 55 dBA and the nighttime (11:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m.) limit of 45 dBA as measured from the closest neighbor's dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-41. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Noise generated from municipally-sponsored or approved celebrations or events shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The following are exempt from the sound level limits of Subsection 310-40(a): 
(1)  Sound by public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices or authorized public safety personnel for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency. 
(2)  Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building, provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation in compliance with Section 58-109 of the Chamblee Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Noise from any automobile alarm, provided such alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted or ten minutes if the sound is intermittent. 
(4)  The generation of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(5)  Noise resulting from any practice or performance sponsored by or associated with the educational process administered by a recognized institution of learning, including, but not limited to, band, choir and orchestral performances. 
(6)  Noise that results from the activities of an organized sports league. 
(7)  Unamplified bells, chimes or carillons while being used in conjunction with religious services between the hours of 7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 
(8)  Emergency work. 
(9)  Events with amplified sound that are operating within the time and volume parameters set forth in an approved special administrative permit. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-42. - Restricted uses and activities. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection 310-40(a) and the exceptions above, the following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth below: 
(1)  Noncommercial or non-industrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall not be operated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or on Saturday or Sunday before the hour of 8:30 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable limits set forth in Subsection 310-40(a). At all other times, the limits set forth in Subsection 310-40(a) do not apply to noncommercial or non-industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance equipment, provided that all motorized equipment is operated with a functioning muffler. 
(2)  Commercial or industrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall be operated with a muffler. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall not be operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a residential property line, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or before the hour of 9:00 a.m., or after the hour of 5:00 p.m. on Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, unless: 
a.  Such activities are deemed emergency work; or 
b.  Such activities meet the limits set forth in Subsection 310-40(a). At all other times, the limits set forth in Subsection 310-40(a) do not apply to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance equipment. 
(3)  Construction and demolition activity shall not be performed between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 5:00 p.m. on Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, unless: 
a.  Such activities are deemed emergency work; or 
b.  Such activities meet the limits set forth in Subsection 310-40(a). This provision shall not apply if the chief of police determines that the loss or inconvenience that would result to any party in interest is of such a nature as to warrant special consideration. In such cases, the chief of police may grant a renewable permit for a period not to exceed ten days for this work to be done within the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(4)  Domesticated animals may not make any vocalizations (including barking, baying, howling, crying or making any other noise) for more than ten minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if intermittent. 
(5)  The collection of trash or refuse in residential districts is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(6)  No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument or similar device in such a manner as to create a continuing noise disturbance at 50 feet from such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space. 
(7)  Late-night establishments are prohibited from allowing noises and/or sounds to emanate from their establishment which are plainly audible more than 50 feet beyond the building or structure from which the noises and/or sounds emanate between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-43. - Procedures for the determination of sound levels. 
(a)  Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including, but not limited to, design, maximum and fluctuating rates. All noise measurements shall be made at or within the property line of the impacted site, unless otherwise directed in this article. When instrumentation cannot be placed at or within the property line, the measurement shall be made as close thereto as is reasonable. For the purposes of this article, noise measurements are measured on the A- or C-weighted sound scale, as applicable, of a sound level meter of standard design and quality having characteristics established by ANSI. 
(b)  Measurements shall be taken by police officers appropriately trained in the use of a sound level meter. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-44. - Special variances. 
(a)  The Development Director shall have the authority, consistent with this article, to grant special variances. 
(b)  Any person seeking a special variance pursuant to this article shall file an application with the Development Director. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound into compliance with this article would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons. Notice of an application for a special variance shall be given by the Development Director to persons who frequent the area of the sound or activity and who may be adversely affected by the granting of the variance. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the special variance may file a statement with the Development Director containing any information to support such individual's claim. 
(c)  In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the Development Director shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community and other persons of not granting the special variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse impact of granting the special variance. Applicants for special variances may be required to submit any information the Development Director may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the Development Director shall place on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the special variance. 
(d)  Special variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity. The special variance shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the special variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this article regulating the source of sound or activity for which the special variance was granted. 
(e)  Application for extension of time limits specified in special variances or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial special variances. 
(f)  The Development Director may issue guidelines approved by the Mayor and City Council defining the procedures to be followed in applying for a special variance and the criteria to be considered in deciding whether or not to grant a special variance. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-45. - Enforcement procedures; miscellaneous. 
(a)  Except as provided in Subsection 310-45(c), the City may prosecute noise-related violations by issuance of a City ordinance citation, in which case the penalty for a violation shall be as provided in Section 1-6 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  In addition to assessing a fine as provided, or in lieu thereof, the municipal court judge may issue an order requiring immediate abatement of any sound source alleged to be in violation of this section. Failure to abate such noise results in contempt of court. 
(c)  Whenever any city resident shall complain to the police department that a dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or a cat which habitually cries or howls, is being kept by any person in the city, a City law enforcement officer, prior to the issuance of a citation, shall issue a formal warning to the owner of such dog or cat that the owner shall take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the barking, howling, yelping or crying. If the warning given to the owner is ineffective, a citation shall be issued to the owner of the dog or cat. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefor, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this section or from other law. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 310-46—310-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - YARD TRIMMING DISPOSAL 

Section 310-50. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having either a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, cause or permit the dumping, blowing, depositing, or placing of yard waste, including any yard debris, grass clippings, weeds, leaves, and tree branches upon any street, sidewalk, avenue or other public property in the city without permission from the City, or into any river, creek, branch, public water, drain, sewer or receiving basin in the City. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-51. - Sorting, storing, composting and collection of yard trimmings. 
(a)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in the following manner: 
(1)  Leaves, brush, grass clippings, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance shall be stored in an area, not to exceed five feet by five feet, on the property generating such materials. 
(2)  All yard trimming materials shall be placed in the rear of the property lot, where practical, so as to limit the visibility of such material from the public roads, streets and highways, except such material may be placed on the curb not more than 24 hours before scheduled collection. 
(3)  Yard trimmings not being retained by the owner for use as mulch, shall be disposed of by placing such material in containers on the curb in front of the property once a week in accordance with the schedule for collection established by the City. 
(4)  Shrub, tree prunings, Christmas trees and other similar material which are too large for placement in containers for collection, may be placed on the curb without being placed in a container. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 310-52. - Penalties. 
Any person violating Section 310-50 or Section 310-51 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 60 days or a combination of such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 310-53—310-59. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 320. - BUFFERS, LANDSCAPING AND TREE PROTECTION 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL 

Section 320-1. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter to provide standards for the preservation and/or replacement of the city's trees, provide vegetated buffer areas between incompatible land uses, and enhance landscaping on project sites in order to facilitate: 
(1)  The health of City citizens in improved air and water quality; 
(2)  The control of flooding, noise, glare and soil erosion; 
(3)  The protection of urban wildlife; 
(4)  The maintaining and increasing of property values; and 
(5)  The character and beauty of the city. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure and facilitate the preservation and/or replacement of trees and landscape as part of the land development process within the city and to provide minimum landscape standards for commercial developments in the city so as to enhance architectural features, improve energy efficiency, improve water quality, reduce environmental damage, reduce urban heat island effect, provide quality wildlife habitat, control of soil erosion and aesthetics and to provide a scenic amenity within Chamblee. This Chapter also provides for appropriate buffers between dissimilar land uses. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-3. - Standards applying to all projects. 
(a)  All tree protection plans and landscape plans submitted to meet city requirements for projects qualifying as a Development of Community Impact (DCI) or a Planned Unit Development (PUD) shall be prepared and stamped by a state-licensed landscape architect. Tree protection plans and landscape plans submitted to meet city requirements for other projects shall be prepared and stamped by a landscape architect licensed to practice in the State of Georgia or surveyor who is knowledgeable in landscape architecture and horticulture. 
(b)  Projects shall be compatible with the guidelines provided in the Buffer, Landscaping and Tree Preservation Administrative Guidelines, Addendum 2.0. 
(c)  Projects requiring buffers, landscaping, and/or tree replacement, as provided in Chapter 320, Articles 2, 3 and 4, shall meet the following planting requirements: 
(1)  A minimum of 10 percent of the trees to be planted in a project shall be of a single species; and 
(2)  No more than 30 percent of the trees to be planted in a project shall be of a single species; and 
(3)  Staking may be added at the discretion of the applicant but should not damage the critical root zone and shall be removed at the end of the required two-year maintenance period; and 
(4)  Invasive species, as identified in Addendum 2.0, shall be prohibited from all commercial landscape, buffer and tree protection plans; and 
(5)  Artificial Materials Prohibited. Artificial plants, trees, shrubs, grass or other vegetation shall be prohibited from fulfilling the requirements of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-4. - Water-efficient design considerations. 
See Chapter 340 Stormwater Management for water-efficient design requirements. Bioretention areas shall be planted with approved species as provided in the Bioretention Area Species Selection List as provided in Addendum 2.0 and shall be consistent with the Recommended Detail for Typical Bioswale/Bioretention as provided in Addendum 2.0. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-5. - City landscape coordinator. 
(a)  The Development Director shall appoint a coordinator on buffers, landscaping and tree protection. This coordinator shall be a person skilled and trained in the arts and sciences of municipal arboriculture, ornamental horticulture, urban forestry, and landscape architecture, and have Registered Landscape Architect (RLA) and International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) arborist certifications. 
(b)  The City Landscape Coordinator shall be called upon to advise the City regarding the specifications and standards of practice governing the planting, maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning, and bracing of trees in public areas as well as the planting and maintenance of landscape strips and buffers. The City Landscape Coordinator shall also review permit requests and site development plans submitted to the City and make recommendations concerning them to the City. The Landscape Infrastructure Coordinator shall conduct follow-up and final inspections as appropriate to insure compliance with this article. 
(c)  The City Landscape Coordinator shall be called upon to identify or confirm the presence of specimen trees on development permit sites. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 320-6—320-11. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - BUFFERS 

Section 320-12. - Landscape standards for permanent buffers. 
(a)  Existing conditions. 
(1)  In those instances where the existing natural vegetation and topography are insufficient to achieve the desired level of screening as required by this article, a planted buffer shall be provided and shall consist of plant material that will provide an opaque acoustical and visual screen having a height of not less than six feet at the time of planting and planted in a minimum of two rows, with staggered on center spacing such that a continuous opaque screen is created within two years of planting. 
(2)  With the exception of additional planting, buffers shall remain undisturbed. 
(b)  Materials and ratios. 
(1)  Plant materials. Buffers shall contain a maximum of 25 percent of deciduous plant materials. 
(2)  Planting ratios and layout. For the entire length of the unvegetated buffer area, provide a minimum of one row of evergreen screening trees spaced 8 feet on center. For every 50 linear feet of unvegetated buffer area, provide two overstory trees planted a minimum of 25 feet apart, three understory trees planted a minimum of 15 feet apart, and 20 shrubs planted a minimum of 5 feet on center in two rows. Plant materials may be staggered within the square footage of the overall buffer. 
(c)  Permanent buffers shall use only the plants identified in the Plant Species Selection List for Permanent Buffers provided in the Buffer, Landscaping, and Tree Preservation Administrative Guidelines, Addendum 2.0 of this UDO, except as approved by the City Landscape Coordinator. 
(d)  Invasive species are prohibited. See Invasive Species List in Addendum 2.0 for a complete list of invasive species prohibited by the City of Chamblee. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-13. - Buffer maintenance. 
In addition to the maintenance requirements of Subsections 230-30 and 300-27(c), the buffer planting shall be maintained for the life of the development. Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be performed to maintain the health of the plant materials, to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance, and to assure that the buffer serves the purpose of this UDO. Plantings that have died shall be replaced unless the City Landscape Coordinator deems such replacement unnecessary from a finding that the remaining buffer plantings achieve the overall purpose of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-14. - Standards for construction buffers. 
(a)  Where Required. Construction buffers may be required by the Mayor and Council as a condition of its approval of any action. 
(b)  Time constraints. Construction buffers shall be in effect during the construction of a project until a Certificate of Completion is approved. In the case of a residential subdivision, a construction buffer shall terminate upon each individual lot with the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for each principal dwelling. 
(c)  Disturbance or encroachments. 
(1)  Construction buffers shall be natural, undisturbed and free of encroachments except as otherwise authorized by the Development Department. 
(2)  Sediment basins must be located outside of a required construction buffer. 
(3)  Natural bottom stormwater ponds and their appurtenant structures that do not require grading and removal of trees may encroach upon the construction buffer. See Chapter 340, Article 4 for additional regulations for stormwater management practices. 
(4)  Ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sediment basins, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities, and any associated easements may not encroach into a construction buffer except for perpendicular crossings by water, sewer or stormwater pipes. 
(5)  If the construction buffer on a residential lot is devoid of existing trees and vegetation and is documented by a tree survey prior to conducting land-disturbing activities on the lot, the Development Director may authorize the encroachment of a building or structure into the construction buffer for a distance not to exceed 10 feet. 
(d)  Protection during land-disturbing activities. 
(1)  Prior to initiating land-disturbing activities, construction buffers shall be clearly marked in the field and shall be continuously protected during construction. 
(2)  The Development Director shall review and approve the method of demarcation and protection in accordance with best management practices. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 320-15—320-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS 

Section 320-20. - Landscape zone planting requirements. 
(a)  Permanent structures (including buildings, parking spaces, dumpsters, drainage structures and detention facilities) shall be prohibited within landscape zones. Exceptions include perpendicular crossings for driveways, sidewalks and bicycle pathways, as well as retaining walls, signs and drainage swales. 
(b)  Signs within landscape zones may only be located in areas of turf or ground cover and must not conflict with the growth potential of trees and shrubs. 
(c)  Design standards: All required landscape zones must be designed with at least 60 percent coverage in trees and shrubs, and no more than 40 percent coverage in grass and ground cover. Trees and shrubbery may be either existing or new and may be included in the tree density calculation required in Section 320-39. 
(1)  Landscape strip coverage will be calculated as follows: 
a.  Calculate the total spatial area of the landscape zone. 
b.  Count the number of trees within the landscape strip and multiply by 50 square feet for trees less than six-inch caliper and 150 square feet for trees greater than six-inch caliper. (This will allow some credit for the spatial coverage of the tree canopy.) 
c.  Measure the spatial coverage of the proposed shrub beds and add to the tree coverage. 
1.  Twelve square feet for each five-gallon shrub; 
2.  Nine square feet for each three-gallon shrub; 
3.  Six square feet for each two-gallon shrub or ground cover; or 
4.  Three square feet for each one-gallon shrub or ground cover. 
d.  The total area of b and c above, shall be greater than or equal to 60 percent of the total area of the strip. 
(2)  Except where required otherwise by state regulations and approved by the Development Director or his/her designee, newly planted trees shall be a minimum of 2.5 inches in caliper measured 36 inches above the ground, shall be a minimum of 16 feet in height, shall have a minimum mature height of 40 feet, and shall be limbed up to a minimum height of ten feet. 
(3)  Any exposed ground shall be planted with a living ground cover or lawn, with an appropriate mulch as specified in Addendum 2.0, Administrative Guidelines. 
(4)  Tree planting areas shall provide porous drainage systems that allow for drainage of the planting area. 
(5)  All trees and landscape materials should be planted during the fall, winter or spring and maintained in perpetuity. The City may require performance bonds, as provided in Section 300-27, be posted if planting is delayed due to seasonality. 
(6)  Trees within required landscape strips shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Trees are required and shall be planted in accordance with Section 230-26; 
b.  The Development Director may approve street tree grouping if it enables existing trees to be saved within the landscape zone in a manner that results in an improved appearance. Clumping is permitted provided that adequate spacing is allowed for future growth; 
c.  Street tree species shall be consistent for an entire block length. Similar species shall be permitted to change on individual block faces and only when approved by the Development Director; 
d.  Trees planted along Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) rights-of-way shall be selected from the list of Trees Appropriate for Planting in GDOT Right-of-Way as provided in Addendum 2.0. Trees planted along GDOT rights-of-way within 500 feet of a billboard shall be selected from the list of Trees Appropriate for Planting in GDOT Right-of-Way within 500-Foot Billboard Zones as provided in Addendum 2.0; 
e.  Required street trees may be planted in the adjacent front yard when unique circumstances of topography, geography or geometric shape result in hardships or safety problems, as determined by the Development Director; and 
f.  Physical permanent root barriers shall be required along the required street curbs to prevent roots from damaging the curbs. 
(7)  The area between required plantings shall either be planted with sod or shall be paved as approved by the Development Director. 
(d)  See Subsection 230-26(e) for additional landscape zone requirements. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-21. - Off-street surface parking lot planting requirements. 
(a)  Interior landscaping for off-parking areas shall be required for all surface parking lots designed for 20 or more spaces. The following requirements shall apply. 
(1)  Landscape islands shall be located no farther apart than every ten parking spaces and at the terminus of all rows of parking. Each landscaped island shall be at least 200 square feet in area with a minimum width or diameter of ten feet. 
(2)  There shall be at least one overstory tree, ten low shrubs and a minimum of 60 percent living ground cover, sod, and/or annual or perennial color in each landscaped island. Shrubs, sod and/or living ground cover shall not to exceed three feet in height. Landscape islands shall include mulch as specified in the Administrative Guidelines. 
(3)  Vehicles shall be separated from sidewalks, driveways, supplemental zones, and streets in public rights-of-way by wheel bumpers and by a strip of land at least ten feet wide reserved as open space and planted in grass containing at least one understory or overstory tree, as appropriate, and ten shrubs per 50 linear feet, and a minimum of 80 percent living ground cover, sod, and/or annual or perennial color in the landscape strip surface area. Wheel bumpers shall be placed a minimum of 48 inches from the nearest tree trunk. 
(4)  Head-to-head parking shall provide a five-foot grass strip with curb. The grass strip may be counted as part of the landscaped areas and shall have one tree every 50 feet containing at least one overstory tree, and ten shrubs, per 50 linear feet, and a minimum of 70 percent living ground cover, sod, and/or annual or perennial color in the landscape strip surface area. 
(5)  Perimeter landscape strips. The perimeter of a surface parking lot shall provide a five-foot wide landscape strip where such parking lot abuts side or rear property lines. The perimeter landscape strip shall be planted with a single row of overstory trees of a species appropriate for buffers and spaced every 40 linear feet of landscape strip, and evergreen shrubs spaced every 5 linear feet of landscape strip. The perimeter landscape strip shall be continuous except for near perpendicular crossings of driveways and sidewalks. 
(6)  Landscaped areas in parking lots shall provide drainage and irrigation that ensures full drainage to the storm drainage system. 
(7)  See the Tree Species Selection list in Addendum 2.0 for overstory trees that shall not be permitted within parking lot landscape areas. 
(8)  The requirement in Subsection 250-7(b)(9) for all developments to have pedestrian walkways connecting ground level parking to public sidewalks and all building entrances shall be met and shall not be interpreted to prevent the landscaping requirements of this section to be fully met. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-22. - Screening requirements for vehicular "no access." 
(a)  Vehicular no-access easements which are required by this UDO or as a condition of approval of any City action shall be screened as follows: 
(1)  Five-foot landscape strip with 6-foot high screening wall. Planted with a single row of street trees spaced every 40 linear feet of landscape strip and small evergreen shrubs spaced every 4 linear feet of landscape strip; or 
(2)  Ten-foot landscape strip with 10-foot high masonry screening wall planted with a single row of street trees spaced every 40 linear feet of landscape strip and large evergreen shrubs spaced every 6 linear feet of landscape strip; or 
(3)  Contain such other landscaping treatments or grade changes that will produce a partial screening effect as authorized by the Development Director. 
(b)  Screening requirements shall be consistent with landscape strips in Section 320-20. 
(c)  Walls and fences shall meet the requirements of Section 230-6. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 320-23—320-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - TREE PRESERVATION AND REPLACEMENT REGULATIONS 

Section 320-30. - Applicability. 
(a)  The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to any activity on real property that is subject to a land disturbance permit. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from permitting: 
(1)  Single-family residential lots. Previously developed single-family residential lots that are not subject to an active building permit shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  No more than five non-specimen trees shall be removed from a single property in one calendar year without a permit; 
b.  This exemption shall not apply to the removal of any specimen trees. 
(2)  During the period of an emergency, such as a tornado, ice storm, or other act of nature, the requirements of this article may be waived by the Development Director or his/her designee. 
(3)  Regardless of whether a permit is required, all lots shall maintain tree density requirements of Section 320-39. 
(c)  The following varieties of plants are prohibited from planting in the City of Chamblee: 
(1)  Invasive bamboo varieties (including Phyllostachys, Sasa, Shibataea , Pseudosasa and Pleioblastus varieties). Fargesia and Borinda varieties are not prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-31. - Public trees. 
(a)  Utility companies, private contractors, outside governments, and individuals must apply for and procure a permit, comply with tree protection and replacement administrative guidelines to this article to protect and preserve City properties in any modification of their landscape. Written plans outlining purpose, proposed operations, and approximate dates shall be submitted to the Development Director for approval. 
(b)  Wherever it is necessary to remove a tree or trees from a landscape strip in connection with paving of a sidewalk, or the paving or widening of a street or bike path, this requirement may be satisfied if an equivalent number of trees of the same potential size and species are planted on adjoining property or other public property. 
(c)  No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain excess soil, stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials which may endanger the critical root zone of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the Development Department. 
(d)  Planting trees in right-of-way. In any instance where the cutting of any paved sidewalk in a right-of-way of the City is necessary for the planting of any shrub or tree, such work shall be supervised by the Development Department or shall be done according to plans approved by and a permit issued by the Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-32. - Permitting process. 
(a)  No person, firm, organization, public agency or society shall directly or indirectly destroy or remove any trees situated on property described in Section 320-33 of this article without obtaining a permit as provided herein. 
(b)  Permits shall be obtained by making application to the Development Department, and the application shall thereafter be referred to the City Landscape Coordinator. The permit fee shall be as fixed from time to time by the Mayor and City Council. The application, when made in conjunction with an application for a building permit or a soil erosion control permit, shall also include a landscaping plan, a plan for protection of trees during construction, and any other documentation required for all areas of the parcel within the protected zone as required by Section 300-35. The applicant may be required to submit a tree replacement plan if, at the discretion of the City Landscape Coordinator, replacement is appropriate. Methods and standards for tree protection and replacement shall be established from time to time and set forth in the tree preservation administrative guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-33. - Protection of trees. 
(a)  All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near an excavation or construction of any building, structure, or street work, shall be guarded with a fence, frame, or box not less than four feet high and eight feet square, or at a minimum distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk, whichever is greater. The fence, frame, or box shall not impede upon the critical root zones of trees. Any barrier with lesser dimensions than those specified above shall be subject to approval by the City Landscape Coordinator. All building material, dirt, or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier. 
(b)  No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnel, trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of ten feet from any public tree without first obtaining a written permit from the Development Director. 
(c)  Unless specifically authorized by the Development Director, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any public tree or shrub; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any public tree or shrub; allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such plants to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree or shrub. 
(d)  Prior to causing impacts to more than 30% of the critical root zone of boundary trees, as defined by Chapter 110, the developer of property shall obtain approval of the property owner where the boundary tree is located using a form provided by the Development Department. Said form shall be filed with the Development Department prior to disturbing more than 30% of the critical root zone of a boundary tree. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property having trees that border on any street to prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct the vision of traffic signs, or obstruct the view of any street, driveway or alley intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be ten feet over sidewalks, and 12 feet over all streets. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-34. - Tree removal permits. 
(a)  Application Requirements. Except for exemptions in Subsection 320-30(b), when a person applies for any type of development permit (land disturbance, demolition or building permit), that requires removal of existing trees, they shall file an application for a Tree Removal Permit providing the following: 
(1)  Type 1 Major Development, as defined in Chapter 110, or Redevelopment: 
a.  A complete Tree Survey and Inventory Plan, as described in Section 320-36. 
b.  A complete Tree Protection Plan as described in Subsection 320-37(a). 
c.  A complete Tree Replacement Plan as described in Subsection 320-37(b). 
d.  An application fee, as provided in the fee schedule maintained by the City. 
(2)  Type 2 Minor Development, as defined in Chapter 100, or Redevelopment: 
a.  Minor Development projects require a detailed sketch showing proposed changes to the City Landscape Coordinator for review and approval. In the event that any tree 2 inches DBH or greater will be impacted or removed during development, the sketch shall contain the required elements of the Tree Survey Plan and Inventory as required in Section 320-36 and the Tree Replacement Plan as described in Subsection 320-37(b). In the event that the site cannot bear replanting of the required density of trees, then the applicant shall comply with the alternate guidelines under the Minimum DBH Density Requirements in Section 320-39. 
b.  An application fee, as provided in the tree preservation and protection fee schedule maintained by the City. 
(3)  Type 3 - Removal of Hazardous Trees: 
a.  The removal of one of more hazardous trees may be applied for in one Hazardous Tree Removal application. 
b.  The applicant shall submit an application on a form provided by the Development Department along with a detailed sketch showing the location of a hazardous tree or trees, as well as the location of existing structures, paving, driveways, detention areas, etc., within fifty feet (50') of the hazardous tree(s). 
c.  The application shall be accompanied by a fee, as provided in the tree preservation and protection fee schedule maintained by the City. 
d.  The Landscape Coordinator will examine the application materials and the tree(s) in question, then make a recommendation concerning whether or not the tree is hazardous and should be permitted for removal. 
e.  If the tree is determined to be hazardous the applicant shall be responsible for the costs of safely removing the hazardous tree unless the hazardous tree is a public tree. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-35. - Specimen trees. 
(a)  When making a determination of the type of trees to be affected within a development project the following criteria shall be referenced. 
(1)  Specimen Tree: 
a.  Any tree in fair or better condition, which equals or exceeds the following diameter sizes: 
1.  Large Hardwoods Trees: 24-inches DBH or larger - such as oaks, hickories, yellow poplars, sweetgums, etc. 
2.  Large Softwoods Trees: 30-inches DBH or larger - such as pines, deodar cedars, etc. 
3.  Understory Trees: 4-inches DBH or larger- such as dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, etc. 
b.  A tree in fair or better condition must meet the following minimum standards: 
1.  A life expectancy of greater than 15 years. 
2.  A structurally sound trunk, not hollow and having no extensive decay, and less than 20 percent radial trunk dieback. 
3.  No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only). 
4.  No major insect or pathological problem. 
c.  A lesser-sized tree can be considered a specimen tree if it is a rare or unusual species, of exceptional or unique quality, or of historical significance. 
d.  A lesser size tree can be considered a specimen tree if it is specifically used by a builder, developer, or design professional as a focal point in a landscape project. 
e.  In order to encourage the conservation of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, additional density credit will be given for specimen trees, which are successfully saved by a design feature specifically designated for such purpose. Credit for any specimen tree thus saved would be counted one for one based on replacement and recompense DBH. 
f.  The Critical Root Zone of Specimen Trees will be protected with hog-back/wire-back tree save fencing with metal support posts. See landscape details provided in Addendum 2.0. 
(b)  Specimen Tree Stand: 
(1)  A contiguous grouping of trees, which has been determined to be of high value in the opinion of the City Landscape Coordinator. Determination is based upon the following criteria: 
a.  A relatively mature, even-aged stand. 
b.  A stand with purity of species composition or of a rare or unusual nature. 
c.  A stand of historical significance. 
d.  A stand with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
(c)  If a specimen tree is to be removed, a plan or written documentation authored by a RLA or ISA certified arborist indicating the reason for the removal must be submitted to the City Landscape Coordinator for approval. 
(1)  Specimen trees that cannot be saved must be replaced with trees having an equal value to the DBH of the trees removed above and beyond minimum site DBH densities. However, excess DBH resulting from the sum of the DBH of existing trees saved plus the DBH of approved trees planted on-site may be used to off-set the recompense DBH of specimen trees removed on an inch-for-inch basis. 
(2)  Specimen trees removed shall be replaced with a 2.5-inch tree caliper, by species with potentials for comparable size and quality. If applicant cannot determine specimen trees, the applicant is to hire an independent ISA certified arborist for determination and supply the results to the City Landscape Coordinator for approval. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-36. - Tree survey plan and inventory. 
(a)  The Tree Survey Plan shall be in the form of a to-scale map or a site plan prepared and sealed by a registered surveyor, certified engineer or landscape architect noting the location of all specimen trees or stands of trees plus all others trees which will be preserved and counted toward meeting site density requirements. It should also include the following information: 
(1)  All specimen trees and their critical root zones should be labeled, and must be shown on the survey and inventoried by size and species. This includes those specimen trees that are to be preserved as well as those proposed for removal. 
(2)  The critical root zone of boundary trees that are located on neighboring properties whose critical route zone extends on to applicant's property shall be shown. 
(3)  All other trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be shown on the survey and inventoried by size and species. Only trees with a DBH measurement of two inches or greater are to be identified as eligible for density compliance. Existing trees less than two inches DBH will not be counted toward Existing Density Factor. 
(4)  Trees that measure less than 2" DBH, and thus can't be counted toward the density requirements, do not have to be counted and shown individually on the plan. 
(5)  Sampling methods may be used to determine tree densities for forested areas over two (2) acres. 
(6)  Show all areas of proposed land disturbance along with tree protection zones, tree save areas, and buffers with existing trees on the Survey. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-37. - Tree protection and replacement plans. 
(a)  Tree Protection Plan—Required documents. A Tree Protection Plan is a detailed plan designed to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of two (2) years after construction. This Protection Plan is a separate drawing that must be submitted at the same time as the Tree Survey Plan in order to qualify for a Tree Removal Permit. The Plan should list the following specifications: 
(1)  The identity of the tract of land upon which tree(s) sought to be removed are located. 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the owner of the land and the name, address and phone number of any tenant of the property. 
(3)  The type, location and size as measured at the diameter breast height of the tree(s) constituting those to be protected. Only trees designated on the Tree Protection Plan will be counted toward density requirements. 
(4)  Locations of all specimen trees and their critical root zones (CRZ's). Indicate those specimen trees proposed for removal or for preservation. Removal of specimen trees is subject to approval by the City Landscape Coordinator. Any specimen tree proposed for removal is to be identified in terms of exact location, size and species. 
(5)  All tree protection zones, natural areas, landscaped areas, buffers and areas of re-vegetation. Include detailed locations and specifications for active and/or passive tree protection measures. Methods of tree protection should be indicated for all tree protection zones, including tree fencing, erosion control, retaining walls, tunneling for utilities, aeration systems, transplanting, staking, signage, etc. 
(6)  Limits of clearing and land disturbance such as grading, trenching, etc., where these disturbances may affect tree protection zones. 
(7)  The locations of all existing and proposed utility lines or easements. Include the location for any boring sites for underground utilities. 
(8)  Indication of staging areas for parking, material storage, concrete washout, and other areas where tree protection may be affected. 
(9)  A delineation of tree save areas in which trees have been inventoried for minimum site DBH calculation. 
(10)  Calculations showing compliance with the required minimum site DBH density using existing trees, replacement/recompense trees, and/or alternative compliance methods. Site density compliance should be demonstrated on both the Tree Protection and the Tree Replacement plans. Existing trees or stands of trees used in determining the minimum site DBH density requirement must be indicated on the drawings. All trees must be accordance with Subsection 320-39 if they are to be applied toward the minimum site DBH density. Trees with a DBH of two (2) inches or greater shall be applied to the site minimum DBH requirements. 
(11)  Site area (roads, utility lines, detention ponds, etc.). 
(12)  The locations of existing and proposed structures, paving, driveways, land disturbance, cut and fill areas, detention areas, etc. 
(13)  Phase lines and/or limits of construction. 
(14)  Location and details for all permanent tree protection measures (tree wells, aeration systems, permeable paving, retaining walls, bollards, etc.). 
(15)  Additional information as required on a case-by-case basis or as requested by the City Landscape Coordinator. 
(b)  Tree Replacement Plan standards and vegetation. 
(1)  The last part of the Tree Removal Permit is the Tree Replacement Plan. This plan may be included as a part of the Tree Protection Plan or may be submitted as a separate drawing. The Tree Replacement Plan includes the planting schedules along with proposed tree names (botanical and common), quantity, size, spacing and any special planting notes. Unless otherwise approved by the City Landscape Coordinator, all trees selected for replanting must be on the City's Tree Species List, see Addendum 2.0. 
(2)  Trees selected for planting must be free from injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root defects, and must be of good vigor in order to assure a reasonable expectation of survivability. Standards for transplanting should be in keeping with those established in the International Society of Arboriculture publication Tree and Shrub Planting Manual or similar publication. Reference the American Association of Nurserymen publication American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60, 1973) for plant material quality specifications. Reference the Manual of Woody Landscape Plants (Michael Dirr, 1983, Castle Books) or similar publication for information on tree species site requirements. 
(3)  The Tree Replacement Plan should also reflect the following guidelines: 
a.  Replanted trees shall be of the same or similar species as those removed when practical unless a change in species is appropriate to achieve the requirements of Subsection 320-3(c). 
b.  The use of flowering ornamental trees or plants classified as large shrubs may be included in the Tree Replacement Plan, but shall not be used for the purpose of meeting the density calculations for the site unless approved by the City Landscape Coordinator. 
c.  All overstory trees should be a minimum of eight (8) feet tall and have a trunk of not less than three (3.0) caliper inches. All understory trees should be a minimum of six (6) feet tall and have a trunk of not less than two (2.0) inches. In order to provide sufficient growing area for planted trees, the following minimum criteria must be observed unless otherwise approved by the City Landscape Coordinator: 
1.  Overstory Trees - 200 square feet of pervious root zone. 
2.  Understory Trees - 75 square feet of pervious root zone. 
3.  Up to 30% of root zone may be impervious area except for parking lot islands). 
d.  For new residential single-family detached dwellings, smaller caliper replacement trees shall be considered, provided the total minimum tree density goal is reached. A list of proposed plant species and sizes is to be submitted in writing to the City Landscape Coordinator. 
e.  All planting and staking details should be provided on the plan. Examples of acceptable details are provided in Addendum 2.0. 
f.  All debris from trees cut or substantially damaged should be removed from the site in a timely fashion including the removal of any portion of the tree stump above the original natural grade or elevation of land unless accepted by the City Landscape Coordinator for a specific reason such as, but not limited to, unusually large size or age. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-38. - Tree preservation and replacement requirements. 
(a)  Existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall be preserved and/or replaced with suitable vegetation. All existing, healthy hardwood or softwood trees with a caliper of two or more inches at a point four and one-half feet above the ground shall be retained whenever feasible; if not feasible, the tree shall be replaced by the guidelines set forth in this article. 
(b)  A minimum of one overstory tree shall be required for each 500 square feet of the total minimum required open space outside parking areas. For purposes of meeting this requirement, all existing, replaced or planted trees as defined in this article and all other existing trees of at least 20 feet in canopy diameter and height shall be counted. Trees required for screening purposes shall not be included in the aforementioned calculation. 
(c)  Except as required by this section and to meet specific community design policies established for various areas of the city, trees shall be planted and/or retained in areas of the site to enhance the overall project design and provide such amenities as visual attractiveness, natural resources preservation, energy conservation, etc. 
(d)  All retained or planted trees shall be protected or situated as to prevent damage from environmental changes, particularly grading and other contractor operations, resulting from any building or other improvements. 
(e)  Overstory and understory trees identified in the Tree Species Selection List of Addendum 2.0, Buffer, Landscaping, and Tree Preservation Administrative Guidelines, shall be permitted in keeping with the tree species diversity requirements of Subsection 320-3(c). 
(f)  Other trees may be approved on a case-by-case basis. The general criteria for overstory replacement trees are large growing (40 feet tall or greater), and ecologically compatible with the site. The general criteria for understory replacement trees are medium growing (ten to 35 feet in height), and ecologically compatible with the site. All planting and replanting plans are subject to the City Landscape Coordinator's approval. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-39. - Tree density requirements. 
(a)  The following tree density requirements are intended to supplement plantings where tree replacement is necessary to meet the minimum standards of the City of Chamblee: 
(1)  All applicable sites shall maintain a minimum tree density of 100 inches DBH per acre. Existing residential sites applying for permits pertaining to the exclusions of Subsection 320-30(b)(1) shall maintain a minimum of 50 inches DBH per acre. 
(2)  An applicant for development or redevelopment of a nonresidential development is only required to plant additional trees to meet the minimum tree density requirements of this Article if the total tree density factor provided by the following provisions of the UDO does not exceed the minimum tree density factor of 100 inches DBH per acre: 
a.  All existing trees retained on-site as per Section 320-36 and Section 320-38 (Not including public trees); 
b.  Trees planted in landscape strips required in Section 320-20; 
c.  Trees planted in parking lots as required in Section 320-21; 
d.  Trees planted in landscape strips around parking structures required in Subsection 240-13(b)(39)g; 
e.  Trees planted in landscaping around detention ponds as described in Subsection 340-38(c)(3)h; 
f.  Trees planted in open space landscaping required in Subsection 320-38(b); 
g.  Trees planted in no-access easements required in Section 320-22; and 
h.  Trees planted in buffers required in Section 320-12. 
(3)  Specimen Tree(s) located outside of the required building setbacks must be preserved with less than 20% disturbance of their critical root zones. 
(4)  The site minimum DBH density requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development. Occasionally, this density cannot be met because a project site will not bear the required density of trees. To provide some alternatives in such cases, two (2) alternative methods of compliance may, at the discretion of the City Landscape Coordinator, be approved: planting at a location remote from the project site; or, contribution to the City of Chamblee Tree Bank Fund, as provided in Subsection 320-40(c). 
(5)  The City Landscape Coordinator and the Development Department must review and approve all requests for alternative compliance. In no instance will more than eighty percent (80%) of the required site density be met through alternative compliance. 
(6)  A minimum of 20% or as many trees that can reasonably be expected to survive must be planted on the site in question. No permit will be issued until the City Landscape Coordinator and Development Department have approved the request and received the necessary documentation and/or funds. 
(7)  Minimum site DBH density shall be calculated and established using the procedure described in this Section 320-39. The inches per acre calculation shall be based on the net site areas, excluding any detention ponds, lakes, stream buffers, floodplain areas and permanent easements where planting is prohibited. Non-specimen sized trees saved with less than 30% CRZ impact providing DBH in excess of the required minimum site DBH located within the building setback limits, may count toward the specimen recompense on an inch-for-inch basis. 
(8)  Trees replanted to achieve density requirements should be selected from the Tree Species Selection List found in Addendum 2.0 and shall meet the requirements of Subsection 320-3(c). In addition, replanting should be at the ratio of not less than one overstory tree for every three understory tree. Density credit may be met by planting all overstory trees, but not by planting only understory trees. 
(9)  All reasonable efforts shall be made to save specimen trees. Reasonable efforts include, but are not limited to, alteration of building design; alternate location of building, parking area, water retention, drainage pipes; or relocation of utilities. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-40. - Recompense and alternative compliance. 
(a)  If the City Landscape Coordinator agrees that trees to replace removed specimen trees will not fit on the site based on industry accepted spacing requirements, alternative compliance is available by recompense, as defined by Chapter 110, to the City of Chamblee Tree Bank Fund or planting the remainder of trees at a location remote from the project site. 
(b)  Planting at a location remote from the project site. 
(1)  Trees to be planted at another location will be planted at sites designated by the City. 
(2)  Each DBH density unit that cannot be placed on-site shall be replaced one-for-one off-site, by species of the minimum caliper stated in Subsection 320-37(b), Tree replacement plan. 
(3)  A tree replacement plan, meeting all applicable standards, must be reviewed and approved for the alternate planting location. 
(c)  Recompense. City of Chamblee Tree Bank Fund donation. 
(1)  If full or partial monetary recompense is to be paid to the City of Chamblee Tree Bank Fund, City Landscape Coordinator, the applicant shall pay as provided in the Tree Replacement fee schedule. Such funds shall be used for tree plantings in public spaces as approved in the annual budgeting process or as directed by City Council. 
(2)  The amount of the recompense shall be based upon the size of DBH that cannot be planted at the site. Each DBH density unit that cannot be placed on-site shall be replaced one-for-one by species of the minimum caliper stated in Subsection 320-37(b), tree replacement plan. 
a.  Cost. Recompense is to be paid per DBH inch to be replaced, as provided in the Tree Preservation and Protection Fee Schedule maintained by the City. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-41. - Inspection. 
(a)  The City Landscape Coordinator shall perform an inspection of the plantings and landscape materials required by this UDO prior to expiration of the two-year maintenance period. The owner shall be notified of any replacements or restoration that must be made to maintain compliance with this UDO or conditions approval of any City action. 
(b)  Required landscape material found to be dead or near death shall be replaced prior to release by the City Landscape Coordinator of the warranty or maintenance surety. In no case shall replacement be delayed greater than 30 days from notification unless a performance bond is posted with the Department. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-42. - Sureties and guarantees. 
Refer to Section 300-27 for required sureties and guarantees. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-43. - Reserved. 
Section 320-44. - Continuing maintenance. 
(a)  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed in a sound workmanlike manner. Plant materials, installation and maintenance shall meet the standards incorporated in ANSI Z60.1, American Standard for Nursery Stock, most current edition, ANSI A 300, Standard Practices for Tree, Shrub and other Woody Plant Maintenance, most current edition, as specified in Addendum 2.0 and as indicated in the project Design Professional's drawings and specifications. The City Landscape Coordinator shall inspect all landscaping and no certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy will be issued unless the landscaping meets the requirements provided in this zoning ordinance or performance surety requirements of Section 300-27. 
(b)  Maintenance. The owner, occupant, tenant and respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance and protection of all required landscaping in perpetuity, in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Keep landscaping reasonably free of visible signs of insects and disease and appropriately irrigated to enable landscaping to exist in a healthy growing condition; 
(2)  Mow or trim landscaping in a manner and at a frequency appropriate to the use made of the material and species on the site so as not to detract from the appearance of the general area. Growth of plant material at maturity shall be considered where future conflicts such as view, signage, street lighting, utilities and circulation might arise; 
(3)  Maintain all landscaping to minimize property damage and public safety hazards, including removal of dead or decaying plant material, and removal of low hanging branches next to sidewalks and walkways obstructing street lighting; and 
(4)  Pruning is to be performed to maintaining healthy plant matter in accordance with the specifications set forth by the American Forestry Association, the National Arborist Association, or other professional arboricultural organizations. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-45. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be punished as described in Section 1-6, general penalty, of this Code, and in addition thereto may be enjoined from continuing the violation. Each tree cut, damaged or poisoned shall constitute a separate offense and shall be subject to a fine of $1,000.00 per specimen tree and $500.00 per non-specimen tree as defined in Section 110-3, Definitions. Any tree, specimen or non-specimen, which is removed without the appropriate review and approval of the administrator must be replaced by trees with a total density up to eight times the unit value of the tree(s) removed with a minimum four-inch tree caliper. The owner of any buildings or premises or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this section exists, and any architect, builder, contractor or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits or assists in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and subject to the above-stated penalties. The same penalties shall be assessed for trees damaged directly or indirectly on any existing residential or nonresidential property adjacent to a site under development or construction without having first obtained a tree removal permit and permission of the owner of such adjacent residential or nonresidential property. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 320-46. - Judicial review. 
See Section 120-8 for judicial review of final decisions of the City regarding permits. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 320-47—320-55. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 330. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 

Section 330-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that the flood hazard areas of the City of Chamblee are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(c)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to private property; 
(3)  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(d)  Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a), have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Chamblee establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 330-2. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(b)  Applicability. This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the city. 
(c)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The Development Director or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard, Areas of Future-Conditions Flood Hazard and Associated Floodplain Characteristics—Flood Area Maps and Studies. For the purposes of defining and determining "Areas of Special Flood Hazard," "Areas of Future-conditions Flood Hazard," "Areas of Shallow Flooding," "Base Flood Elevations," "Floodplains," "Floodways," "Future-conditions Flood Elevations," "Future-conditions Floodplains," potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this chapter, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted for reference: 
(1)  The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for DeKalb County, dated May 16, 2013, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. 
(2)  The Future-conditions Floodplain Map and other accompanying supporting data on file at the City are hereby adopted. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) approved methodology and approved by the City. 
(4)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the City. 
(5)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at in the offices of the Development Department. 
(e)  Compatibility with other regulations. This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(f)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 330-3. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard, as defined in Chapter 110, is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the City a permit application on a form provided by the City for that purpose. No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(b)  Floodplain management plan requirements. An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in Subsection 330-5(b)(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Subsection 330-5(a)(5); and 
e.  Design plans certified by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this Chapter. 
(c)  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(d)  Construction stage submittal requirements. For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the Development Director a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
(e)  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Development Director or his/her designee shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(f)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the Development Director or his/her designee shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to, section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the Development Director or his/her designee shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of Section 330-4 and Section 330-5; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the Development Director or his/her designee shall obtain certification of design criteria from a professional engineer or architect licensed in the State of Georgia; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Development Director or his/her designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the Development Director and shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to City Council. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 330-4. - Standards for development. 
(a)  Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the City. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the City, then it shall be determined by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia using a method approved by FEMA and the City. 
(b)  Definition of floodway boundaries. The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the City. If floodway data is not available from the City, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City. 
(c)  General standards. 
(1)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under Subsection (a)(1) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 3:1; 
c.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments set forth in Subsection 330-4(d); 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable using the City's consent forms. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the City before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(d)  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations (A-zones) apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the City prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the City. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; and 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(e)  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in Subsection (e)(2) below; 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the City until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the City. 
(f)  Maintenance requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The City may direct the property owner (at no cost to the City) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the City. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 330-5. - Provisions for flood damage reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of general standards, engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments and floodway encroachments as set forth in Subsections 330-4(c), (d) and (e) have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per Chapter 340 of the Unified Development Ordinance to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
(9)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(10)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(11)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; 
(12)  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding; 
(13)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
(14)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
(15)  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this ordinance; and 
(16)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(b)  Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. The following provisions, in addition to those in Subsection 330-5(a) above, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of general standards, engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments and floodway encroachments set forth in Section 330-4 have been met. If all of the requirements of general standards, engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments and floodway encroachments as set forth in Section 330-4 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Subsection 330-5(a). 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Subsection 330-5(a). 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal nonresidential buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of general standards, engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments and floodway encroachments set forth in Section 330-4 have been met. If all of the requirements of Subsections 330-4(c), (d) and (e) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Subsection 330-5(a). New construction that has met all of the requirements of general standards, engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments and floodway encroachments as set forth in Section 330-4 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Development Director or his or her designee using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE or AH zones, may be authorized by the Development Director or his/her designee to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Subsection 330-5(a). Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water-tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Development Director or his/her designee using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of Subsections 330-4(c), (d) and (e) and are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with Subsection 330-5(a) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for residential buildings—Substantial improvements Subsection 330-5(b)(1), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of general standards, engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments and floodway encroachments set forth in Section 330-4 have been met. If all of the requirements of Subsections 330-4(c), (d) and (e) have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Subsection 330-5(a). 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of Subsection 330-5(a)(7). 
(c)  Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(1)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Subsection 330-5(a)(5)a. 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Subsection 330-5(a)(5)a. Nonresidential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
(d)  Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the Development Director or his/her designee shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with Subsection 330-5(a). 
(e)  Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of Subsection 330-5(a); 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water-tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the Development Director or his/her designee using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Standards for subdivisions of land. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; and 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with Subsection 330-3(b)(2). 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 330-6. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because he/she was advised by the Development Director that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted in writing to the City Clerk using forms provided by the Development Department. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures provided in Subsection 280-16(c) of this UDO. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the City shall have the right to appeal such decision to the City Council in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the City Council. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the City and the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property. 
d.  The Development Director or his/her designee shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the City and the City Council shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the City and City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 330-7. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the City determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The City may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the (local permitting authority) may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the City shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the City Council has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the City may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court of the City to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
CHAPTER 340. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE 1. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Section 340-1. - Findings. 
(a)  Uncontrolled stormwater discharges may have a significant, adverse impact on the health, safety and general welfare of the city and on the quality of life of its citizens. More specifically, surface water runoff can carry pollutants and nutrients into receiving waters. 
(b)  Adverse stormwater discharge quality and quantity consequences as described above, could result in substantial economic losses. Potential losses include, but are not limited to, increased water treatment costs, as well as state and federal fines associated with water quality violations. 
(c)  Many future problems can be avoided through proper stormwater management. 
(d)  Every parcel of real property, both public and private, either impacts or derives benefits from the operation and maintenance of the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(e)  Current and anticipated growth will contribute to and increase the need for improvement and maintenance of the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(f)  Coordination of management, monitoring, and enforcement among co-applicants to the City's stormwater management program will be beneficial for the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city and will facilitate compliance with the provisions of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-2. - Objectives. 
(a)  The objectives of this Article include the following: 
(1)  Protect, maintain and enhance the short-term and long-term public health, safety and general welfare. This objective will be achieved by providing for regulation and management of the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(2)  Comply with Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) and Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act and the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. 
(3)  Provide for intergovernmental cooperation in management, monitoring and enforcement of the City's stormwater management program between the City and the county government. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-3. - Scope of regulation. 
(a)  The provisions of this Article shall apply throughout the incorporated City. 
(b)  The Public Works Director, acting through the Public Works Department, shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this Article. 
(c)  The Public Works Director, acting through the Public Works Department, shall be responsible for the conservation, management, maintenance (where applicable), extension and improvement of the municipal separate storm sewer system, including activities necessary to control stormwater discharges, and activities necessary to carry out stormwater management programs included in the Phase 1 Large MS4 Permit, NPDES Permit No. GAS000105. 
(d)  The provisions of this Article shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers or authority granted by federal, state or local law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-4. - Powers of the public works department. 
(a)  The Public Works Department shall have the power to administer and enforce all regulations and procedures adopted to implement this Article, including the right to maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this Article, or to seek recovery of damages, fees or costs. 
(b)  The Public Works Department can: 
(1)  Administer, coordinate and oversee conservation, acquisition, extension, improvement, design, construction, management, operation and maintenance of the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(2)  Establish or oversee establishment of regulations for control, management, and enhancement of the quality or quantity of stormwater, subject to approval by the governing body, and establish procedures and guidelines to implement such regulations; 
(3)  Determine the manner in which stormwater conveyances should be operated; 
(4)  Inspect and enforce private stormwater conveyances which discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(5)  Advise the City Council and other City departments or agencies on issues related to stormwater; 
(6)  Protect the municipal separate storm sewer system and stormwater conveyances and properties owned or maintained by the City and prescribe how they are used by others; 
(7)  Require new, increased, or significantly changed stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to comply with the terms of this Article, including regulations and procedures adopted pursuant thereto, with respect to the installation of stormwater conveyances or best management practices; 
(8)  Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(9)  Develop, adopt and implement the City Stormwater Management Program; and 
(10)  Comply with federal and state regulations and permits concerning the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-5. - Maintenance. 
(a)  All stormwater conveyances shall be privately owned and maintained, unless accepted for public ownership and maintenance by the City. 
(b)  The City may require dedication of privately owned stormwater conveyances which discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(c)  Owners of stormwater conveyances that discharge to the City's municipal separate sewer system shall maintain a perpetual nonexclusive easement that allows for monitoring, inspection and emergency maintenance by the City. 
(d)  Where stormwater conveyances are accepted by the City for maintenance, public access easements shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-6. - Emergency powers. 
(a)  If, after inspection, the condition of a stormwater conveyance presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, the City shall have the right to take action as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare and make the stormwater conveyance safe. 
(b)  The Public Works Department may conduct emergency maintenance or remediation operations on private property and on private stormwater conveyances. Emergency maintenance or remediation operations shall constitute actions to remedy conditions that in the opinion of the public works director create a condition potentially injurious to life, property or municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(c)  Emergency maintenance conducted on any stormwater conveyance shall not be construed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of the City. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-7. - Cooperation with other governments. 
The City may enter into agreements with other local governments to carry out the purposes of this Article, to comply with the provisions of the permit, and to implement the City of Chamblee Stormwater Management Program. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, agreements regarding enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes, cooperative stormwater management programs and cooperative monitoring, maintenance, enforcement and management of municipal separate storm sewer systems, or other actions as may be needed to control the contribution of pollutants from and among any municipal system, and the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 340-8—340-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS 

Section 340-16. - Introduction. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Discharges to the separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments; 
(2)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters; 
(3)  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(4)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(5)  The City is required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Therefore, the City Council adopts this Article to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-17. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this Article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This Article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this Article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this Article shall apply throughout the City. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This Article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this Article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this Article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Article. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The City Public Works Department shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-18. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(b)  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the public works department as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the U.S. EPA; provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations; and provided that, written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(c)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this Article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this Article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the county sanitary sewer department. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the City Public Works Department requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the department. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-19. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to department prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-20. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
(a)  The Public Works Department shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the Public Works Department. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the Public Works Department ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The Public Works Department shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the department to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The Public Works Department may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the department. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the Public Works Department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the Public Works Department access to a facility is a violation of this Article. 
(7)  If the Public Works Department has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the Public Works Department is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this Article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this Article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the Public Works Department may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-21. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the department within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-22. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall become liable to the City by reason of such violation. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(2)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the Public Works Department is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The Public Works Department is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in Subsection 340-22(e). 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the Public Works Department finds that a violation of this Article has occurred, the department may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this Article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the public works department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the Public Works Department. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before City Council, or other appropriate authority shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the Public Works Department, then representatives of the Public Works Department may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within 15 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within ten days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the Public Works Department shall deem appropriate, after the department has taken one or more actions described above, the department may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this Article, the Development Director may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this Article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the department may seek cumulative remedies. 
(j)  The Public Works Department may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this Article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 340-23—340-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - LITTER CONTROL 

Section 340-26. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this Article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this Article are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life in the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(b)  Applicability. This Article shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This Article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this Article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this Article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any Article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-27. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city, as defined in Chapter 110, or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-28. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-29. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this Article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this Article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(1) above, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this Article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this Article. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this Article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,200.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (c)(1) above, the violator shall reimburse the City for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the City; 
(3)  Additional penalties: 
a.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this Article. 
(d)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 340-30—340-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Section 340-36. - Introduction. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(3)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(4)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or "credits." The Georgia Greenspace Program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those greenspace areas which provide stormwater management quality and quantity benefits; 
(5)  The City is required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution; and 
(6)  Therefore, the City has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-37. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this Article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This Article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  This Article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to Subsections (b)(2) or (3) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of 10,000 square feet or more; 
b.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition and/or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of 10,000 square feet or more; 
c.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the Public Works Director to be a hotspot land use; or 
d.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in Subsections (b)(1)a. and (b)(1)b. above, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(2)  The following activities are exempt from this Article: 
a.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
b.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the Public Works Director. 
(3)  The following activities are exempt from stream channel protection and overbank flooding protection requirements of this Article, if the applicant can provide adequate proof that the improvements will not have any adverse impacts to upstream and downstream properties, and the proposed project would not exacerbate any existing drainage problems within the drainage basin: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project that includes the creation, addition and/or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of 10,000 square feet or more. 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures that includes the creation, addition and/or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of 10,000 square feet or more. 
(c)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The public works director or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Article. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This Article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this Article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this Article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(e)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Article. 
(f)  Stormwater design manual. The City will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda or equivalent local stormwater management design manual, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this Article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-38. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. 
(1)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this Article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(2)  Unless specifically exempted by this Article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the City a permit application on a form provided by the City for that purpose. 
(3)  Unless otherwise exempted by this Article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
a.  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with Subsection 340-38(b); 
b.  Stormwater management plan in accordance with Subsection 340-38(c); 
c.  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with Subsection 340-38(d), if applicable; 
d.  Performance bond in accordance with Section 300-27, if applicable; and 
e.  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with Subsection 340-38(e). 
(b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(1)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer shall meet with the City for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process and may be coordinated with the pre-application conference required by Section 300-6. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(2)  To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
a.  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
b.  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
c.  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
d.  Any local watershed plans, greenspace projection plans (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(c)  Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(1)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this Article, including the performance criteria set forth in Section 340-39. 
(2)  The plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and be prepared under the direct supervisory control of either a professional engineer or landscape architect licensed in the State of Georgia. Subsections c, d, e, and f of Subsection 340-38(c)(3) shall be prepared under the direct supervisory control of a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, who shall seal and sign the work. The landscaping and open space plan (see Subsection 340-38(c)(3)h.) shall be prepared under the direct supervisory control of a registered landscape architect, who shall seal and sign the work. Portions of the overall plan may be prepared and stamped by a registered land surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia as appropriate, such as boundary surveys, contour maps, erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this Article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan guidance and general landscape guidelines found in the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and the plan review checklist provided by the City. This includes: 
a.  Common address and legal description of site; 
b.  Vicinity map; 
c.  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, pre-development conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities; 
d.  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Section 340-39; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in Section 340-39 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site; 
e.  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: a map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Section 340-39; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan; 
f.  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in report form and shall address every point or area along the project site in accordance with the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
g.  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with Chapter 310, Article 1, Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls; 
h.  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. The minimum landscape plan requirements shall include a planting plan and schedule and associated details and specifications. The minimum planting sizes shall be as follows: Two-inch caliper for trees, three-gallon pots for shrubs, and four-inch pots for ground cover. Vegetation shall be spaced appropriately to establish mature plant growth. The minimum coverage percentages after one year of establishment for stormwater structural control measures within the stormwater design manual shall be 75 percent coverage for stormwater ponds, stormwater wetlands, biorention areas, submerged gravel wetlands, and dry detention/dry extended detention basins and 90 percent coverage for sand filters, enhanced swales, infiltration trenches, filter strips, grassed channels and organic filters; 
i.  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices, including their associated landscaping measures to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice, including their associated landscaping measures that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. The landscape maintenance plan shall include: inspection periods, mulching frequency, removal and replacement of dead and diseased vegetation, treatment of diseased trees, watering schedule after initial installation, and repair and replacement of staking and wires; 
j.  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities, stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded in the deed records of the clerk of superior court of the county and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. Proof of the recorded plat or document shall be submitted to the City prior to final inspection and approval; 
k.  Inspection and maintenance agreements. The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice, including their associated landscaping measures in accordance with Subsection 340-38(d); 
l.  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and nonlocal permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the City that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan; and 
m.  Indemnity agreement. An indemnity agreement shall be signed by the property owner and submitted to the City prior to final inspection and approval. 
(d)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the City as provided in Chapter 300. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in Subsection 340-38(c) above, (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(3)  The City shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the City shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which Subsection (f)(3) above, and this subsection shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the City that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this Article, the City may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met as provided in Section 300-34. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this Article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The City shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the City; and 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report or landscape architect's report and certificate and as-built plans required by Subsection 340-40(b). 
(e)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the City and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(f)  Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(1)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. All property owners participating in the off-site or regional facility shall sign an agreement regarding use of the facility and how the overall capacity is accounted for on a form provided by the City. Future modifications to participating properties shall ensure adequate capacity within the off-site or regional facility, accounted for on an updated form provided by the City. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(2)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the City which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(3)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
a.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life and property; 
b.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams and other structures; 
c.  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
d.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
e.  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(g)  Approval of proprietary structural controls. 
(1)  The following structural controls and conditions associated with devices are approved for use: 
a.  Devices approved under the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) Manufactured Treatment Devices Certification Program are approved for use in the city. The total suspended solids (TSS) removal rate to be used for the device shall be the same as that listed by NJDEP. Any conditions by the NJDEP required for use of the proprietary device shall be considered for site use applicability and/or shall be implemented into the stormwater management design and maintenance measures for the proposed new development or redevelopment. 
b.  Pretreatment and basic treatment devices approved under the State of Washington Department of Ecology Technology Assessment Protocol - Ecology (TAPE) Program with use level designations of conditional use level designation (CULD) and general use level designation (GULD) are approved for use in the city. Pretreatment devices shall have a TSS removal rate of 50 percent and basic treatment devices shall have a TSS removal rate of 80 percent. Any conditions by TAPE required for use of the proprietary device shall be considered for site use applicability and/or shall be implemented into the stormwater management design and maintenance measures for the proposed new development or redevelopment. 
c.  Proprietary structural control devices and associated conditions listed by the City as previously approved through the procedures described by Subsection 340-38(g)(2) may be approved for use in the city. 
(2)  Proprietary structural control reviews not approved for use described in this subsection may be used after review and approval by City Engineer in accordance with the provisions below: 
a.  The applicant shall submit a letter from the manufacturer stating which criterion under Subsection 340-38(g)(2)b. shall be the basis of the City's evaluation for review and necessary testing reports to prove that criterion was met. Also, provide as part of the device review: physical description; site requirements; sizing methodology; installation; operation and maintenance requirements; reliability; and other benefits and limitations associated with the use of this device. Describe how the device meets the chosen criterion from the submitted manufacturer data and what TSS removal rate is expected to be achieved by the device. 
b.  The City will evaluate the proposed structural device based on the applicable criterion described below: 
1.  The proprietary structural control is proven to be similar in function to a structural control measure listed within the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. The proprietary structural control device shall be designed using the design guidelines associated with the similar structural control measures described with the stormwater design manual. The proprietary structural control device shall use the same TSS removal rate of the similar structural control measure listed within the stormwater design manual. 
2.  The proprietary structural control manufacturer provides adequate information that proves that the device meets the general intent of the guidelines listed within the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for proprietary systems. However, where testing guidelines are not specifically listed in the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, supplement with testing standards used by NJDEP Manufactured Treatment Devices Certification Program or State of Washington TAPE Program to allow uniform minimum criteria for review and comparison of these devices, such as: identifying which events to sample; selecting sampling locations; sampling methods; flow measurement methods; sample data quality assurance and control; analytical laboratory requirements; and calculating best management practices efficiencies. The TSS removal rate for the device will be assigned by the City from the information provided with the submittal. 
3.  The proprietary structural control manufacturer provides adequate information that proves that the device meets the general intent of the established guidelines for laboratory and/or field testing used by NJDEP Manufactured Treatment Devices Certification Program or State of Washington TAPE Program. The TSS removal rate for the device will be assigned by the City from the information provided with the submittal. 
c.  The City will then make a determination as to whether the proprietary structural control device is approved with any conditions and assign the TSS removal rate that shall be associated with the use of the device. 
d.  To obtain approval for use of this device for the proposed new development or redevelopment, all proposed proprietary devices shall submit site-specific design information as part of the stormwater management plan procedures described in Subsection 340-38(c) of this Article. 
e.  The City reserves the right to deny the use of any previously approved proprietary structural control device. 
(h)  Deviations from this Article. The Development Director may grant deviations of engineering performance criteria prescribed by this Article upon recommendation by the City Engineer that the stormwater management measures proposed for the new development or redevelopment meet the engineering performance criteria to the maximum extent technically feasible. All other requests for deviations from the terms of this Article may only be granted by the Mayor and Council under the procedures described within this subsection. 
(1)  General standards for application and approval. 
a.  Before any application is submitted for a deviation from the terms of this Article, the land owner or developer shall meet with the City staff for a consultation meeting to review a concept plan of the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. 
b.  Request for applications for deviations from the terms of this Article shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
c.  All filed applications shall be reviewed by the appropriate City staff member and this staff member shall provide a written recommendation to the Mayor and City Council for a final decision. 
d.  Applications for deviations from the terms of this Article shall follow the variance provisions as set forth in Chapter 280, Article 4, Variances, of the UDO with the exception that the written analysis shall follow the criteria listed in Subsection 340-38(h)(1)e. 
e.  The Mayor and City Council shall authorize deviations from the terms of this Article only upon determination of each of the following: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
2.  The application of this Article to the property in question would create an unnecessary hardship to owner; 
3.  Such conditions are peculiar to the property in question; 
4.  Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the property owner; and 
5.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good, nor impair the purposes or intent of this Article. 
(2)  Mayor and City Council hearings. 
a.  Before deciding a deviation from the terms of this Article, the Mayor and City Council shall provide for a hearing on the proposed action as set forth in Section 280-16 of the UDO. 
b.  The following provisions shall apply to applications for deviations from the terms of this Article: public notice as set forth in Section 280-15; sign postings as set forth in Subsection 280-15(b)(2) of the UDO; and written notices as set forth Subsection 280-15(b)(3)b of the UDO. 
c.  The Mayor and City Council shall make a "deviation decision" for each application. For purposes of this Article, the term "deviation decision" shall mean final action by the Mayor and City Council which results in an approval or denial of deviations from the terms of this Article. 
d.  A "deviation decision" shall be made no later than 60 days following an applicant's submittal of a complete application, unless extended by agreement with the applicant. 
e.  The Mayor and City Council may require accompanying written requirements as part of a "deviation decision", thereby approving the variance as "conditional." 
f.  An application may be withdrawn by the applicant prior to the "deviation decision." 
g.  Appeals of a "deviation decision" of the Mayor and City Council by an aggrieved party to the DeKalb County Superior Court shall be authorized pursuant to Section 280-32 of the UDO. 
(i)  Approval process for amenity pond/wetland located within restricted portions of site as described in Subsection 340-39(a)(5) of this Article. 
(1)  Before any request shall be submitted for an amenity pond/wetland located within restricted portion of the site as described in this section, the land owner or developer shall meet with the City for a consultation meeting to review a concept plan of the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. 
(2)  Submit to the City an application for the amenity pond/wetland to be presented before council, which shall at a minimum include the following: 
a.  A site plan of the proposed development, showing the planned location and size of the amenity pond/wetland; 
b.  A grading plan of the site showing existing and proposed elevations; 
c.  A landscape plan of the proposed plantings within the amenity pond/wetland; and 
d.  A rendering of the amenity pond/wetland area that shows the concept design intent of the amenity pond/wetland area. 
(3)  At the council public hearing and work session, the City Council shall discuss the submitted application and provide decision at the following City Council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-39. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
(a)  The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this Article: 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the City are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream stream bank or channel integrity; 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(3)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to at least 90 percent of the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under Subsection 340-39(a)(2) is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. If structural stormwater controls are implemented within the stormwater management plan that promote infiltration, the City Engineer may allow the post-development peak discharge rate to not exceed the pre-development rate of the current existing condition, regardless of the amount of impervious area to be removed and replaced on-site. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and the additional conditions and exceptions listed under Subsections 340-39(a)(5)a.—(a)(5)s. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the City as described in Subsection 340-38(j) of this Article before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
a.  All stormwater structural control measures are allowed except for alum treatment. 
b.  Organic filter may only be used in space-limited applications that require enhanced removal capability, such as hotspots. The City Engineer shall meet with the applicant to make a determination if the site is space-limited. 
c.  Underground sand filter and submerged gravel wetlands may only be used in space-limited applications. The City Engineer shall meet with the applicant to make a determination if the site is space-limited. 
d.  Stormwater structural controls, which are designed to have a permanent pool of water, shall not include slopes in excess of 3:1, incorporate safety and/or aquatic benches as recommended in the stormwater design manual, and deter access to permanent pool by providing landscape on safety benches in order to reduce the potential for accidental drowning. The perimeter of all deep pool areas (four feet or greater in depth) should be surrounded by two benches: safety and aquatic. The safety bench shall extend outward from the normal pool elevation to the toe of the pond side slopes. The maximum slope of the safety bench shall be six percent. An aquatic bench shall extend inward from the normal pool edge with a maximum depth of 18 inches below the normal pool water surface elevation. The average widths of safety and aquatic benches shall be 15 feet. Fencing stormwater structural controls is not an allowed safety precaution. However, if City Council approves a deviation of this Article and allows fencing, fencing shall: be a minimum of six feet in height, allow free flow of runoff into the stormwater structural control measure(s), and include a gate of sufficient size to permit entrance of equipment for periodic maintenance. 
e.  Side slopes for stormwater structural controls shall not exceed 3:1. The side slopes for stormwater structural controls that are designed to have a normal pool of water shall terminate on a safety bench. The safety bench may be waived by the Development Director upon recommendations received from review staff if slopes are 4:1 or greater. 
f.  Retaining walls shall not be permitted as structural control or impoundment devices for dry detention ponds. A wall of no more than 18 inches in height above the permanent pool may be approved by the Development Director for this purpose in a stormwater pond. 
g.  Retaining walls shall not be constructed within the side slopes of any stormwater facility. The Development Director may approve walls of no more than 18 inches within the side slopes of a stormwater pond if deemed to provide an amenity which focuses on the permanent pool of the stormwater pond. 
h.  Development Director may grant a waiver upon recommendations received by review staff for retaining walls used as an outlet control structure, as long as the wall does not extend more than five feet on either side of the outside edge of weir/orifice for grade transitions to earthen berms. 
i.  Standpipes and outlet control structures associated with structural stormwater controls shall be designed to provide measures to obstruct and/or soften views to standpipes and outlet control structures from streets and adjacent properties as deemed acceptable by City review staff. 
j.  The footprint of stormwater ponds, stormwater wetlands, submerged gravel wetlands, and dry detention/dry extended detention basins shall be irregular in shape as deemed acceptable by City review staff to provide a more natural landscaping effect. 
k.  Stormwater ponds within residential subdivisions shall be located on a separate lot that does not contain a dwelling unit. Stormwater ponds may be located within a designated common area within a subdivision or on unbuildable lots. 
l.  The footprint of stormwater ponds, stormwater wetlands, submerged gravel wetlands, and dry detention/dry extended detention basins shall not encroach in the space between rights-of-way and portions of buildings that face right-of-way and/or between multiple buildings on a site. All other stormwater structural control measures listed within the stormwater design do not have any site location restrictions. However, stormwater ponds, stormwater wetlands, and submerged gravel wetlands designed as amenity features may be waived of these location restrictions upon council's review and approval of the amenity concept. See Subsection 340-38(i) for amenity pond/wetland approval process. 
m.  All stormwater structural controls that require ground cover must meet the landscaping and aesthetics guidance of the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
n.  Measures shall be provided to aid in containing mulch within bioretention areas during storm events. 
o.  No side walls of any stormwater structural control intended to be underground, such as underground sand filter, gravity (oil grit) separator, and underground detention, shall be allowed. The tops of these units shall not be exposed in nonpaved areas, except for inlets and access manholes associated with these units. 
p.  The total suspended solids removal rate associated with pervious concrete and modular paver systems may be 80 percent if: runoff from pervious surface is avoided to the pervious pavement system; manufacturer can submit proven documentation of maintenance measures to prevent clogging and methods to easily unclog system; and owner agrees to implement these maintenance measures recommended by manufacturer. 
q.  Stormwater structural control measures that have a permanent pool of water shall include mosquito control measures. 
r.  The following landscaping requirements shall apply to stormwater ponds: 
1.  The bottom and sides of detention ponds shall be planted with fast-germinating, erosion-controlling vegetation, continuous over the entire surface of disturbed soils both inside and outside of the pond. 
2.  Larger-growing species of perennial plants shall be interplanted in the wet areas of the pond (up to the 25-year storm inundation line) on minimum ten-foot centers, that are capable of thriving in intermittently wet and dry soils and will provide food and habitat for birds and other wildlife. 
3.  Trees are prohibited within or on the outer slopes of detention ponds in order to prevent damage to the pond structure. 
4.  If located within a permanent buffer, the screening requirements for permanent buffers as regulated by Section 320-12 shall also apply. 
s.  Applicants shall consult the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under Subsection 340-39(a)(1). The applicant may, if approved by the City, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(7)  Drainage system guidelines. 
a.  Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include, but are not limited to, culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. All new development and redevelopment sites that generate concentrated flow will be required to connect to existing public underground storm drainage conveyance system(s). However, if City Engineer determines that connection to an existing public underground storm drainage conveyance system is not feasible, all new development and redevelopment sites shall discharge into a stabilized channel from the point of release to the point of connection to the public storm drainage conveyance system. Also, all outlets from structural stormwater controls must be located a minimum distance from the project boundary to provide adequate dissipation of energy as described by the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. Under no circumstances shall the outlet from structural stormwater controls be any closer than ten feet to the site boundary. 
b.  Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
2.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
3.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
4.  Provide drainage easement for the stormwater conveyances that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel. The drainage easement widths shall be as listed in the following Table of Minimum Easement Widths in Feet, unless the Public Works Director approves otherwise: 
Table of Minimum Easement Widths in Feet 

 
(8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land-disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-40. - Construction inspections of post-development management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
(1)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City or conducted and certified by a professional engineer or registered landscape architect who has been approved by the City. 
(2)  Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(3)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
a.  The date and location of the inspection; 
b.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
c.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
d.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer or a registered landscape architect. A final inspection by the City is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-41. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(1)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this Article. 
(2)  A stormwater management facility or practices and their associate landscaping shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility and its associated landscaping has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City, may correct the violation as provided in Subsection 340-41(d) hereof. 
(3)  Inspection programs by the City may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the City to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this Article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this Article. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the City. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The City may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-42. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this Article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. 
a.  If the City determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this Article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
b.  The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
2.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
3.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this Article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
5.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
6.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The City may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the City shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the City has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this Article, the City may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court of the City to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 340-43—340-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Section 340-46. - Findings. 
(a)  The Mayor and City Council make the following findings: 
(1)  The City is authorized by the supplementary powers provisions of Article IX, section II, paragraph III(a)(6) of the Georgia Constitution to provide a stormwater collection and disposal system throughout the city. 
(2)  The federal Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act emphasizes the role of local governments in developing, implementing, conducting and funding stormwater programs which address water quality and the impact of stormwater runoff. 
(3)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the corporate limits of the City. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the corporate limits of the City is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(4)  The stormwater needs in the City include, but are not limited to, protecting the public health, safety and welfare. Provision of stormwater management programs and facilities renders and/or results in both service and benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of the city in a variety of ways. The service and benefit rendered or resulting from provision of stormwater management systems and facilities may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to, location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and programs, and risk exposure. 
(5)  The county presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities in the city which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater systems owned and operated by the county and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the City and county to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use and enhance stormwater systems and facilities in the City in concert with the management of other water resources in the City and county. In order to do so, the City and county must have adequate and stable funding for the stormwater management program, operating capital and investment needs. 
(6)  The Mayor and City Council find, conclude and determine that a utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering and funding stormwater management services in the city. 
(7)  An equitable approach to funding stormwater management services and facilities can be provided by adopting a schedule of service charges upon properties that is related to burden of stormwater quality control service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the city. Such schedule of service charges can be complemented by other funding methods which address specific needs, including but not limited to, allocations of special purpose local option sales taxes to stormwater drainage improvement projects. A service charge credit is an appropriate means of adjusting service charges in recognition that private stormwater systems and/or actions can effectively reduce or eliminate the burden of stormwater quantity and quality control service requirements and costs that a property or properties pose for the City. Impervious area is the most important factor influencing stormwater service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the city, and therefore is an appropriate parameter for calculating stormwater service charges and associated credits. In addition, the value to the stormwater utility of certain actions and practices performed by property owners and other stormwater utility customers may be recognized by credits based on other factors, including but not limited to, the avoided cost of public information and education realized by the utility when public information and education about stormwater management is provided by the public school system. 
(8)  The "Feasibility Study for a Stormwater Utility User Fee" prepared by HDR/WL Jorden, Inc., CH2M HILL, Brown Design Associates, Inc., and CFA International, LLC, properly assesses and defines the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities for all of the county. 
(9)  Given the problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities identified in the "Feasibility Study for a Stormwater Utility User Fee," it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater systems in the city in concert with similar programs in the county. 
(10)  It would be advantageous for the City and the county to enter into an intergovernmental agreement to effectively provide stormwater services and charge and collect reasonable fees for such services. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-47. - Establishment of a utility and enterprise fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater management utility within the city which shall be responsible for stormwater management throughout the City's corporate limits, and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater systems and facilities. Such utility shall be under the direction of a stormwater utility director, appointed by the Development Director. 
(b)  The Development Director shall establish a stormwater enterprise fund in the City budget and accounting system, separate and apart from its general fund, for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the utility, including but not limited to, rentals, rates, charges, fees and licenses as may be established by the City Council. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be deposited promptly upon receipt into the stormwater enterprise fund, to be held and invested in trust for the purposes dedicated and expended exclusively for purposes of the utility, including capital project construction. No other funds of the City shall be deposited in the stormwater enterprise fund or commingled with dedicated stormwater revenues, except that other revenues, receipts and resources not accounted for in the stormwater enterprise fund, including grants, loans and bond proceeds may be combined with and applied to stormwater management capital projects as deemed appropriate by the City Council, upon recommendation of the stormwater utility director. 
(c)  The City Council hereby transfers to the stormwater utility director operational control over the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and heretofore operated by the City and county and other related assets, including but not limited to, properties upon which such facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-48. - Scope of responsibility for the drainage system in the city. 
(a)  The City drainage system consists of all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, channels, ditches, swales, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural or manmade, within the political boundaries of the City which control and/or convey stormwater through which the City intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and properties. The City or the county owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvements to those segments of this system which: 
(1)  Are located within public streets, rights-of-way and easements; 
(2)  Are subject to easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use, or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities; or 
(3)  Are located on public lands to which the City has adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities. 
(b)  Operation and maintenance of stormwater systems and facilities which are located on private property or public property not owned by the City or county and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, or its occupant, except as that responsibility may be otherwise affected by the laws of the state and the Unites States of America. 
(c)  It is the intent of this Article to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of all properties and persons in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the City. The City expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the City, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may not exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the City as a condition precedent to any activity by or upon property not owned by the City, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the City or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the City, its officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-49. - Requirements for on-site stormwater systems; enforcement methods and inspections. 
All property owners and developers of developed real property within the city shall provide, manage, maintain and operate on-site stormwater systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all City development regulations and the laws of the state and the United States of America. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by the City in the municipal court. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the City may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner in the same manner as a tax levied against the property. From date of the filing of such action, the City shall have lien rights which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the superior court of the county. The City shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this Article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the City, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-50. - Determination and modification of stormwater service charges. 
Stormwater service charges shall be determined and modified from time to time by resolution of the City Council. In setting or modifying such rates it shall be the objective of the City Council to establish rates, fees and charges that are fair and reasonable, reflect the value of stormwater management services and facilities to those properties who benefit therefrom and, which together with any other sources of revenue that may be made available to the stormwater utility, will be sufficient to meet the cost of budgeted programs, services and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-51. - Effective date of stormwater service charges. 
Stormwater service charges shall accrue beginning January 1, 2005, and shall be billed periodically thereafter to customers, except as specific exemptions and credits may apply. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-52. - Stormwater service fees established. 
(a)  In order to fully recover the cost of providing stormwater services and facilities while fairly and reasonably apportioning the cost among developed properties throughout the unincorporated portion of the county, the following stormwater rates shall apply: 
(1)  The stormwater service charge per equivalent residential unit shall be four dollars per month or as amended by official action of the governing authority. 
(2)  All single detached dwelling lots shall be charged the rate applicable to one equivalent residential unit. 
(3)  All multiple dwelling lots shall be charged the rate applicable to one equivalent residential unit times the number of dwelling units located on the multiple dwelling unit property times an adjustment factor that adjusts the ERU to equal the median impervious coverage of a statistical sampling of a single dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling lot in the county, which has been determined to be 0.5. 
(4)  All other developed lands shall be billed for one equivalent residential unit for each 3,000 square feet of impervious surface or increment thereof on the property, rounded to the next highest tenth of an equivalent residential unit. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-53. - Exemptions and credits applicable to stormwater service charges. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater utility service charges or receive a credit or offset against such service charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater service charges shall be granted based on the age, tax or economic status, race, or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. 
(b)  The following properties are exempt from stormwater utility fees: 
(1)  Undeveloped land. 
(2)  All public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Railroad rights-of-way (tracks). However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(4)  Any property whereby 100 percent of the stormwater runoff is contained on the premises and no runoff enters into the stormwater management system. 
(5)  Developed land which by reason of topography discharges stormwater onto land or property which does not lie within the jurisdictional limits of the City. 
(c)  Credits are available based on the following: 
(1)  Property owners of developed land may receive a stormwater service charge credit for on-site systems or facilities. Stormwater service charge credits shall be determined based on the technical requirements, design and performance standards contained in the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as may be updated or amended from time to time. Stormwater service charge credits may total up to 40 percent of the service charge applicable to a property, and shall be granted in the following increments: 
a.  Ten percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet water quality in accordance with the County Code and the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
b.  Ten percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet the channel protection in accordance with the County Code and the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
c.  Ten percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet the overbank flood protection in accordance with the County Code and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
d.  Ten percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet the extreme flood protection properly as defined in the State-wide Stormwater Sizing Criteria for Stormwater Control and Mitigation [Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Vol. 2 (Technical Handbook), section 1.3], as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(2)  Property owners seeking service charge credits must apply for stormwater service charge credits through completion and submittal to the City of a stormwater service charge credit application prior to January 1 of the year in which stormwater service charges are to be billed. (Except for 2005, in which applications must be received by March 1, 2005). Credits will only be granted through applications approved by the City for the remainder of the year in which stormwater service charges are to be billed. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a timely filed, completed application, the chief executive officer or his designee shall review the application and make a determination as to whether the applicable criteria for a credit has been met. All decisions regarding the approval or disapproval of a stormwater credit shall be made within 45 days of the date the completed application was submitted to the City. 
(4)  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on: 
a.  Continuing compliance with the county's design and performance standards as stated in the 2016 edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as may be updated or amended from time to time; and 
b.  Upon continuing provision of the systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. 
(d)  The City may revoke any credit at any time for noncompliance with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-54. - Stormwater service charge billing, delinquencies, collections. 
(a)  A stormwater service charge bill may be sent through the United States Mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land, as shown from public land records of the county, shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee. If a customer is under-billed or if no bill is sent for developed land, the City may back-bill for a period of up to four years, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency. A 1.5 percent late charge shall be billed based on the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service charge that becomes delinquent. 
(b)  Suit for collection shall be commenced by the City in the court of the owner's residence; provided, however, if the owner is not a resident of this state, suit may be filed in the superior court of the county. No lien shall be imposed for delinquent collections unless a judgment is first obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-55. - Stormwater utility service charges billed in common. 
The stormwater utility service charge may be billed on a common statement and collected along with City taxes or county taxes or both City and county taxes. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-56. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any customer who believes the provisions of this Article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the City stormwater utility director. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  Using the information provided by the appellant, the director shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days. 
(3)  In response to an appeal the director may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this Article. 
(4)  A decision of the director which is adverse to an appellant may be further appealed to the Development Director within 30 days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision. Notice of the appeal shall be served on the Development Director by the appellant, stating the grounds for the appeal. The Development Director shall issue a written decision on the appeal within 30 days. All decisions of the Development Director shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant. 
(5)  All decisions by the Development Director shall be final. 
(6)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the Development Director may be reviewed upon application for writ of certiorari before the superior court of the county, filed within 30 days of the date of service of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 340-57—340-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 

Section 340-66. - Title of article, findings and objectives. 
(a)  This Article shall be known as the Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance of the City of Chamblee, Georgia. 
(b)  In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the city and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that the City and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. Groundwater resources are contained within aquifers, which are permeable, rock strata occupying vast regions of the subsurface. These aquifers are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(c)  The objectives of this Article are: 
(1)  Protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; 
(2)  Protect groundwater quality by limiting destiny of development; and 
(3)  Protect groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse effect on groundwater quality. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-67. - Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district. 
A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which all shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 Edition. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-68. - Determination of pollution susceptibility. 
Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-69. - Permit requirements and enforcement. 
(a)  No building permit, rezoning request or subdivision plan will be approved by the City unless the permit, request or plan is in compliance with the groundwater protection standards listed in Section 340-71. The City, its agent officers and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this Article and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the City deems necessary. 
(1)  The City is hereby designated as the administrator and enforcement officer for this Article. 
(2)  The City shall have authority to enforce this Article; issue permits hereunder; and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(3)  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the City in enforcement. 
(4)  Any person who commits, takes part in, or assists in any violation of any provision of this Article shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(5)  The City shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this Article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified in Section 340-72. 
(6)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this Article, the violator shall be required to remove the structure. 
(7)  When removal of vegetation cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this Article, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(b)  With the exception of certain exempted activities identified in Subsection 340-69(c), applications for a development permit within the Groundwater Recharge Area District shall include a site plan. The following information is required for all site plans: 
(1)  A map or maps, drawn to a scale of 1 inch equals 50 feet, showing all planned improvements including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, watercourses and drainage ways, water lines, wastewater and stormwater facilities, and utility installations, shall be provided by the applicant. 
(2)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
(3)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(4)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
(5)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous to toxic materials. 
(6)  Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown in cross-sectional drawings. 
(7)  All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of the development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction of otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the City. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(c)  The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(d)  The application shall be made to the permits and inspection director and will be reviewed within ten days. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions or disapproval) by the City. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the City. Decisions of the permits and inspection director may be appealed to the Mayor and City Council. 
(e)  A public hearing on the application, to be held before the Mayor and City Council, may be scheduled if requested by a citizen. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 14 days prior to the hearing. A record of the proceedings shall be made and kept on file by the City Clerk. Any person may testify at the hearing. Decisions of the Mayor and City Council may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction identified in Section 340-72. 
(f)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 6 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 24 months from the date of issuance of the permit. Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-70. - Reserved. 
Section 340-71. - Groundwater protection standards. 
(a)  For all pollution susceptibility areas, new waste disposal facilities must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(b)  New agricultural impoundments shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  For areas of high susceptibility, a liner shall be provided that is approved by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service (SCS). 
(2)  For areas of medium susceptibility, an SCS approved liner shall be provided if the site exceeds 15 acre-feet. 
(3)  For areas of low susceptibility, a SCS approved liner shall be provided if the site exceeds 50 acre-feet. 
(c)  No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within significant groundwater recharge area. 
(d)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas, the handling, storage and disposal of hazardous materials shall take place on impermeable surface having spill and leak protection approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 
(e)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas, new above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks larger than 650 gallons must have secondary containment of 110 percent of tank volume or 110 percent of the largest tanks in a cluster of tanks. 
(f)  For high pollution susceptibility areas, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner approved by EPD. 
(g)  For high pollution susceptibility areas, no new stormwater infiltration basins may be constructed. 
(h)  For high pollution susceptibility areas, wastewater spray irrigation systems or the land spreading of wastewater sludge shall be practiced in accordance with Department of Natural Resources criteria for slow rate land treatment. An application for a development permit for activities involving wastewater spray irrigation or land spreading of wastewater sludge must be accompanied by proof that the applicant has received a land application system permit from EPD. 
(i)  New homes served by septic tank/drain systems shall conform to minimum lot size requirements identified in the Minimum Lot Size Requirements Table and Single-Family Home Minimum Lot Size Where Served by On-site Septic Tank Systems Table below: 
Minimum Lot Size Requirements Table 

 
Source: DHR Manual for On-Site Sewerage Management Systems 
  
Single-Family Home Minimum Lot Size Where Served by On-Site Septic Tank Systems Table 

 
Source: DHR Manual for On-Site Sewerage Management Systems 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-72. - Judicial review. 
(a)  All final decisions of the City, concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in DeKalb County Superior Court. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the City may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicants land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-73. - Amendments. 
These regulations may, from time to time, be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statues and as new information becomes available. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 340-74. - Assessment relief. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider the requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 340-75—340-80. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 350. - INFRASTRUCTURE 
ARTICLE 1. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 

Section 350-1. - Street classification requirements. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this Article to build streets that are integral components of community design. Streets shall be detailed to complement neighborhoods and commercial centers and shall be pedestrian in scale. 
(b)  Street Classifications. 
(1)  For purposes of this Unified Development Ordinance, all of the public streets, roads and highways in the City except where otherwise noted, are classified as boulevard, primary, secondary, feeder, or local streets, as shown on the Streetscapes and Gateways Map of the appendix. 
(2)  In addition, to the road classification certain streets are also designated on the Streetscapes and Gateways Map as storefront streets. Storefront streets are designed to provide access to local businesses for pedestrians and bicycles over vehicular through-put and as such buildings along such roadways are required to meet the provision of Section 230-29, Storefront Streets. 
(3)  Street improvements. Streets, shall be constructed or improved to the standards as established in this UDO, or as otherwise required by the City Council. 
(c)  Relationship to State Road Construction Standards. 
(1)  All state-maintained roads and intersections shall comply with the standards and specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT). All new roads and intersections which are to be state-maintained shall be constructed to meet those standards. 
(2)  GDOT standards are based on the Federal Highway Administration Functional Classification System, which are separate from the street classification established by the City of Chamblee. 
(3)  Work done within the State rights-of-way is subject to review and approval by both GDOT and the City of Chamblee. 
(4)  All of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to street construction shall conform to the latest specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation, "Design Policy Manual," latest edition. Exceptions may be made for pedestrian crosswalk and sidewalk materials, which may vary according to the overall design and character of the development. 
(d)  Streetscape requirements. 
(1)  The dimensions of all streetscape elements, including landscaping, sidewalks, on-street parking, and lighting, are governed by Chapter 230, Standards Applying to All Districts, and Addendum 3.0, Streetscape Guidelines. 
(2)  All streets shall be landscaped as provided in Section 230-26 Streetscape Design and Chapter 320, Article 3. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-2. - Access management. 
(a)  Driveways. 
(1)  Driveways and curb cuts shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Interior driveway. Where 90-degree parking is utilized, all interior driveways shall be a minimum of 22 feet in width. If 45- or 60-degree angle parking is used, then interior driveways shall be at least 12 feet in width for one-way traffic and 22 feet in width for two-way traffic. Where parallel parking is utilized or there is no parking, interior driveways shall be a minimum of ten feet in width for one-way traffic and 20 feet in width for two-way traffic. 
b.  All sidewalk paving materials shall be continued across any intervening driveway at the same prevailing grade and cross slope as on the adjacent sidewalk clear zone. A corresponding interior sign or painted bar on the driveway shall be provided adjacent to the sidewalk paving as it intersects the driveway which shall communicate that vehicles must stop or yield for the intervening sidewalk. 
c.  Driveway widths shall be a maximum of 24 feet for two-way entrances or shared driveways, and 20 feet for one-way entrances, unless otherwise permitted by the City of Chamblee Public Works Department or state department of transportation. Residential driveways shall be limited to a maximum of 20 feet in width in the right of way. Apron may be flared up to an additional two feet on either side. 
d.  Driveway curb cuts shall not be permitted on any street that is classified as a boulevard, primary, secondary, or feeder street when access may be provided from a side or rear local street located immediately adjacent to a contiguous property, with the exception of hotel patron drop-off drives. 
e.  Driveways and drive aisles are not permitted between the sidewalk and a building and shall be perpendicular to any adjacent street. 
f.  No more than one curb cut shall be permitted for each development, provided that properties with more than one street frontage may have one curb cut located on each street frontage. However, developments on properties with a single street frontage greater than 400 feet shall be permitted two curb cuts along one street frontage. 
g.  A shared driveway serving two or more adjoining lots may be authorized by the Development Director based on the application of the following criteria: 
1.  The shared driveway is desired to improve traffic safety and operations. 
2.  The shared driveway is necessary in order to provide for reasonable use and development of property due to its size, shape, topography or hydrology. 
3.  The shared driveway has environmental benefits such as the minimization of impervious surface and the protection of mature vegetation in areas with environmental constraints, such as steep slopes, sub-surface rock, floodplain, and stream buffers or other similar characteristics that would be impacted with the construction of multiple driveways. 
4.  Ownership of the shared driveway can be established to provide for the perpetual maintenance and repair of the shared driveway in an equitable way that does not encumber the City of Chamblee. 
5.  Construction standards for the shared driveway will meet or exceed the standards of construction of Sections 350-2 and 350-5. 
h.  All developments other than single-family detached dwellings shall have pedestrian walkways a minimum width of five feet connecting ground level parking to the public sidewalks and to all building entrances. 
(2)  Minimum driveway spacing. All driveways along public streets, except for driveways serving individual driveway lots or single dwelling units, shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Minimum separation for driveways and streets: 

 
b.  Spacing shall be measured from centerline to centerline of driveways or streets. Greater separation may be required for safe operation of intersections and right or left turning lanes. Whenever possible, proposed driveways along one side of a street shall coincide with existing or proposed driveways on the opposite side of such street. If offset driveways cannot be avoided, the same driveway spacing criteria as given in Table 350.1 should be provided. Spacing shall be measured from centerline to centerline. If the street involved is a divided facility and the driveways do not align with a median crossover, the driveway spacing would only apply to the adjacent driveway on the same side of the street as provided in Table 350.1. 
c.  Maximum number of driveways serving a single project: one for each 400' of property frontage, or fraction thereof per street, along a Boulevard, Primary or Secondary Street. 
d.  No new curb cut, driveway, or private street intersection shall be permitted on a street classified as a Feeder, Secondary, Primary or Boulevard without the approval of the Development Director, if it is within 50 feet of an existing driveway or street intersection. 
(b)  No-access easements along thoroughfares where driveways are discouraged. Land in private ownership adjacent to public rights-of-way which could control or are intended to control access to streets, alleys, or public lands shall not be permitted unless their control is given to the City under ownership, dedication or easement conditions approved by the City Attorney or acceptable to the Development Director, and the access to abutting properties is provided by an alley, see Subsection 300-12(d), Double frontage or reverse frontage lots. No development shall be designed so as to deny access to abutting properties. See Section 320-22 for landscape requirements within the no-access easement. 
(c)  Requirements for interparcel access. To the maximum extent possible, sidewalks and parking lots serving adjacent lots shall be interconnected to provide continuous driveway connections and pedestrian connections between adjoining lots and streets, except that this requirement shall not apply to lots zoned for single-family residential units. Where necessary, the City may require access easements be provided to ensure continuous access and egress routes connecting commercial, office, and multifamily lots. 
(d)  Gates and security arms shall be prohibited from crossing any public street or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-3. - Requirements for new streets. 
(a)  Standards for New Streets. 
(1)  All new streets proposed to be dedicated to the City shall be designed at least to the standards contained in this UDO in accordance with the category of said streets (see Section 230-26, Streetscape Design and Addendum 3.0, Streetscape Guidelines). 
(2)  Proposed street layouts shall interconnect within a development and with adjoining development as often as possible. 
(3)  Public or private streets longer than 150 feet shall be connected to a continuous street network. Culs-de-sac or hammerheads shall be allowed only where topographical and/or lot line configurations offer no practical alternatives for connections or through traffic. Maximum cul-de-sac length is 250 feet in length from the nearest intersection with a street providing through access (not a cul-de-sac). Minimum radius for culs-de-sac shall be 40 feet from back of curb, except for industrial or warehouse areas, where the minimum radius shall be 50 feet from back of curb. The minimum radius of the right-of-way for culs-de-sac shall be 10 feet greater than the radius from back of curb. 
(4)  The following street specifications are provided for non-state-maintained public roads within the municipal limits of the city. In addition to the specifications, all the following designs shall provide a 90-foot minimum tangent between reverse curves on all streets. 
(5)  Streets are encouraged to be designed with on-street parking. 
Table of Street Specifications for Non-State-Maintained Public Roads 

 
(b)  Private Streets. 
(1)  Private Streets Permitted. Private streets are prohibited except where necessary and subject to approval by the Development Director. The Development Director may impose conditions on the approval of private streets to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the general public and to mitigate potential problems with private streets. 
(2)  General Provisions. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct a new private street or alter an existing private street or to cause the same to be done without first obtaining a development permit for such construction or alteration from the Development Director. 
b.  All private streets shall be constructed to the roadway base, paving and curbing standards required for public streets and contained herein. No permit for a private street shall be issued unless the proposed roadway improvements are in conformity with the standards and the provisions of this UDO. 
c.  For setback purposes, front setbacks shall be measured as if the streets were public streets, or as approved by individual variances. 
d.  All provisions of the UDO regarding roadways, water lines, sewer lines, stormwater facilities and their appurtenances, including the design, submittal of plans, required improvements, etc., shall apply to all developments with private streets approved pursuant to this Section. 
e.  The subdivider/developer shall establish a mandatory property owners association, with bylaws and/or covenants which shall include the following: 
1.  Mandatory membership of all purchasers of lots therein and their successors. 
2.  Responsibility for maintenance, insurance and taxes. 
3.  Equitable sharing of the cost of maintenance. 
4.  Authority to place liens on the real property of members who fail to pay their dues or assessments. 
f.  No final plat or development permit involving any private streets shall be approved unless said final plat or development permit conforms to the requirements of this section. 
(3)  Street Names and Address Assignments for Private Streets. 
a.  Proposed names and address assignments for private streets shall follow to the same rules as for public streets, Section 350-8. 
b.  The subdivider of land involving a private street shall install street signs with the street name and designation "private," as approved by the Development Director. 
(4)  Easements for Private Streets. 
a.  Easements for private streets shall be designated on final plats as general purpose public access and utility easements, along with the name of said private street. Said easement shall at minimum be of the same width as that required for the right-of-way of a public street as shown on the Streetscape and Gateways Map for the type of public street (local, feeder, etc.) most closely resembling the proposed private street, except that private streets used exclusively for single-family attached dwellings shall be constructed on an easement with a minimum width of 40 feet. 
b.  Easements for private streets shall not be included in any calculation of minimum lot size or density limitations established by this UDO. 
c.  In the cases of private streets where roadway improvements are required, the general purpose public access and utility easement for a private street shall be drawn as its own discrete parcel to be dedicated to a mandatory private homeowners association (i.e., not shown to be a part of any lot). 
(5)  Maintenance. 
a.  The City shall not maintain, repair, resurface, rebuild, or otherwise improve streets, signs, drainage improvements, or any other appurtenances within general purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. 
b.  Permanent repairs to the streets shall be made by the homeowners associations or other entity having maintenance responsibility for the development. Driveways and sidewalks will be repaved, sodded or landscape areas will be graded, smoothed, reseeded or resodded where appropriate. 
c.  A private maintenance covenant recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court shall be required for any private street and other improvements within general purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. The covenant shall set out the distribution of expenses, remedies for noncompliance with the terms of the agreement, rights to the use of easements, and other pertinent considerations. The covenant shall specifically include the following terms: 
1.  The covenant shall establish minimum annual assessments in an amount adequate to defray costs of ordinary maintenance and procedures for approval of additional needed assessments. The covenant shall also specify that the funds from such assessments will be held by a homeowners or property owners association in cases of a subdivision fronting on a private street. 
2.  The covenant shall specify that the property owners association shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the stormwater drainage system and all common areas within the development. 
3.  The covenant shall include a periodic maintenance schedule. 
4.  The covenant for maintenance shall be enforceable by any property owner served by the private street. 
5.  The covenant shall establish a formula for assessing maintenance and repair costs equitably to property owners served by the private street. 
6.  The covenant shall run with the land. 
7.  The Development Director may, at his or her discretion, as a condition of approving private streets, require a performance bond and/or maintenance bond be submitted by the subdivider and held by a homeowners or property owners association, or the Development Director may require that the subdivider pay an amount of money as recommended by the Development Director into an escrow account or other suitable account for the construction, maintenance and repair of private streets to be drawn from by the homeowners or property owners association as the needs may arise. 
(6)  Specifications for final plats involving private streets. No final plat involving a private street shall be approved by the Department for recording unless and until it shall contain the following on the face of the plat: 
a.  Deed book and page reference to the recorded covenant required in Subsection 350-3(b)(5), Maintenance, as listed above. 
b.  "The City of Chamblee has no responsibility to build, improve, maintain, or otherwise service the private streets, drainage improvements, and other appurtenances contained within the general public purpose access and utility easement or easements for private streets shown on this plat." 
c.  "Grant of Easement. The general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) is hereby granted and said grant of rights shall be liberally construed to provide all necessary authority to the City, County, and to public or private utility companies serving the subdivision, for the installation and maintenance of utilities, including, but not limited to, electric lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, sewer lines, cable television lines, and fiber optic cables, together with the right to trim interfering trees and brush, together with a perpetual right of ingress and egress for installation, maintenance, and replacement of such lines. 
________________________________________  Signature of Property Owner    Date" 
d.  "Certificate of Dedication. All water and sewer lines installed within the general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) are hereby dedicated to DeKalb County." 
(7)  Requirement for Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Street Responsibilities. Prior to the sale or as a condition of the closing of a real estate transaction involving any lot served by a private street in the City of Chamblee, the subdivider or seller of said lot shall execute a notarized purchaser's acknowledgement of private street construction and drainage maintenance responsibilities set forth below. A copy of the purchaser's acknowledgement shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be required to be submitted as a condition of a building permit for a principal building on said lot: 
"Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Street and Drainage Maintenance Responsibility. 
(I) (We) have read the Declaration of Covenant which pertains to the lot that is the subject of this real estate transaction ____________ (insert address or attach legal description). (I) (We) understand that the Declaration of Covenant applies to the lot that (I am) (we are) purchasing and requires (me) (us) to provide a specified percentage or amount of the financing for the construction and maintenance of any private street and drainage facilities serving the lot which (I am) (we are) purchasing, and that owners of other lots in this plat may sue and recover for those costs which this covenant requires (me) (us) to pay, plus their damages resulting from (my) (our) refusal to contribute, plus reasonable attorney's fees. (I) (we) further understand that the City of Chamblee has no obligation to assist with the maintenance and improvement of the private street, drainage facilities, and other appurtenances within the general purpose public access and utility easement for the private road serving the lot in question. I (we) understand that a copy of this purchaser's acknowledgement shall be required as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for a principal building on the lot (I am) (we are) purchasing. 

 
(c)  Alleys. 
(1)  Alleys shall be required wherever topography or the presence of a street classified as a boulevard or primary street or other features makes vehicular access from the front of the lot impractical or unsafe. Where the alley serves as the primary means of vehicular access to the lot, it shall be dedicated as a public right-of-way and built to the standards required in this Chapter. 
(2)  Alleys may be permitted as private streets providing secondary or service access and where the principal buildings have adequate access for emergency vehicles from a public street on their frontage. Private alleys may end in a turn-around. 
(3)  All alleys dedicated to the public shall provide a continuous connection between one (1) or more public streets. Alleys shall be paved and constructed to the same standards as the connecting public streets except that: 
a.  The paved width of a one-way alley shall be not less than eleven (11) feet; Two-way alleys shall be a minimum of 14 feet wide with 4-foot graded shoulders; 
b.  Alleys shall be constructed with flush curbs; 
c.  Buildings shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the back of curb of an alley; 
d.  All access to garages would be from alley when the lot frontage is less than 50 feet in width. 
(d)  Narrow Streets. 
(1)  Narrow Streets shall be utilized as design alternative in a PUD, or in a single-family subdivision with more than 5 lots as a through street, to slow down vehicular traffic and encourage pedestrian activity. 
(2)  Narrow Streets may be permitted as private streets. 
(3)  All Narrow Streets dedicated to the public shall provide a continuous connection between two (2) or more public streets. Narrow Streets shall be paved and constructed to the same standards as the connecting public streets except that: 
a.  The paved width of a narrow street shall be not less than twenty-two (22) feet, with two travel lanes, each having a minimum width of 11 feet; 
b.  Optional to have parallel parking on either side or both sides where each parallel parking aisle adds 7 feet to street width; 
c.  If parallel parking is used then provide bulb out at the intersection, see Addendum 1.0, Design Guidelines; 
d.  Two-foot curb and gutter on each side of the street; 
e.  Landscape zone of 5 feet on each side with street trees planted 40 feet on center, and streetlights constructed 80 feet on center; 
f.  Sidewalks on both sides at 4 feet each; 
g.  Utilities are underground in 10 feet easements on one or both sides, or as an alternative utilities can be in an easement located in alley; 
h.  Curb radii for corners - minimum 15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-4. - Street intersections. 
(a)  Angle of intersection. Intersections shall generally be at right angles and shall not be at an angle of less than 85 degrees unless approved by the City, nor less than 80 degrees unless the intersection is signalized in which case the angle of the intersection may be reduced subject to the review and approval of the Traffic Engineer. 
(b)  Maximum grade. Street intersections should be designed with a flat grade wherever possible, but in no case should the grade exceed 2 percent in normal situations (or 4 percent in topographical hardship situations on local streets). 
(c)  Islands. Islands in street intersections shall conform to the design requirements of the standard drawings. In no case shall anything in an island extend more than three feet above the street grade within the right-of-way, except traffic regulatory devices and other infrastructure erected or approved by the City. No island shall be approved which contains less than 100 square feet. 
(d)  Intersection corner sight distance. See Section 230-7, Corner Visibility. 
(e)  Turning lanes at intersections. Left turning lanes shall be provided where required by DeKalb County, GDOT, or the City to meet traffic demand and safe operations. Right turning lanes may be required to meet traffic demands or safety concerns. When provided, turning lanes shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Storage length. A minimum of 150 feet of storage length for turning lanes on any Primary or Secondary street shall be used. A minimum of 100 feet of storage length for turning lanes on all feeders shall be used. 
(2)  Taper Length. The minimum taper length shall be 50 feet. 
(3)  Left turning lanes from a street designated a boulevard or primary street shall be subject to longer storage lengths and tapers an as determined on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-5. - Street design standards. 
(a)  Street Grades and Design Speeds. 
(1)  Minimum grade for all local and feeder streets shall be 1.5 percent. Minimum grades for all streets designated a boulevard, primary, or secondary shall conform to Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(2)  Minimum grade of less than 1.5 percent on a local street may be approved by the City, based on adequate engineering designs, where at least 1.5 percent cannot reasonably be achieved due to topographical limitations imposed by the land. In such cases, a Record Drawing and such computations as necessary shall be provided after construction to establish that the street will drain in accordance with this UDO. Street sections where unacceptable pooling, excessive spread at catch basins, or other hazardous conditions occur shall be reconstructed or otherwise improved to eliminate such conditions. 
(3)  Minimum vehicle design speeds and maximum grades allowable in the City of Chamblee by street classification shall conform to GDOT/DeKalb County DOT standards as appropriate. 
(4)  Maximum grade on any cul-de-sac turnaround shall be six percent. 
(b)  Street paving standards. Street paving shall be subject to the specification provided by the City of Chamblee Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-6. - Curbs and gutters. 
(a)  Curb and gutter required. All new streets and Project Access Improvements shall be provided with curb and gutter. All gutters shall drain smoothly with no areas of ponding. 
(b)  Curbing. 
(1)  Existing granite curbing shall be preserved and re-used except where new curbing is required by the public works department. When an existing street with granite curbing is improved, extended or rebuilt, the curbing for such street improvement, extension or reconstruction shall be granite curbing of a similar size and type as the granite curbing used on such existing street. 
(2)  Otherwise, new curbing shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Concrete shall be Class "A" (as defined by Georgia Department of Transportation) and have a minimum strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days. 
b.  Typical minimum section shall be 6" × 24" × 12". 
c.  See UDO Addendum 3(e) for Typical Curbing Details. 
d.  Roll curbing as shown as Type I in UDO Addendum 3(e) may be permitted subject to approval of the Public Works Director. 
(c)  Construction methods. Curb and gutter shall be set true to line and grade, horizontal be field staked, and finished to the section shown on the plans. Along the Project Access Improvements of a road which the Department of Public Works has identified for resurfacing within one year of the new construction, the grade of the new gutter shall be placed 1" above the Project Access Improvement pavement grade in areas where drainage will not be adversely affected. 
(1)  Line and grade shall be field staked for grades less than two percent and grades over 12 percent, and within 100 feet in both directions from all low points. 
(2)  One-half inch expansion joints or pre-molded bituminous expansion joint material shall be provided at all structures and radius points and at intervals not to exceed 250 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. 
(3)  Inferior workmanship or unprofessional construction methods resulting in unacceptable curb and gutter will be cause for rejection of the finished work. 
(4)  Disturbed areas along all curbing shall be backfilled, stabilized and grassed. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-7. - Sidewalks and bikeway construction standards. 
(a)  Pathways shall form a logical, safe and convenient system for pedestrian or bike access to all dwelling units and other buildings and facilities. 
(b)  Pathways shall be so located and safeguarded as to minimize contacts with automotive traffic. 
(c)  Pathways that are appropriately located, designed and constructed may be combined with other easements and used by emergency and service vehicles, but shall not be used by other automotive traffic. 
(d)  Public sidewalks shall be located along both sides of all streets and shall have minimum widths as specified in the street type dimensions table, see Section 230-26. 
(e)  Sidewalk construction standards. Sidewalks and curb ramps shall be constructed in all new development or redevelopment along all abutting or internal streets, existing or new, private or public. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Section. The Development Director is authorized to grant modifications upon specific application due to topographic or drainage difficulty as well as alternative design proposals after receiving recommendations from the Public Works Director. Whenever a discrepancy occurs between the design (see Section 230-26, Streetscape Design) and construction standards (this Section) of this UDO and any state or federal regulation, then the most restrictive shall apply. 
(1)  Sidewalk installation and timing. Sidewalks shall be installed as follows: 
a.  Residential subdivision projects. Sidewalks shall be installed on new internal streets (both sides including "eyebrow" turnarounds, culs-de-sac, and hammerheads) and on adjacent external streets prior to the recordation of the final plat, unless a performance bond is secured pursuant to Section 300-27. 
b.  Nonresidential subdivision projects. Sidewalks shall be installed on new internal streets (both sides including cul-de-sac, hammerheads, and "eyebrow" turnarounds) and on adjacent external streets prior to the recordation of the final plat, unless a performance bond is secured pursuant to Section 300-27. 
c.  Nonsubdivision projects. Sidewalks shall be installed on abutting streets (abutting side) prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
d.  Performance surety. Performance surety provided to the City shall include the cost of sidewalk curb and ramp construction not yet installed, per the requirements of Section 300-27, Guarantees and Sureties. The surety shall be in an amount acceptable to the City. 
e.  Escrow alternative. The cost of sidewalk installation may be set aside in escrow with the Department of Public Works if proposed road improvements by the City may impact the location of a sidewalk. 
(2)  Sidewalk site preparation and material standards. 
a.  Cross slope. Sidewalks shall be constructed with a cross slope of 0.25 inch per foot. Sidewalks shall maintain this cross slope at driveway crossings or transition the sidewalk to a driveway with ramps and detectable warnings. 
b.  Material. Class "B" (as defined by Georgia Department of Transportation) with a minimum strength of 2,200 PSI at 28 days. 
c.  Final stabilization. Disturbed areas resulting from sidewalk construction shall be backfilled, stabilized, and grassed or landscaped. 
(3)  Sidewalk curb ramp construction standards. Intersection radius curb ramps shall be provided at street intersections. Straight ramps may be provided at intersections of curbed driveways and at streets without sidewalks. Curb ramps shall meet the requirements of DeKalb County. 
(4)  Damage repair. Damage to sidewalks and ramps caused by construction or development activity shall be repaired at no cost to the County within 30 days or prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, whichever is earlier. 
(f)  Bikeway construction standards. All bicycle routes and lanes, multi-use paths, and greenways shall be designed and developed as follows: 
(1)  Bicycle lanes within the right-of-way. Bicycle lanes, where provided, shall be a minimum of four feet in width and placed between the outside lane of a roadway and the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is permitted, the bicycle lane shall be between the parking lane and the outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanes shall be delineated with appropriate markings, as required by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Bikeways and bicycle lanes must be pre-approved by the City and meet the requirements of the latest edition of the AASHTO "Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities," and the latest edition of the NACTO "Urban Bikeway Design Guide." 
(2)  Multi-use paths. Multi-use paths, where provided, shall comply with the provisions of this Section and shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Width. Multi-use trails and paths shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width. 
b.  Material and construction details. 
1.  A multi-use path that is constructed in a floodplain, adjacent to a stream, or adjacent to undisturbed land shall be either asphalt or concrete. 
2.  In all other cases, a multi-use path shall be concrete. 
c.  Multi-use paths shall be designed to minimize direct auto-pedestrian and/or auto-conflicts by such means as sidewalks, striping and signs. 
d.  Multi-use paths shall be connected to crosswalks at intersections where applicable. 
e.  Multi-use paths shall be in substantial conformity with the provisions of Addendum 1.0, Design Guidelines. 
(3)  Greenways. Greenway paths, where provided shall comply with the provisions of this Section and shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Width. Greenway paths shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. 
b.  Material and construction details. 
1.  A greenway path that is constructed in a floodplain, adjacent to a stream, or adjacent to undisturbed land shall be either asphalt or concrete. 
2.  In all other cases, a greenway path shall be concrete. 
c.  Greenways shall be designed to minimize direct auto-pedestrian and/or auto-bicycle interaction by such means as sidewalks, striping and signs. 
d.  Greenways shall be connected to crosswalks at intersections where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-8. - Traffic control devices. 
(a)  Traffic control signs. The installation of street signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization, shall be coordinated with the Public Work Director, and provided through payment of fees to the appropriate agency. 
(b)  Street name signs. Street name signs shall have a green background with white legends mounted on channelized posts. Alternate post material shall be subject to the review and approval of the Development Director or his/her designee. The posts and signs will be furnished and installed by the City at all street intersections. The developer (or homeowners association, in the event an alternate signpost is chosen at a later date) shall install the signs prior to the recordation of the final plat and shall pay the City's costs. 
(c)  Traffic signals and signs. All traffic signals and signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (no decorative traffic control devices will be allowed). 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-9. - Traffic calming devices. 
(a)  Traffic Calming Devices shall be compatible with standards outlined in the Georgia Department of Transportation Pedestrian and Streetscape Guide. 
(b)  Subdivision streets shall be designed in accordance with the so as to encourage and maintain maximum operating speeds in the 25—30 mph range. The maximum length of roadway section between speed control points shall be 500 feet. 
(c)  The traffic-calming plan is subject to review and approval by the Development Department. The Development Director may grant modifications. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 350-10—350-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - DRAINAGE SYSTEM 

Section 350-16. - Culverts and pipe collection system guidelines. 
(a)  Storm drainage profile drawing. 
(1)  No main line storm pipe shall be less than 15 inches diameter; (roof laterals and landscape drainage are exempted from this requirement); 
(2)  No pipe shall have a slope greater than 12 percent; 
(3)  If a drop in a structure is greater than five feet, a reinforced base shall be provided for that structure; 
(4)  No Corrugated Metal Pipe (CMP) shall be used in any publicly maintained road right-of-way; 
(5)  No outfall pipe shall have a slope greater than one percent. Maximum allowable velocity for storm sewer exit pipe is ten feet per second when flowing full or half-full, based on Manning's Formula. Energy dissipater is required for exit velocity in excess of five feet per second; 
(6)  Open channel design must show the grade of the flow line of the channel and include a typical ditch section that provides a non-erodible velocity at design flows. Channel slopes less than one percent may be grassed; for channel shapes greater than 12 but less than three percent the designer must demonstrate calculated velocity at or less than five feet per second including a channel lining for design to accommodate the design philosophy; channel slopes over three percent must be approved by the city; 
(7)  Crown elevations must be matched at each junction structure or the upstream crown must be higher than the downstream crown. 
(b)  Stormwater easements specifications are provided in subsection 340-39(a)(7). 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-17. - Walls. 
See Subsection 340-39(a)(5) for limitations for installing retaining walls as a part of structural stormwater systems. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 350-18—350-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - PUBLIC UTILITIES INSTALLATION 

Section 350-24. - Installation of public utilities administrative requirements. 
Installation of public utilities shall meet the requirements of DeKalb County Code of Ordinances and corresponding administrative requirements. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-25. - Underground electric and communication utilities. 
(a)  Utilities, including telephone, electric power and cable television in both public and private rights-of-way, shall be placed underground for all new developments with total floor areas 20,000 s.f. or over, except when extreme conditions of underlying rock or other conditions prevent this requirement from being met or as provided in paragraph (c) below, and only as approved by the Development Director. 
(b)  A City fund, known as the "The City of Chamblee Utility Conversion Fund" is hereby created. The purpose of said fund is to accent deposits as described in paragraph (c) below, along with other funds or grants apportioned by the Mayor and City Council, and the use of such funds shall be restricted for the sole purpose of offsetting the cost of projects undertaken by the City that bury or relocate power lines from streets and sidewalks. 
(c)  In cases where the expense to bury overhead utilities for new developments described in paragraph (a), above, is deemed to be unreasonably costly due to the complexity of the work, the developer may request approval from the Development Director of a fee-in-lieu arrangement with the project developers, whereby the developer shall make a contribution toward the City's Utility Conversion Fund in lieu of requiring burial of the utilities. Such fee-in-lieu arrangement shall be based on a cost per linear foot of such underground relocation of utilities established by the Mayor and City Council, and it may be adjusted from time to time by City Ordinance. The developer shall have the choice of burying of utilities, or paying to the City the fee-in-lieu of such utility burying work, prior to any certificate of occupancy being issued for structures in any phase abutting the right-of-way within which the overhead utilities are situated. 
(d)  In all residential or commercial condominium developments: 
(1)  Individual systems for water, sewer, and HVAC shall be required for each unit. 
(2)  Individual metering shall be provided for all utilities. 
(3)  Easements for utility lines shall be provided in the common ownership area where lateral service connections shall take place. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Sections 350-26—350-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - STREET LIGHTING AND OTHER FURNITURE 

Section 350-50. - Authority and responsibility. 
Except as otherwise provided for in Section 350-51, the responsibility for providing street lighting and other furniture for public streets, sidewalks and multi-use trails in the City rests with the Mayor and City Council. No lighting of the streets, sidewalks or multi-use trails in City is permitted unless provided for by the Mayor and City Council. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-51. - Applicability. 
Street and pedestrian lighting and street furniture shall be provided by the developer in new developments which propose the construction of a new street to be dedicated to the City or which propose lot access to existing City streets. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-52. - Procedures. 
(a)  Installation of street and pedestrian lights. The installation and operation of lighting fixtures located within the rights-of-way of any public street, road, highway, sidewalk or alley in the unincorporated areas of the City or fixed to any pole, lamppost, standard or other supporting device which is located within such rights-of-way, will comply the following procedures: 
(1)  Plans and specifications for the proposed installation showing compliance with the standards in this Section shall be submitted to the Development Director for approval. No installations will be made without this approval. 
(2)  Roadway or street lighting luminaries or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as "security lights" or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public streets shall require the approval of the Development Director thereof before installation of such lights. 
(3)  Fixtures for illuminating areas adjoining the public streets, roads, and the like, such as parking areas and driveways, shall be mounted in such a manner as to ensure that the light pattern is kept off the public roadway. When street or roadway lighting luminaries are to be used for security lighting, they will be mounted on the side of the pole that is opposite from the public street and will be mounted to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution at the initial light source is perpendicular to the street. 
(4)  If lighting fixtures of a type other than those in the classification of street or roadway luminaries are to be used or if the proposed lighting is to be installed outside of public rights-of-way, the plans and specifications submitted will be sufficiently detailed to clearly show that such shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Street lights for new subdivisions. 
(1)  Prior to the approval of a Final Plat, the developer shall submit and prepare a street light design drawn on the approved Preliminary Plat based upon the requirements of this UDO. The design shall be forwarded to the appropriate power provider and the developer shall pay the power provider the appropriate cost for materials and installation. Proof of payment to the power provider shall be required. 
(2)  All fixtures and poles shall meet the specification requirements of the City pursuant to the specification in Section 350-54 and all maintenance shall be the responsibility of the power provider. The City, in addition to other requirements, may require a light to be located at street intersections within the development. 
(3)  Upon acceptance of the street light installation by the City, the power provider shall submit monthly bills to the Development Director for payment. The City shall assign a special assessment to each property abutting a street with street lights for payment of the monthly utility costs in accordance with the provisions of this Article 4 of the UDO. 
(c)  Street Light Request Process for Existing Public Streets. This policy follows the standard City process for citizen response to provide uniformity and ensure responsiveness and accountability. 
(1)  Requests for new street lights and/or changes in existing street lights on existing streets must be made in writing to the Public Works Director. Requests should include the primary concern and an individual contact person for follow up. Requests will be logged into the City's tracking system and included on the list of street light requests. 
(2)  When an organized group is active, i.e., homeowners association (HOA), civic association or other, the request shall be submitted by that entity. If no formal group exists, the request may be made by an individual or group of individuals. 
(3)  Requests for street light changes may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Additional/fewer lights; 
b.  Rearrangement of lights; 
c.  Refurbishing of lights. 
(4)  Upon receipt of the street light request, a field inspection may be conducted by City staff to determine the existing lighting conditions including number of street lights, locations, spacing, fixture types, poles, and any other pertinent information. An inspection may take place at night hours if deemed necessary. 
(5)  Findings are documented and the results are presented to the Development Director for direction. As directed by the Development Director, the Director shall notify the identified contact person of the findings and recommendations. 
(6)  If installation is recommended, the community shall circulate a petition to the impacted neighboring property owners. The impacted neighboring property owners are defined as any property owner that has all or a portion of their property within a 250-foot radius of a requested street light modification. The requestor must obtain approval of at least 65% of the property owners petitioned unless a single light is requested, at which point 100% of the property owners must be in favor of the additional street light. All properties in the impacted area must be contacted. If a property owner does not respond, it will be counted as a no vote. If a safety problem can be documented, the Director will recommend to the Development Director to waive the petition process. 
(7)  Once the petition is verified, a map shall be drawn of the area showing any existing street lighting. 
(8)  Contact shall be made by City staff with the power utility provider and a meeting shall take place, if necessary, to discuss various options. The power utility provider shall later supply their recommendations and estimated costs, including installation and monthly billings, to City staff. 
(9)  The map shall be updated to show proposed lighting and submitted to the Development Director with all supporting documentation for review. The street light request will be implemented at the direction of the Development Director. 
(d)  Appeal of decisions. Should the Development Director thereof disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any public right-of-way, he shall communicate the disapproval in writing to the party requesting the same. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. Any appeal of a light or lighting system decision would follow the procedures outlined in Section 280-15. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-53. - Standards of installation and operation. 
(a)  The American Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting, as sponsored by the Illuminating Engineering Society and approved by the American Standards Association on July 11, 1973, is hereby adopted as the standard, except as noted in Subsection (b) of this Section, for installation and operation of street and roadway lighting in the City of Chamblee. 
(b)  Lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal foot-candle illumination level by roadway classification shall be as set forth in the table below. 
Minimum Average Horizontal Foot-candle Illumination Level 

 
(c)  The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal foot-candle required illumination level, except that on local streets it may be not less than one-sixth of such average. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
Section 350-54. - Fixture specifications. 
The following specifications are required for all street and pedestrian lighting and all other street furniture, unless a similar fixture is approved by the Development Director, as required to be installed in accordance with the UDO and the City's Smart Park Design Manual: 
(1)  Trash Receptacle: 
a.  Manufacturer: Victor Stanley, Inc. 
b.  Type: Model S-424, 36 Gallon. 
c.  Color: Powder-coated black metal. 
(2)  Bench: 
a.  Manufacturer: DuMor, Inc. 
b.  Type: Bench Series 57 or 91. 
c.  Color: Powder-coated black metal with wood plastic seat with back, or approved equal. 
(3)  Pedestrian Light: 
a.  Manufacturer: Holophane, or approved alternative. 
b.  Type: Granville fixture with Grand post. Fixture shall be full cut-off. Poles to be round, non-decorative, tapered aluminum. 
c.  Light: LED; 3000 Kelvin; 76 Watts. 
d.  Color: Powder-coated black metal. 
(4)  Street Light: 
a.  Manufacturer: Holophane, or approved alternative. 
b.  Type: Memphis Series standard teardrop with Boston Harbour crossarm. Fixture shall be full cut-off. Poles to be round, non-decorative, tapered aluminum. 
c.  Light: LED; 3000 Kelvin; 76 Watts. 
d.  Color: Powder-coated black metal. 
(Ord. No. 743 , 12-19-17) 
MF DISTRICTS, INFILL DEV./REUSE DESIGN GUIDELINES 

  

 
1.0 - General Design Principles 
[] 
Context  The design principles illustrated here represent a framework that can be applied to multifamily and various other developments. These principles look holistically at the site and its adjacencies in an effort to: 
•  Create connected and walkablable developments. 
•  Ensure well-constructed development that is reflective of the community's character. 
•  Provide long-term and flexible development scenarios that enhance overall mobility and provide multi-modal transportation options. 
•  Enhance the existing character of the city. 
Connectivity + Block Structure  Connectivity and block size are two of the most effective strategies to create a walkable community. A well-connected, fine-grained street and block pattern will influence the form, intensity and character of development. As connectivity increases, travel decreases and routing options increase. In general, the more connected a system the greater the efficiency. Elements Include: 
•  Streets and public spaces should be designed for multiple users. 
•  Parking should be placed internal to development with vehicular access from secondary streets. 
•  Direct pedestrian connections from parking lots to building entrances should be well defined. 
•  Stub-outs for future connections are required. 
•  Joint access and cross access is encouraged. 
•  Dead-end streets and cul-de-sacs are discouraged. 
Site Layout + Building Placement  The arrangement and placement of buildings have an effect on the character, sense of place and walkability of a site. 
•  Primary streets should have building frontage-"built-to the street"-with parking located behind the building. 
•  Buildings should be oriented with windows and main entrances facing streets. 
•  Loading areas, dumpsters, and other building supportive facilities should be screened from view from main vehicular and pedestrian connections. 
Parking and Circulation  Existing commercial development in the city needs better vehicular and pedestrian connectivity. As a result, too many vehicle trips have to use major arterials. By providing new street connectivity and cross-access between parcels, less pressure will be placed on the most congested streets and intersections. 
•  Shared access and parking are encouraged, with stub-outs for future connections when adjacent to undeveloped parcels that could be redeveloped. 
•  Parking facing primary streets should be adequately landscaped with designated pedestrian connections from the street to building entrances. 
•  Surface parking should be kept to a minimum and should be well landscaped to mitigate "heat islands". 
•  The design and landscaping of parking lots is important in creating an attractive environment that encourages pedestrian activity and controls the micro-climate created by large paved areas. 
•  Providing non-vehicular access and circulation is as important as providing vehicular access and circulation. 

Figure DG-1 - Block Structure Adaptability
Footnotes: 

2.0 - Multifamily Design Guidelines 
Building Design and Placement  Building design and placement is an important contributor to the pedestrian realm. Building design includes everything from height and architectural scale to the orientation of building entries. 
•  Buildings should meet setback requirements. 
•  Buildings should incorporate design elements to enhance visual interest, such as balconies, porches, bays, etc. 
•  Building entrances should be well-marked and identifiable from the building form. 
•  On-street parking is strongly encouraged to provide parking for visitors. 
•  Parking should be accessed from secondary streets and clearly marked. 
•  Parking should be well-lit and screened from major pedestrian corridors. 
Open Space and Landscaping    
•  Encourage open space to be semi-public to contribute to larger open space network. 
•  Landscaping should not obstruct entrances and pedestrian lighting, or obscure views of public or semi-public spaces. 
•  Fencing should be permeable and not opaque. Chain-link is not acceptable. 
3.0 - Infill Development 

3.1 - Single-family Zero Lot Line 

Figure DG.3 - Single-family Zero Lot Line
3.2 - Single-family Attached and Townhouses 

Figure DG.4 - Single-family Attached and Townhomes
3.3 - Corner Commercial 
Properly designed corner commercial infill can be implemented into the existing character of the community. 

Figure DG.6 - Corner Commercial
4.0 - Adaptive Reuse 
Non-conforming Strip Commercial  Incremental re-investment of strip commercial and industrial properties is likely to occur along major corridors. The proposed block structure illustrates how surface parking can adapt and change over time into a mixed-use, walkable street framework. Existing strip commercial buildings generally include: 
•  Few designated pedestrian connections to building entrances 
•  Multiple entry points with no cross-parcel access or shared parking 
•  Large surface parking with limited tree coverage creates heat islands 

Figure DG.7 - Existing Strip Commercial
Adaptive Reuse of Strip Commercial Property  Adaptive reuse of strip commercial buildings should: 
•  Provide connections between parking lots. 
•  Locate all new parking at rear of building. 
•  Screen and locate dumpsters at rear of building. 
•  Create direct pedestrian connections between building entrance and parking. 
•  Incorporate massing changes to emphasize building entrance. 
•  Encourage new commercial development to front key streets, limit blank walls, and provide pedestrian-scale amenities. 
•  Parking lot landscaping: one tree per 10 parking spaces. 
•  Encourage stub-outs for future connections. 
•  Provide landscaped buffer for adjacent non-commercial uses. 

Figure DG.8 - Adaptive Re-use of Strip Commercial
[] 
June 11, 2015  (Revised May 18, 2016) 
On October 20, 1998, the City of Chamblee unanimously passed a Tree Preservation Ordinance, which was most recently revised in 2014 and combined with the City's zoning buffer and landscaping ordinances within one ordinance (Chapter 320 of the Unified Development Ordinance). This ordinance provides standards for the preservation and/or replacement of the City of Chamblee's trees and requirements for zoning buffers and landscape areas. What follows are the administrative guidelines to be considered during the permitting process in coordination with Chapter 320 requirements. These guidelines have been approved by the City Landscape Coordinator and by the Chamblee City Council. Any questions about these guidelines or about the permitting process should be directed to the Development Director at 470-395-2333. 
  
Table of Contents 

 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Editor's note— Addendum 2.0 has been amended by the following: Ord. No. 716, pt. II(Exh. A), 8-16-16. 

2.1. - TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION FEE SCHEDULE 
Reserved. 
For plant materials not indicated on all lists below, developer to provide City Development Department information about tree height, caliper, form, and tolerance for environmental conditions on required landscape plans. 
2.2. - PLANT SPECIES SELECTION LIST FOR PERMANENT BUFFERS 
EVERGREEN SCREENING TREES - SPACED AT EIGHT (8) FEET ON CENTER 

 
OTHER EVERGREEN OVERSTORY TREES 

 
DECIDUOUS OVERSTORY TREES 

 
DECIDUOUS UNDERSTORY TREES 

 
EVERGREEN SHRUBS FOR FIVE (5) FOOT SPACING 

 
DECIDUOUS SHRUBS FOR FIVE (5) FOOT SPACING 

 
*  Other trees with similar qualities and impact may be approved by the City Landscape Consultant. 
**  Non-native species. Native material is recommended when buffer material is incorporated in a naturalized area. 
2.3. - TREE SPECIES SELECTION LIST 
CULTIVARS FOR PARKING LOTS, LANDSCAPE STRIPS AND STREETSCAPES 
Overstory Trees 

 
Understory Trees 

 
ADDITONAL TREE SPECIES NOT NOTED IN CULTIVAR OR BUFFER LISTS 

 
*  Use of clonal cultivars is recommended for parking lot trees and required for streetscape trees, to ensure uniformity in size and form of species. 
**  Non-native species.  Notes: 
1.  Acer rubrum, Acer saccharum, Platanus sp. not recommended for parking lots due to shallow roots. Provide clonal varieties in streetscape situations. 
2.  Other trees with similar qualities and impact may be approved by the City Landscape Consultant. 
2.4. - TREES APPROPRIATE FOR PLANTING IN GDOT RIGHT-OF-WAY 
Peachtree Blvd. [SR 141], Buford Hwy. [SR 13], Clairmont Rd. [SR 155] 

 
*  Specific trees are still subject to approval by GDOT and exact site requirements and must fall under GDOT Policy #6755-9: Policy for Landscaping and Enhancements on GDOT Right of Way for specifications of trees within GDOT rights of way. 
**  Non-native 
2.5. - TREES APPROPRIATE FOR PLANTING IN GDOT RIGHT-OF-WAY WITHIN 500-FOOT BILLBOARD ZONES 

 
NOTE: Only small cultivars and hybrids of above species per GDOT and billboard requirements will be permitted In areas within billboard view zone areas. 
*  Other trees may be permitted on a case by case basis upon approval by Chamblee Development Department and GDOT. 
**  Non-native 
2.6. - ACCEPTABLE MULCHING MATERIALS 
The following mulch materials are acceptable: 
•  Pine straw 
•  Bark 
•  Aged Hardwood/Wood chips 
•  Turf grass 
Cypress mulch, lava rock and other stone materials are prohibited as mulch, Boulders, River rock, and other stonework accents are acceptable as a part of landscaping. 
2.7. - INVASIVE SPECIES LIST 
The City of Chamblee references invasive species lists as maintained by the Georgia Exotic Pest Plant Council and specifically prohibits the use of the following plant material outright for buffer, landscaping, and tree replacement due to their invasive tendency or other unfavorable characteristics. 
TREES 

 
SHRUBS 

 
GRASSES AND VINES 

 
2.8. - BIORETENTION AREA SPECIES SELECTION LIST 
NATIVE TREES FOR INUNDATION AREAS OF BIORETENTION AREAS/CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS 

 
NATIVE TREES FOR MINIMAL INUNDATION AREAS OF BIORETENTION AREAS/CONSTRUCTED WETLAND EDGE 

 
NATIVE SHRUBS FOR BIORETENTION AREAS/CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS 

 
NATIVE ORNAMENTAL GRASSES FOR BIORETENTION AREAS 

 
NATIVE SEDGES AND FERNS FOR BIORETENTION AREAS 

 
NATIVE HERBACEOUS/PERENNIAL FOR BIORETENTION AREAS 

 
2.9. - STANDARD DETAILS 







[] 
June 11, 2015 
Preface 
In December 2008, the City of Chamblee adopted Streetscape Guidelines in order to assist with the administration and enforcement of the City of Chamblee's Code of Ordinances as they related to streetscape improvements within the public rights-of-way. With the preparation of the draft Unified Development Ordinance in 2014 these Guidelines were updated to match the terminology and standards of the draft code and new Comprehensive Plan. In 2017, several of these recommendations were incorporated into the UDO. What follows are the administrative guidelines to be considered during the permitting process in coordination with Chapter 350 requirements. 
  
Table of Contents 

 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Editor's note— Addendum 3.0 has been amended by the following: Ord. No. 710, pts. I—V(Exhs. B—F), 7-19-16; Ord. No. 743, 12-19-17. 

3.1. - Street Designations 
In accordance with the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO), the dimensions of all landscape zones, sidewalks, minimum building façade heights and front yards are governed by the street designation that the lot fronts on, in order to ensure consistency and application of the streetscape requirements. The street designations of all public streets are defined in Chapter 350 of the UDO, and are illustrated in the City of Chamblee Comprehensive Plan on the "Streetscape and Gateways Map." A reduced copy of this map is on the following page, and a poster sized copy of the map is available on the city website at www.chambleega.gov. 
In addition to public streets, the city also allows private streets, which may follow the same designations as the public streets or one of two other typologies: alleys and narrow streets. These private streets are not shown on the Streetscape and Gateways Map, and must be approved under the provisions of the UDO. 

3.2. - General Notes 
(a)  Current Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards shall apply to the design and installation of all pedestrian facilities (e.g., sidewalks, ramps, crosswalks). 
(b)  Street trees pre-approved for installation in the landscape zone, are listed in Addendum 2.0 of the UDO. 
(c)  Retaining walls, where pre-approved for installation in the right-of-way, must be installed in accordance with the following specifications: 
a.  All walls over 4 feet in height require engineering certification. 
b.  Walls within limits of streetscape requirement are encouraged to be granite veneer masonry walls or granite rubble masonry walls as indicated by the following graphics: 

(d)  The following style of segmental block wall is acceptable without City review: BelAir by Belgard. http://www.belgard.com/products/retaining_walls/belair_wall 

(e)  Other styles of segmental block or other masonry may be approved on a case by case basis. 
APPENDIX B - RESERVED[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 682 , pt. IV, adopted June 16, 2015, repealed app. B, §§ 1.1—4.3 entitled "Subdivision Regulations", which derived from: Ord. No. 486, adopted July 18, 2000; Ord. No. 533, adopted May 18, 2004; Ord. No. 537, adopted Nov. 16, 2004; Ord. No. 545, adopted Aug. 15, 2006; and Ord. No. 620, § 1, adopted Nov. 16, 2010. For similar provisions see appendix A, ch. 300 of this Code. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1982 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code, as updated through January 10, 1992, which are included herein. Sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code, as updated through January 10, 1992, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1982 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since January 10, 1992, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws and any amendments thereto as set out in Subpart B of Part I. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 