THE CODE OF THE CITY OF LEESBURG, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Jim Quinn 
Mayor 
____________ 
Richard Bush 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Billy H. Breeden 
Rufus Sherman 
Debra M. Long 
Judy Powell 
Bob Wilson 
City Council 
____________ 
Bob Alexander 
City Manager 
____________ 
Bert Gregory 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Leesburg, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2003 Code, as updated through May 6, 2014, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2003 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Sweeney, Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Bob Alexander, City Manager, and Bert Gregory, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Leesburg, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Leesburg, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Leesburg, Georgia. 2018. 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
AN ACT 
To create a new charter for the City of Leesburg, Georgia, and to repeal and replace the charter provided by an Act establishing a new charter for the Town of Leesburg, approved December 21, 1898 (1898 Ga. Laws, p. 204), as amended; to provide for all matters relative thereto; to provide an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2851, as adopted by the Georgia General Assembly. Amendments to this act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The Charter was most recently amended by ordinance adopted on November 7, 2013, adding new Charter section 2.20 and Sections 3.20 through 3.25. The entire Charter, including these amendments, was reprinted in 2014 Ga. Laws, page 4454. These sections have been history noted to the adopting ordinance. The absence of a history note after any section indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - CITY OF LEESBURG 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
This Act shall constitute the whole charter of the City of Leesburg repealing and replacing the charter provided by an Act of the General Assembly approved December 21, 1898 (1898 Ga. Laws, p. 204), as amended. The City of Leesburg, Georgia, in the county of Lee and the inhabitants thereof, are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of [the] City of Leesburg, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all the courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal and change it at pleasure. 
Sec. 1.11. - Incorporation. 
The City of Leesburg, Georgia, in the County of Lee, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of the City of Leesburg, Georgia. Under that name, said City shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the corporation; shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will; and may exercise in conformity with this Charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
Sec. 1.12. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the City of Leesburg shall be as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being all of Land Lots 44, 45, 46, 47, 50, 51, 52, 53, 76, 77, 78, 79, 81, 82, 83, and a portion of Land Lot 84 in the Second Land District, Lee County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the southwest corner of Land Lot 76 and from said Point of Beginning proceed in an easterly direction along the southern boundary line of said Land Lot 76 to the southeastern corner of said Land Lot 76, which is also the northwest corner of Land Lot 84; thence proceed south along the western boundary line of Land Lot 84 to the point where said western boundary line intersects the southern right-of-way line of Georgia Highway Route 32; thence proceed in an easterly direction along the southern right-of-way line of said Georgia Highway Route 32 to the point where said right-of-way line intersects the western right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 19; thence proceed south along the western right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 19 to the point where such right-of-way line intersects the southern boundary line of Land Lot 84; thence proceed in an easterly direction along said southern boundary line and along the southern boundary lines of Land Lots 83, 82, and 81 to the southeastern corner of Land Lot 81; thence proceed north along the eastern boundary of Land Lot 81 to the northeast corner of said Land Lot 81; thence proceed west along said northern boundary line of Land Lot 81 to the southeast corner of Land Lot 79; thence proceed north along the eastern boundary line of Land Lot 79 until said line intersects with the northern right-of-way line of Georgia Highway Route 32; thence proceed south 89 degrees 20 minutes 00 seconds west a distance of 249.10 feet to a point; thence proceed north 02 degrees 11 minutes 00 seconds east a distance of 600.01 feet to a point; thence proceed south 89 degrees 20 minutes 00 seconds west a distance of 75.00 feet to a point; thence proceed north 02 degrees 11 minutes 00 seconds east a distance of 200.00 feet to a point; thence proceed north 89 degrees 20 minutes 00 seconds east a distance of 75.00 feet to a point; thence proceed north 02 degrees 11 minutes 00 seconds east a distance of 221.31 feet to a point; thence proceed south 87 degrees 34 minutes 23 seconds west a distance of 168.01 feet to a point; thence proceed north 01 degrees 32 minutes 03 seconds west a distance of 215.00 feet to a point; thence proceed north 89 degrees 37 minutes 41 seconds east a distance of 122.35 feet to a point; thence proceed north 01 degrees 43 minutes 19 seconds west a distance of 219.86 feet to a point; thence proceed north 89 degrees 37 minutes 41 seconds east a distance of 235.94 feet to a point on the eastern boundary line of Land Lot 50; thence proceed north along the eastern boundary lines of Land Lots 50 and 47 to the northeastern corner of Land Lot 47; thence proceed west along the northern boundary lines of Land Lot 47, land Lot 46 and Land Lot 45 to the point where the northern boundary line of Land Lot 45 intersects the western right-of-way line of the Old Smithville Road also known as the Jones Place Road; thence proceed south along said western right-of-way line of the Old Smithville Road a distance of 2,132.94 feet to a point; thence proceed north 89 degrees 55 minutes west a distance of 1,496.61 feet to a point on the eastern right-of-way line of the Central of Georgia Railroad; thence proceed north 22 degrees 52 minutes west along the eastern right-of-way line of the Central of Georgia Railroad until said right-of-way line intersects the northern boundary line of Land Lot 45; thence proceed west along the northern boundary lines of Land Lot 45 and Land Lot 44 to the northwest corner of Land Lot 44; thence proceed south along the western boundary lines of Land Lots 44, 53, and 76 to the Point of Beginning. 
(b)  The boundaries of the city shall be shown on a map or a written description or a combination of the two maintained in the office of the city clerk, which map shall be kept at all times current. Copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, p. 4109, § 1) 
Sec. 1.13. - Specific powers. 
The corporate powers of the government of the City of Leesburg, to be exercised by the governing authority, may include the following: 
(1)  To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(2)  To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions, and to license and regulate such privileges, occupations, trades and professions, and to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; 
(3)  To make appropriations for the support of the government of the City, to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia, and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the City and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(5)  To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the City; 
(6)  To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the City and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(7)  To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the City for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under Section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, or under other applicable Public Acts as are or may be enacted; 
(8)  To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; 
(9)  To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services, not to exceed periods of 5 years; to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with such regulations by the Public Service Commission; 
(10)  To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the City; 
(11)  To grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads for the use of public utilities; 
(12)  To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, airports, hospitals, and charitable, cultural education, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the City; and to regulate the use thereof; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, or other applicable Public Acts, as are or may be enacted; 
(13)  To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; 
(14)  To regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes and to regulate all housing, building, and building trades; to license all building trades, and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to authorize the establishment of standards for, or the regulation of the electrical wiring and equipment by or for a utility rendering communication services and required by it to be utilized in the rendition of its duly authorized service to the public; 
(15)  To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(16)  To regulate or prohibit junk dealers; pawnshops; the use and sale of firearms; and to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; 
(17)  To regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind whatever, by taxation or otherwise; 
(18)  To license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling or palmistry; 
(19)  To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the City and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(20)  To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(21)  To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the City; 
(22)  To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict [the] same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(23)  To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(24)  To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(25)  To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee, for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the City from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefitting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees, and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(26)  To levy a fee, charge [a] sewer tax as necessary to ensure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system a sewer service charge[,] fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; 
(27)  To charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees, and to charge the same from time to time; such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system; 
(28)  To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the City and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(29)  To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(30)  To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the City and the administration and use of same by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(31)  To establish minimum standards for and to regulate building construction and repair, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing, and housing, for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the City and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(32)  To provide that persons given jail sentences in the recorder's court shall work out such sentence in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and squares in the City; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(33)  To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of loitering, disorderly conduct, public drunkenness and disturbing the peace in the corporate limits of the City and to prohibit the playing of lotteries therein, and to prohibit or regulate by ordinance such other conduct and activities within said City which, while not constituting an offense against the laws of this State, is deemed by the governing authority to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the City or to the welfare of the citizens thereof; 
(34)  To regulate and license, or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same, if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; to provide punishment for violation of ordinance enacted hereunder; 
(35)  To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the City; 
(36)  To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the City; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; 
(37)  To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the City; 
(38)  To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(39)  To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations providing for services to be furnished and payments to be made therefor; 
(40)  To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the City, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; 
(41)  To make, ordain and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience and interest of the City and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order and good government of the City; 
(42)  To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(43)  To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen; 
(44)  To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the City, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the City; 
(45)  To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the City and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(46)  There shall be and there is hereby established in and for the City of Leesburg to be conducted in such manner and at such time, except Sunday as the City Council may prescribe, a Municipal Court in which a Municipal Court Judge shall be the presiding officer, in case of the absence or disability of the presiding officer for any cause, a Municipal Court Judge or any Judge in any court of record which regularly hears traffic offenses or ordinance violations may preside. The procedure for appointment, compensation, qualifications and tenure of the Municipal Judge, shall be set forth by the City Council in ordinances addressing the same. The procedure in said court, with reference to the conduct and trial of cases therein, not in conflict with this section of the Charter or the general law shall be prescribed by the City Council or by rule or order of the presiding officer thereof not in conflict with the Charter or City on the subject, and the City Council shall have the power to provide by ordinance for the compulsory attendance of all persons violating any municipal ordinance before said Municipal Court, by summons or copy of charges, to answer the offense charged, and when employed, such summons or copy of the charges shall be issued as provided for subpoenas and shall contain a summary or simple statement of the offense charged, and disobedience of said summons or copy of charges shall be punished as provided for disobedience of subpoenas. 
(1)  Jurisdiction; authority to punish; extent of penalty, etc. Said Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to try all offenders against the laws and ordinances of the City of Leesburg committed within the corporate limits or police jurisdiction, and to punish persons convicted in said court of violating such laws and ordinances in a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the Lee County Jail or other place provided, or by compulsory labor on the streets or other public works or community service not to exceed six (6) months and either one or more of such punishments maybe imposed, or the several punishments maybe cumulative, or the fines may be imposed with alternative of such imprisonment or compulsory labor or coerced or enforced by said punishment or labor; provided, that the punishments, within the limits prescribed, shall only be imposed by said court in the amount and manner prescribed by the penal ordinances of said city, but in the event no penalty be provided for the doing of which is made unlawful by ordinances, the court shall have power to proceed to impose the punishments as herein enumerated. The jurisdiction of said Municipal court shall further extend to the investigation of any charge involving or amounting to a violation of the penal laws of the State of Georgia, when such charge is entered upon the docket of said court and when the offense is alleged to have been committed within the corporate or police limits of the city, and provided such charges are made in writing and verified to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person making the same. 
(2)  Powers of presiding officer generally; contempt, etc. The presiding officer of said court shall have the same power as judges of the superior court of this state to punish for contempt of said city recorder's court by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisonment in the Lee County Jail, or other place provided, or in Lee County jail not to exceed 10 days, and either or both of said punishments may be imposed in the discretion of the court, or the fine may be imposed with the alternative of such imprisonment, or coerced by such imprisonment. Said presiding officer of said court shall be to all intents and purposes a Magistrate insofar as to enable him or her to issue warrants for offenses committed within the City of Leesburg or its police jurisdiction against the penal laws of this state, this either before a hearing or trial of the charge in said Municipal court; provided, the affidavit required by law to obtain warrants is first made before said presiding Officer, which warrant may be executed by any member of the police force of the city. Said presiding officer of said court as such ex officio Magistrate, shall have the power and authority to commit to the jail of Lee County offenders against the law of the State of Georgia, and to admit them to bail, in bailable cause, for their appearance at the next term of the court of competent jurisdiction to be held in and for the County of Lee, after legal investigation, and shall, if the evidence in the trial of an offense against the ordinances of the city discloses the violation of any state law, have the power to bind the defendant over as above set forth. 
(3)  Powers of presiding officer as to penalties. The presiding officer of said court shall have the right and power to vacate or reduce penalties imposed by him at any time he deems such action to be in the interest of justice. He shall also have the power to suspend sentences and to permit them to be served on probation; and may affix to such suspension or probation such terms and conditions of suspension or probation as he shall consider reasonable and proper, including, but not limited to, those conditions of probation which Superior Court judges are authorized by law to impose. He may revoke any suspended or probated sentence for breach of condition after reasonable notice and hearing and require the remainder of the sentence to be served or carried out. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, however, no fines which have been paid and collected shall be refunded in whole or in part except by the City Council upon the written recommendation of the presiding officer who imposed the fine. 
(4)  Dockets; notice of accusation, etc. There shall be kept in such Court one or more dockets, upon which shall appear the names of each person arrested by the officers and members of the police force in the city for any offense against the municipal ordinances or penal law, and such person brought before said court by summons, warrant or other right issued therefrom, to answer for the violation of any ordinance of the city or any state penal law, together with the names of the witnesses against them, and a summary or simple statement of the offenses with which they are charged, which statement shall be deemed sufficient notice to or accusation of the accused, provided, the City Council may prescribe such additional notice or accusation as they may deem proper. Upon the trial of such persons the sentence imposed or the disposition of the same shall be entered in writing opposite the name and charge, by the presiding officer of said court, which respective entries signed by the presiding officer shall constitute the judgment of the recorder's court in such respective case. 
(5)  Authority to compel attendance by subpoena, disobeying subpoena, etc. Said court shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses in all proceedings before the court by subpoena (which subpoena) may be issued by the chief of police or any member of the police force or city clerk, and shall bear test in the name of the presiding officer and shall contain a brief statement of the case, the time set for the trial or hearing and the time at which the person subpoenaed shall appear. The presiding officer of said court shall have the power to punish any person disobeying said subpoena of court, within the limits of punishment in this Act prescribed. Such subpoena shall be served by any officer or member of the police force of the city. Any person who may be charged with contempt of court as hereinafter provided, may be arrested, by an attachment or warrant written or signed by the presiding officer in said court, which said attachment or warrant may be executed by any member of the police force. 
(6)  Ministerial officers. The ministerial officers of said court shall be the chief and other members of the police force, any of whom may execute the mandates of the court and to whom, in the alternative, all mesne and final processes shall be directed. 
(7)  Right of certiorari. The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the recorder's court shall exist in all cases and shall be exercised under the provision of the laws of the State of Georgia in such cases made and provided. 
(8)  Forfeiture of appearance bond. In any case where any person has deposited a sum of money as a bond for the appearance in said recorder's court of a person charged with an offense which said court has jurisdiction to try, such sum of money shall be forfeited by the owner thereof and to be paid over by said recorder's court to the city treasurer as the property of the City of Leesburg, in the event the party does not appear at the time appointed, for whose appearance such sum of money was deposited as a bond. 
(9)  Failure to appear; scire facias. When any bond is given by any person charged with an offense against the ordinances or arrested for such offense, for his or her appearance at any session of the recorder's court, and such person so giving bond shall fail to appear at the time appointed in said bond for his or her appearances, then the presiding officer in said court shall issue a scire facias against the principal as and his or her security calling on them to show cause, in said court at the time specified in said scire facias, why said bond should not be forfeited, which said scire facias shall be served by any member of the police force of the City of Leesburg at least two days prior to the return day thereon upon the principal and sureties personally or in the absence of either from the county or state, then by one newspaper publication of said scire facias two days before the return thereof. If at the return time of said scire facias in said court no sufficient cause be shown to the contrary, judgment shall be entered upon said bond against said principal and his or her sureties. On the entering of said judgment the city clerk shall issue execution against the principal and his surety, in conformity with such judgment, and in the form and manner prescribed for execution issued by the city for taxes, and which execution shall be placed in the hands of the chief of police who shall proceed to collect the same as tax executions are collected by the city. 
(10)  Sentences involving labor. Persons sentenced to labor by said recorder's court shall be turned over to the superintendent of streets or other officer in charge of the streets and public works, to be put to work on said streets or public works in or around said City. 
(11)  Costs. The City Council of the City of Leesburg shall have the power to provide by ordinance for the charge and collection of all items of cost in cases brought into said recorder's court, such as are incident and lawfully chargeable to the prosecution of said case. 
(12)  Failure to pay fine or cost; collection. Upon the failure or refusal of any person to pay any fine or cost imposed by said recorder's court the same may, in addition to other methods, be enforced and collected by an execution issued and directed as is provided for the issuance and collection of tax executions by the city, and sales thereunder shall be conducted in the same manner. 
(13)  Issuance of warrant for violation of ordinances. Upon complaint being filed with the [municipal judge] recorder or Mayor, or in their absence or disability to act, any member of the City Council by affidavit or such other manner as he may require that any person has violated any municipal ordinance or law, said Mayor or [municipal judge] recorder shall have the power to issue a warrant for the arrest of said offender, which warrant shall be directed to the chief of police, his deputy or any member of the police force of the City and shall be signed by said Mayor or [municipal judge] recorder. The City Council of Leesburg may also appoint one or more persons as warrant commissioners who shall be authorized to issue warrants for violations of city ordinances upon affidavit of a complainant that such offense has been committed. Said Warrant Commissioner[s] shall not be sworn or uniformed police officers, and shall have no duties in regard to the prosecution, conviction or punishment of offenders against City ordinances. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, p. 4639, § 1; 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 829), p. 4385, § 1) 
Sec. 1.14. - General powers. 
In addition to all other powers herein granted, the City shall be vested with any and all powers which municipal corporations are or may hereafter be authorized or required to exercise under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated herein; and any and all powers which the City was heretofore authorized to exercise upon the effective date of this Charter. 
Sec. 1.15. - Construction. 
The powers of the City shall be construed liberally and in favor of the City. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the City as stated in this Charter. It is the intention hereof to grant the City full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the City and all of its affairs. 
Sec. 1.16. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the City, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance of the governing authority and as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.17. - Ordinances. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter, are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the governing authority. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 2.10. - Creation; composition; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of the City of Leesburg, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six councilmen. The mayor and councilmen shall be elected in the manner provided by Article IV of this charter. 
(1981 Ga. Laws, p. 3583, § 1) 
Sec. 2.11. - Terms and qualification of office. 
The members of the Council shall serve for terms of 4 years, except as provided in Article IV of this Charter, and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilman unless he shall have been a resident of the City for a period of 1 year immediately prior to the date of the election of mayor or members of the Council and shall continue to reside therein during his period of service, and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Leesburg, and unless he shall meet the qualification standards required for members of the Georgia House of Representatives, as are now or may in the future be prescribed by the Georgia Constitution. 
(1981 Ga. Laws, p. 3583, § 2) 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Forfeiture of office. The mayor or any councilman shall forfeit his office if he: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications of the office as prescribed by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(2)  Willfully and knowingly violates any express prohibition of this Charter; or 
(3)  Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(c)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilman shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in Article IV [of this Charter], 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The council shall establish the salary of the councilmembers and the mayor. The salary of the councilmembers shall be not less than $300.00, nor more than $1,800.00 per year, paid in such manner as the council shall determine. The salary of the mayor shall be two times the salary set for the councilmembers and the salary of the mayor pro tempore shall be one and one-half times the salary set for the councilmembers, and salaries shall be paid in the same manner as for the councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, p. 4136, § 1) 
Sec. 2.14. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Holding other office. Except as authorized by law, no member of the Council shall hold any other elective City office or City employment during the term for which he was elected. 
(b)  Voting when personally interested. Neither the mayor nor any other member of the Council shall vote upon any question in which he is personally interested. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The Council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the City and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the Council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.17. - General power and authority of the council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the Council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Leesburg as provided by Article I [of this Charter]. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the Council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, the Constitution, and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Leesburg and may enforce such ordinance by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(c)  The council may by ordinance create, change, alter, abolish, or consolidate offices, agencies, and departments, of the City and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies, and departments expressly provided for by this Charter. 
Sec. 2.20. - Chief executive officer. 
The City Manager shall be the chief executive of the City of Leesburg. He or she shall possess, have, and exercise all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the City under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this Charter. 
(2014 Ga. Laws, p. 4454, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-2013, § 2.20) 
Sec. 2.21. - Term; qualification; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected for a term of 4 years, except as provided in Article IV of this Charter, and until his successor is elected and qualified. He shall be a qualified elector of the City of Leesburg, shall meet the qualifications required of members of the State House of Representatives by the Georgia Constitution, and shall have been a resident of the City of Leesburg for a period of 1 year immediately preceding his election. He shall continue to reside in the City of Leesburg during the period of his service. The compensation of the mayor shall be $600.00 per year. 
(1981 Ga. Laws, p. 3583, § 3) 
Sec. 2.22. - Powers and duties. 
The mayor shall: 
(a)  See that all laws and ordinances of the City are faithfully executed; 
(b)  Recommend to the Council such measures relative to the affairs of the City, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he may deem expedient; 
(c)  Call special meetings of the Council; 
(d)  Perform other duties as may be required by law, this Charter or ordinance. 
Sec. 2.23. - Mayor pro tem. 
During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tem, or in his or her absence or disability for any reason, any one of the council members chosen by the Council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. The compensation of the mayor pro tem shall be $380.00 per year. 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 
DIVISION 1. - ORGANIZATION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  The Council, by ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the City, as they shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the City. The Council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices, and agencies or of any departments, offices and agencies hereinafter created or established; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the function or duties of offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the City. 
(b)  The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the City shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the Council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be provided by this Charter or by ordinance, and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the mayor and Council. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the City shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. Vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed by this Charter for an original appointment. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the City shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(e)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance of the City Council. 
Sec. 3.20. - City Manager. 
The Council may appoint a City Manager. The Council may specifically delegate the City manager any of the administrative or budgetary duties of the mayor. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2013, § 3.20) 
Sec. 3.21. - Appointment; qualifications; and compensation. 
The City Council shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite term and fix the manager's compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. The manager shall have the minimum qualifications as set forth by the City Council. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2013, § 3.21) 
Sec. 3.22. - Removal of the City Manager. 
The City Manager is employed at will and may be summarily removed from office at any time by the City Council. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2013, § 3.22) 
Sec. 3.23. - Acting City Manager. 
By letter filed with the City Clerk, the City Manager shall designate, subject to approval of the City Council, a qualified department head within the City of Leesburg to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the City Manager during the City Manager's temporary absence or physical or mental disability. During such absence or disability, the City Council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another employee or elected official of the City to serve until the City Manager shall return or the City Manager's disability shall cease. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2013, § 3.23) 
Sec. 3.24. - Powers and duties of the City Manager. 
The City Manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The City Manager shall be responsible to the City Council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the City Manager's charge by or under this charter. As the chief executive and administrative officer, the City Manager shall: 
(a)  Appoint and, when the City Manager deems it necessary for the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the manager appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or charter. The City Manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the City Manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency. 
(b)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or law; 
(c)  Attend all City Council meetings except for executive sessions held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline or removal of the City Manager and have the right to take part in discussion but not vote; 
(d)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the City Council, subject to enforcement by the City Manager or by officers subject to the City Manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(e)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the City Council; 
(f)  Submit to the City Council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(g)  Make such other reports as the City Council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to the City Manager's direction and supervision; 
(h)  Keep the City Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the City, and make such recommendations to the City Council concerning the affairs of the City as the City Manager deems desirable; and 
(i)  Perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the City Council. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2013, § 3.24) 
Sec. 3.25. - Council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.15, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(2014 Ga. Laws, p. 4454, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-2013, § 3.25) 
Sec. 3.30. - City Attorney. 
The Council shall appoint a City attorney and shall provide for the payment of such attorney for services rendered to the City. The City attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the City in all litigation in which the City is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the recorder's court; shall attend the meetings of the Council as directed; shall advise the Council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the City concerning legal aspects of the City's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as maybe required of him by virtue of his position as City attorney. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS 

Sec. 3.40. - City Clerk. 
The Council may appoint a City Clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of the City Council and to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the City, and to perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the Council may direct. 
Sec. 3.41. - Tax Collector. 
The Council may appoint a tax collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and other monies belonging to the City subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the City, and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale, or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
Sec. 3.42. - City accountant. 
The Council may appoint a City accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. 
Sec. 3.43. - Consolidation of functions. 
The Council may consolidate any two or more of the positions of City Clerk, City tax collector, and City accountant, or any other positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. The City Manager may also, with the approval of the City Council, perform all or any part of the functions of any of the positions or offices in lieu of appointing other persons to perform the same. 
DIVISION 3. - PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 3.50. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The City Manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the Council for approval. Said plans may apply to all employees of the City of Leesburg, and of any of its agencies and offices. When a pay plan has been adopted the Council shall not increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except by amendment of said pay plan. 
Sec. 3.51. - Personnel policies. 
The City Manager shall present to the City Council for its adoption, rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; and 
(4)  Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the City of Leesburg. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - REPRESENTATION—GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 4.10. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
Repealed by 1981 Ga. Laws, p. 3583, § 4. 
DIVISION 2. - CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS 

Sec. 4.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
On the Tuesday immediately following the first Monday in November 1981, an election shall be held for a mayor and six councilmen who shall take office on the first Tuesday in February 1982. Three councilmen, whose offices are hereby designated as Post 1, Post 2 and Post 3, respectively, shall serve for a term ending December 31, 1985, and three councilmen, whose offices are hereby designated Post 4, Post 5 and Post 6, respectively, shall serve for a term ending December 31, 1983. On the Tuesday immediately following the first Monday in November 1983, and on the Tuesday immediately following the first Monday in November every four years thereafter, an election shall be held for Post 4, Post 5 and Post 6, with said councilmen to take office on the first day in January following their election. On the Tuesday immediately following the first Monday in November 1985, and on the Tuesday immediately following the first Monday in November every four years thereafter, an election shall be held for a mayor and Post 1, Post 2 and Post 3 of the council who shall take office on the first day in January following their election. 
(1981 Ga. Laws, p. 3583, § 4) 
Sec. 4.20. - Applicability of general laws. 
The procedures and requirements for election of all elected officials of the City of Leesburg as to primary, special or general elections shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code approved April 4, 1968, (1968 Ga. Laws, p. 885) as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 4.21. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the Council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 6 months of the expiration of the term of office of the mayor or any councilman, said vacancy in office shall be filled by appointment by the remaining members of the Council. Both special elections and qualifications of candidates therefor shall conform to the applicable provisions of this Charter and the Georgia Municipal Election Code and Title 34A of the Code of Georgia of 1933 as now or hereafter amended. 
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 5.10. - Specific repealer. 
An Act entitled: "An Act to establish a new charter for the Town of Leesburg, in the County of Lee, State of Georgia, to grant certain privileges to said town; to repeal all Acts in conflict; to define the limits of the same; to provide for the election of officers; to prescribe their duties, rights and powers; and for other purposes.", approved December 21, 1898 (1898 Ga. Laws, p. 204), as amended, is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 5.11. - Laws in conflict with Act repealed. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3(a). 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Leesburg, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Leesburg City Code." 
(Code 1980, § 1-101; Code 2003, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Advice and consent. The term "advice and consent" of the city council means an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire council. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Leesburg in the County of Lee and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
City council, the council. The terms "city council" and "the council" mean the city council of the City of Leesburg, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Leesburg, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County, the county. The terms "county" and "the county" mean the County of Lee, State of Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Governing body. The term "governing body" means the city council of the City of Leesburg, Georgia. 
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the mayor and council. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Leesburg" were added to such name or title. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office, which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined by the city council. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the city seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" means the sheriff of Lee County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State, the state. The terms "state" and "the state" mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and their approaches within the city. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days. 
Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1980, §§ 1-102, 1-103; Code 2003, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; meaning of defined words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1980, § 1-104; Code 2003, § 1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of Code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared or adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since they would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 2003, § 1-4) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained in the ordinance, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance that repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(c)  An ordinance which is in conflict in its entirety with a subsequent ordinance shall be deemed to be repealed in its entirety, even if no specific repealer is stated. If an ordinance is only partially in conflict with a subsequent ordinance, only the portion of the previous ordinance in conflict with the subsequent ordinance shall be deemed to have been repealed, even if a specific repealer is not stated. 
(Code 1980, § 1-105; Code 2003, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Conjunctions. 
In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate cases the terms "or" and "and" are interchangeable: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
Sec. 1-7. - Overlapping provisions. 
Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
Sec. 1-8. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any subdivision ordinance including any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(16)  Any land development regulation ordinance. 
(b)  No ordinance in subsection (a) of this section shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All ordinances in subsection (a) of this section are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 2003, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 2003, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of the City of Leesburg, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, article or chapter to be numbered ____________ , which section, article or chapter reads as follows: …." The new section, article or chapter may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1980, § 1-106; Code 2003, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 2003, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-12. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1980, § 1-107; Code 2003, § 1-10) 
State Law reference— Offenses involving public records, documents and other items, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" or "violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" or "violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Unless another penalty is otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the county jail or other place provided, and work and labor on the streets or other public works, or community service, not exceeding 180 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Violations of this Code may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(e)  The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the city's Charter or Code. 
(f)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(Code 1980, § 1-108; Code 2003, § 1-11) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violation, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. title 36; open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Exercise of governmental authority. 
The corporate governmental powers of the city shall be exercised by the mayor and council in the manner provided by the Charter and by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 2-101; Code 2003, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Personnel provisions. 
Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance or resolution adopting, establishing or amending any job classification and compensation plan for the employees of the city or any other personnel rules, regulations, policies or procedures, which has been adopted by the mayor and council. All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out in this Code. 
(Code 2003, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-3. - Nepotism. 
No person shall be hired as a full-time or part-time employee of the city if such person is related as close as the fifth degree to another employee of the city or an elected official of the city, provided that, if a person related to an employee of the city within the fifth degree shall be elected to an elected office of the city, such election shall not be grounds for the termination of the related city employee. 
(Code 2003, § 2-3; Ord. of 3-7-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 2-4. - Fiscal year. 
The city operates on a fiscal year which shall begin July 1 and end on June 30. 
(Code 1980, § 19-301; Code 2003, § 50-213) 
Secs. 2-5—2-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-27. - Election. 
The mayor and council shall be elected in accordance with article IV of the city Charter. 
(Code 1980, § 2-201; Code 2003, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-28. - Qualifications for office. 
Any person who meets the qualifications set forth in sections 2.11 and 2.21 of the city Charter shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember. 
(Code 1980, § 2-202; Code 2003, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-29. - Vacancies. 
In case of a vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember, from failure to elect, death, removal or any cause whatsoever, such vacancy shall be filled pursuant to section 4.21 of the city Charter. 
(Code 1980, § 2-203; Code 2003, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-30. - Duty to attend. 
It shall be the duty of each member of the city council to attend each meeting of the city council, unless he is prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-204(2); Code 2003, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-31. - Chair. 
The mayor shall act as chair of the council and is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the mayor shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the city council. The chair shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. 
(Code 1980, § 2-302(1); Code 2003, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-32. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the city council shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(Code 2003, § 2-37) 
Sec. 2-33. - Organizational meeting. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on or before the first Tuesday in January following each election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk, and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members of the city council whose terms of office shall begin the day and hour of taking the oath of office. 
(Code 2003, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-34. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday of each month. All regular meetings shall be held in the city hall. A notice containing the information in this section shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-204; Code 2003, § 2-39) 
Sec. 2-35. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
Subject to the notice requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, a regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the city by the mayor for any reason. Other special meetings may be called as provided in the city Charter or state law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-204(1); Code 2003, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-36. - Emergency sessions. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the council may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the city or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the city council as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
(Code 2003, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-37. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  Executive sessions of the city council may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the council is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the city council taken in a public meeting. 
(b)  The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of councilmembers present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the city clerk at the direction of the mayor. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the council may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(Code 1980, § 2-206(13); Code 2003, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-38. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the council. A quorum is a majority of all of the members of the council then in office. It is the duty of the mayor to enforce this rule. Any elected member of city council may raise a point of order directed to the mayor if he believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a councilmember leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the mayor with the approval of the councilmembers present. 
(Code 1980, § 2-204(3); Code 2003, § 2-43) 
Sec. 2-39. - Voting; majority. 
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of councilmembers present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. Unless otherwise specified in these procedures, a majority shall mean more than half of the councilmembers present excluding abstentions. Where a two-thirds majority is specified, a majority vote shall mean at least two-thirds of the councilmembers present excluding abstentions. The mayor shall vote only so as to break a tie among councilmembers. 
(Code 2003, § 2-44) 
Sec. 2-40. - Abstentions. 
A councilmember shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest that would prevent him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the councilmember shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. 
(Code 2003, § 2-45) 
Sec. 2-41. - Agenda. 
(a)  The city clerk, with the advice of the mayor and the councilmembers, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. An agenda work session shall be held by the city clerk to finalize the agenda. The mayor and all councilmembers may participate in the work session. Whenever a quorum of the council is present for an agenda work session, the meeting shall be open to the public and all notice and recordkeeping requirements applicable to an open meeting must be met. The agenda shall be made available to the councilmembers at least one business day before every council meeting. 
(b)  The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the council. A new subject that requires urgent attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a two-thirds vote of the council. 
(c)  A copy of the agenda and a list of those members present shall be made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of any meeting. 
(Code 2003, § 2-46) 
Sec. 2-42. - Consent agenda. 
(a)  A consent agenda may be prepared by the city clerk for the council to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval and where no debate is expected may be placed on a consent agenda. 
(b)  At the appropriate time of the meeting, the mayor shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a councilmember objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the mayor shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the mayor will ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda will be adopted by unanimous consent. 
(Code 2003, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-43. - Minutes. 
(a)  The city clerk shall promptly record the minutes for each council meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the council meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the council but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the council. The minutes shall specify the names of councilmembers present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the councilmember who proposed each motion, the councilmember who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll-call vote, the name of each councilmember voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a councilmember has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the council. 
(b)  The council must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the council. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the councilmembers at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the council at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the mayor and attested to by the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 2-206(5); Code 2003, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-44. - Order of business. 
All regular council meetings shall follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 
(1)  Call to order, roll call. 
(2)  Approval of minutes of the previous meeting. 
(3)  Invited guests. 
(4)  Reports from committees and departments. 
(5)  Consent agenda. 
(6)  Old business. 
(7)  New business. 
(8)  Public comments. 
(9)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1980, § 2-204(4); Code 2003, § 2-49) 
Sec. 2-45. - Decorum. 
(a)  All councilmembers must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the mayor and not to individual councilmembers, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A councilmember is not allowed to speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the mayor. All comments made by a councilmember shall address the motion that is being discussed. 
(b)  The mayor shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a councilmember believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The mayor can rule on the question or he may allow the council to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote. 
(Code 1980, § 2-206(7); Code 2003, § 2-50) 
Sec. 2-46. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the city council shall be permitted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Public comments. The final agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. All members of the public who wish to address the council must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the city clerk at least three business days before the council meeting. These individuals will be allotted 15 minutes to make their comments and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the council. 
(2)  Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote, the council may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the council. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for 15 minutes and may only speak once. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the council. Anyone wishing to speak at any council meeting must be recognized by the mayor before addressing the council. 
(3)  Rules of decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a council meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for councilmembers. Individuals who violate any rules of the council may be ruled out of order by the mayor or on a point of order made by councilmember. A majority vote of the council will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the mayor. 
(4)  Public hearings. The council may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the council. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. 
(Code 1980, § 2-206(8); Code 2003, § 2-51) 
Sec. 2-47. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable and requires a two-thirds vote of the council. Rules governing quorum, voting methods and requirements, the notification to councilmembers of meetings, and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended. 
(Code 2003, § 2-52) 
Sec. 2-48. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public meetings. 
(Code 2003, § 2-53) 
Sec. 2-49. - Compensation. 
The annual salary of councilmembers, mayor and mayor pro tem will be consistent with the city Charter and established by resolution from time to time by the city council, which will be available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 2003, § 2-54; Ord. of 6-6-1995) 
Secs. 2-50—2-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-72. - Rules of procedure. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, procedures for meetings of the city council shall follow an edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, prescribed by the mayor. 
(Code 2003, § 2-81) 
Sec. 2-73. - Parliamentarian. 
The city attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for council meetings. 
(Code 2003, § 2-82) 
Sec. 2-74. - Main motion. 
In order for the council to take any official action on any subject, a councilmember must propose a main motion. A proposed main motion will not be recognized by the chair until another councilmember agrees to second the motion. A second does not require the councilmember seconding the motion to support the motion. A councilmember may withdraw a main motion that he has made at any time before the council has voted on that motion. 
(Code 2003, § 2-83) 
Sec. 2-75. - Debate. 
(a)  After the main motion is recognized by the chair, the council shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the mayor in a manner that is fair to all members of the council. Councilmembers may participate in the debate only when they are recognized by the mayor. 
(b)  During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce subsidiary motions that propose that the council take a particular action on a motion. There are two classes of subsidiary motions: debatable subsidiary motions and undebatable subsidiary motions. Debatable subsidiary motions consist of motions to postpone indefinitely, amend, refer to committee, and postpone to a time certain. Debatable subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. There are three undebatable subsidiary motions: limit debate, vote immediately, and lay on the table. They require a second and cannot be debated. 
(c)  Councilmembers may also introduce privileged motions. Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting and can be introduced during the course of debate. Privileged motions consist of a motion to raise a question of privilege and motions to recess and adjourn. The motions to recess and adjourn require a second. Debate is not allowed on privileged motions. 
(Code 2003, § 2-84) 
Sec. 2-76. - Voting; procedure. 
Voting on debatable motions and voting on undebatable motions shall take place in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Debatable motions. In the case of debatable motions, the vote can be proposed in one of two ways: 
a.  If debate has been completed and no other councilmember wishes to speak, the chair can call for the vote. If there are no objections then the chair can proceed with the vote. 
b.  If the mayor calls for the vote and there is an objection, a member of the council may move to vote immediately (move the previous question). If this motion is seconded and approved by a two-thirds vote, debate will stop. The mayor will then read the proposed motion to the council and ask for the votes of the councilmembers. 
(2)  Undebatable motions. In the case of undebatable motions, the vote shall occur immediately after the motion is recognized by the chair. The mayor shall read the proposed motion to the council and then call for the vote. 
(Code 2003, § 2-85) 
Sec. 2-77. - Ranking of motions. 
(a)  Each subsidiary and privileged motion is assigned a specific rank. A motion of higher precedence can interrupt a motion of lower precedence. The higher motion must be decided before the council returns to consider the motion of lower precedence. 
(b)  A main motion has the lowest rank and does not take precedence over any other motion. A motion to adjourn has the highest rank and will take precedence over all other subsidiary and privileged motions. The order of precedence of motions shall be in accordance with this section. Motions at the bottom of the following list take precedence over motions at the top of the list. 
(1)  Main motion (lowest rank). 
(2)  Subsidiary motions (debatable): 
a.  Postpone indefinitely. 
b.  Amend. 
c.  Refer to committee (commit). 
d.  Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). 
(3)  Subsidiary motions (undebatable): 
a.  Limit debate or extend limits. 
b.  Vote immediately (previous question). 
c.  Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). 
(4)  Privileged motions (undebatable): 
a.  Question of privilege. 
b.  Recess. 
c.  Adjourn (highest rank). 
(Code 2003, § 2-86) 
Sec. 2-78. - Subsidiary motions. 
During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce motions that propose that the council take a particular action on a main motion. These motions are called subsidiary motions and they allow a council to reach a conclusion on the main motion. Subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. Three subsidiary motions (amend, limit debate and vote immediately) also may apply to other subsidiary motions. 
(1)  Postpone indefinitely. If any councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered by the council, that councilmember may move to postpone the consideration of the main motion indefinitely. If the motion is successful, consideration of the main motion stops and the main motion is tabled. A motion to postpone indefinitely may be debated, but it cannot be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(2)  Amend. If a councilmember believes that a main motion that is on the table should be changed in order to make it more acceptable, he can move to amend the motion. 
a.  Amendments must be closely related to the original motion and must not change the nature of the motion that they amend. 
b.  Motions to refer, amend, postpone to a time certain and the motion to recess can also be amended. 
c.  A motion cannot be amended more than two times. 
d.  Debate is allowed on a motion to amend only if the original motion is debatable. 
e.  A majority vote is required for the council to adopt an amendment. 
f.  If the amendment is adopted, then the council shall consider the amended version of the motion. 
(3)  Refer to a committee (commit). If a councilmember believes that further information is needed before the council can act on a main motion, he may propose that the motion be referred to a specific committee or department for further study. If an appropriate committee does not already exist, then a committee may be formed as a part of the motion. A motion to refer should specify the date that the committee or department will report back to the council. This motion is debatable and amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(4)  Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). A motion to postpone to a time certain may be proposed if a councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered until a future time. This motion shall set a particular time for the main motion to be considered again. It is debatable and can be amended. If this motion is passed, the mayor will bring the original motion back to the council for consideration at the specified time. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(5)  Limit or extend limits of debate. A motion to limit debate places a time constraint on the length of debate. The details of such a motion are to be decided by the councilmember who makes the motion. This motion can also be used to extend the limits of debate if a limit on debate already exists. Debate is not allowed on this motion and a two-thirds vote is required. 
(6)  Vote immediately (previous question). If a councilmember believes that the motion being considered should be voted on, the councilmember may move to vote immediately. The motion is undebatable and a vote of two-thirds of the council is required for the motion to pass. 
(7)  Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). A motion to lay on the table proposes that the consideration of a main motion be postponed until a later time in the meeting. The motion can be brought up for consideration only if a motion to resume consideration is accepted by the council during the same meeting. The motion will die if it is not taken up during the meeting. Debate is not allowed on this motion and the motion is not amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Code 2003, § 2-87) 
Sec. 2-79. - Privileged motions. 
Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting. They do not address or relate to a main motion and can be introduced whether or not there is a main motion under consideration. Privileged motions take precedence over all subsidiary motions. Debate is not allowed on the following motions: 
(1)  Question of privilege. A formal question addressed to the chair concerning the rights of a councilmember or of the council as a whole is referred to as a question of privilege. It does not require a second and cannot be debated or amended. The chair is required to make a ruling on the question. 
(2)  Recess. A motion to recess proposes that the meeting be suspended for a particular amount of time. The motion must specify the length of the recess. The motion must also be seconded. Debate is not allowed on this motion but the motion can be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(3)  Adjourn. In order for a meeting to come to a close, a councilmember must make a motion to adjourn. The motion to adjourn has the highest rank of any motion and as a result it can be introduced at any time. The motion requires a second, but is not debatable or amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Code 2003, § 2-88) 
Sec. 2-80. - Incidental motions. 
Incidental motions allow councilmembers to exert their rights as a member of the council. Incidental motions can be introduced at any time during a meeting. 
(1)  Appeal. If a councilmember disagrees with a decision that is made by the chair, that councilmember may appeal the decision. If the appeal is seconded, the appeal will be considered by the council. The chair has the opportunity to explain the ruling that has been challenged. The council may then debate the appeal. The council shall decide by majority vote if the chair's decision is to be upheld or overturned. An appeal is high in precedence and can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or by a motion to lay on the table. 
(2)  Parliamentary inquiry. If a councilmember has a question about the rules of order, he may ask the chair to give an opinion on that question. This question should take the form of a parliamentary inquiry and should relate to the current business of the council. This motion takes precedence over all motions except privileged motions. This motion does not require a second and is not debatable or amendable. 
(3)  Point of order (question of order). If a councilmember believes that a violation of the rules of parliamentary procedure has occurred, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chair can make a ruling on the question or can allow the council to debate and then rule on the question by majority vote. A point of order can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or a motion to lay on the table. 
(4)  Point of information (request for information). If a councilmember has a question about the facts of a particular issue that is being considered, he may ask a point of information. This motion is addressed first to the chair and then to the appropriate person. A second is not required and the motion is not debatable or amendable. 
(Code 2003, § 2-89) 
Sec. 2-81. - Supplementary main motions. 
Three motions allow the council to act on a main motion that has either been passed or tabled by the council. The following motions are considered to be main motions but differ from usual main motions in the ways specified: 
(1)  Reconsider. The motion to reconsider allows the council to debate whether or not to overturn a decision made at the meeting that is in progress. It allows the council to consider new information that may affect the decision that has already been made. Any councilmember may make a motion to reconsider and any councilmember may second the motion. The motion is debatable but it cannot be amended. A majority vote of the council is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to reconsider is passed, the original decision will be voided and the council will return to debate and revote the original motion. 
(2)  Rescind. A motion to rescind proposes that the council overturn a motion passed at a previous meeting. A motion to rescind can be made by any councilmember. It is in order as long as the original motion has not been implemented. An announcement of the intention to rescind a motion may be made at the meeting where the decision was made, or the councilmember seeking to rescind may place the matter on the agenda for the next meeting pursuant to section 2-41. The motion to rescind will then be placed on the agenda for the next meeting. At the next meeting, the motion to rescind will formally be made. If it is seconded, then the council shall debate and vote on rescission. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to rescind is passed, the original decision will be voided. 
(3)  Resume consideration. The motion to resume consideration allows the council to consider a motion that has been temporarily postponed. This motion requires a second and is not debatable or amendable. It is a main motion but ranks higher than any debatable motion. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Code 2003, § 2-90) 
Secs. 2-82—2-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LEGISLATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances of city council not to bind succeeding councils, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-3; authority to adopt municipal ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3(a). 

Sec. 2-106. - General legislative authority. 
The city council shall exercise the legislative functions of the city, and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the government of the city. Such ordinance or resolution, however, shall not conflict with the Charter of the city, the constitution or the laws of the state, or the Constitution or the laws of the United States. 
(Code 1980, § 2-20; Code 2003, § 2-111) 
Sec. 2-107. - Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the manner provided in this division. 
(Code 1980, § 2-206(9)(a); Code 2003, § 2-112) 
Sec. 2-108. - Preparation of ordinances. 
Whenever possible, all ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. 
(Code 1980, § 2-206(9)(a); Code 2003, § 2-113) 
Sec. 2-109. - Required elements of ordinances. 
All ordinances passed by the council shall contain the following items, which shall be set forth in the ordinance in the following order: 
(1)  Ordinance number. 
(2)  Title and purpose. 
(3)  Enacting clause. 
(4)  Body of ordinance by sections. 
(5)  Severability clause. 
(6)  Penalty clause, when applicable. 
(7)  Repealing clause, when applicable. 
(8)  Adoption date. 
(9)  Effective date. 
(10)  Authentication of city clerk. 
(Code 2003, § 2-114) 
Sec. 2-110. - Introduction of ordinances, resolutions and other matters. 
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters of subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-206(9)(b)(1); Code 2003, § 2-115) 
Sec. 2-111. - Action restricted; emergencies. 
No ordinance shall be put on its final passage on the same day on which it is introduced, except that, where an emergency exists and public health and safety require it, an ordinance containing a full statement of the facts and reasons for the emergency may be made effective upon its adoption, if approved by the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-206(9)(b)(3); Code 2003, § 2-116) 
Sec. 2-112. - Reading of ordinances. 
Each ordinance shall be read at two consecutive meetings of the city council. This section may be waived by unanimous agreement. 
(Code 1980, § 2-206(9)(b)(3); Code 2003, § 2-117) 
Sec. 2-113. - Subject matter of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title; and no ordinance, or section of such ordinance, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed. When practicable, all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 2-206(9)(b)(4); Code 2003, § 2-118) 
Sec. 2-114. - Adoption of ordinances, resolutions, contracts. 
An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives an affirmative vote of a majority of the whole council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-206(9)(b)(5); Code 2003, § 2-119) 
Sec. 2-115. - Effective date. 
Every ordinance and resolution shall take effect upon its adoption, unless otherwise stated therein. 
(Code 1980, § 2-206(9)(c); Code 2003, § 2-120) 
Secs. 2-116—2-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEM 

Sec. 2-144. - Executing legal documents. 
The mayor shall sign and execute all contracts, deeds and bonds of the city duly authorized by the city council as required by law. The city manager shall sign all other contracts unless otherwise specified by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-302(6); Code 2003, § 2-145) 
Sec. 2-145. - Mayor pro tem. 
The mayor pro tem shall be elected at the beginning of each new term, by a majority of the elected councilmembers, and he shall serve in the absence or disability of the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 2-304; Code 2003, § 2-150) 
Sec. 2-146. - Acting mayor. 
In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the mayor pro tem shall assume the job of mayor to serve until the vacancy is filled at a regular or special election as provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-305; Code 2003, § 2-151) 
Secs. 2-147—2-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers for official acts, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2); code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq.; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-176. - Duties. 
Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, the Charter, and this Code, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 2-102(1); Code 2003, § 2-171) 
Sec. 2-177. - Oaths. 
All officers and employees required by the Charter or some other provision of law to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform the duties of ____________ of the City of Leesburg, Georgia, and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(Code 1980, § 2-103; Code 2003, § 2-172) 
Sec. 2-178. - Bonds. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the council may require any department head, city official or employee, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, to give good and sufficient bond in any amount decided by the council. Such bond shall be payable to the city for the faithful performance of such duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations or unlawful expenditures in office. Surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the council. The premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-104; Code 2003, § 2-173) 
Sec. 2-179. - Compensation. 
Each officer and employee of the city shall receive such compensation as may be provided from time to time by resolution. 
(Code 1980, § 2-105; Code 2003, § 2-174) 
Sec. 2-180. - Personnel provisions. 
Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance or resolution adopting, establishing or amending any job classification and compensation plan for the employees of the city or any other personnel rules, regulations, policies or procedures, which have been adopted by the council. All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out in this Code. 
(Code 2003, § 2-175) 
Sec. 2-181. - Employment of personnel. 
Each department head, subject to the approval of the city manager, shall have the authority to employ the necessary personnel, as authorized by council action, to perform the duties of his department, and it shall be the responsibility of each such department head to determine by the physician's report and the applicant's history whether such applicant has the necessary qualifications for the particular position applied for. 
(Code 1980, § 2-603(1); Code 2003, § 2-176) 
Sec. 2-182. - Physician's examination. 
Applicants seeking employment shall complete a standard application form as provided by the city and shall pass a complete physical examination to be given by a licensed physician and paid for by the prospective employee. The physician shall enter his findings on a standard form to be provided by the city. This provision shall not apply to those employees hired in an emergency and for a period of less than ten working days. 
(Code 1980, § 2-603(2); Code 2003, § 2-177) 
Sec. 2-183. - Accidents. 
Employees involved in, or having any knowledge of, any accident involving any other person employed by the city or any property or equipment owned or operated by the city shall immediately report the accident and pertinent information to their department head, who shall forward such information to the office of the city clerk. The city clerk shall record the information on three copies of the applicable accident form, one copy to be forwarded to the insurance carrier, one copy to the city attorney, and one copy retained on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1980, § 2-603(4); Code 2003, § 2-179) 
Sec. 2-184. - Outside employment. 
No municipal employee shall engage in any outside employment during any period in which he is being compensated to do work for the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-603(6); Code 2003, § 2-180) 
Sec. 2-185. - Political activity. 
Municipal employees may individually exercise their right to vote and privately express their political views as citizens, but no municipal employee shall solicit political campaign contributions or engage in or actively participate in any political campaign to the neglect of his official duties. 
(Code 1980, § 2-603(7); Code 2003, § 2-181) 
Sec. 2-186. - Strikes. 
No municipal employee shall participate in or encourage any form of sit down, slow down, work stoppage, or strike against the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-603(8); Code 2003, § 2-182) 
Sec. 2-187. - Smoking ban for city property. 
(a)  Smoking will not be permitted indoors on property owned, operated or leased by the city, including, but not limited to, the following areas: 
(1)  Employee work areas. 
(2)  Employee break rooms, lounges, snack bars and restrooms. 
(3)  Conference and meeting rooms, offices, hallways, courtrooms and other public assembly chambers. 
(4)  Any vehicle or equipment owned, leased, or operated by the city. 
(b)  "No Smoking" signs shall be placed conspicuously in city facilities to serve as a directive to employees and the general public. 
(c)  In all cases the rights of nonsmokers to protect their health will take precedence over persons who desire to smoke. Voluntary compliance with these policies is desired. However, violation of these policies by employees may subject them to disciplinary action under provisions of the city personnel policies. Members of the public who smoke in restricted areas will be asked to comply with these policies by extinguishing all smoking materials. Persons refusing to extinguish smoking materials will be escorted from the building by appropriate law enforcement officials, and may be charged with a violation of this section or state law. 
(Res. of 6-3-2003, § 1(2-183)) 
State Law reference— Georgia Smokefree Air Act of 2005, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-188. - Duties of finance director/tax collector. 
The finance director/tax collector's duties shall be assigned by and, unless otherwise dictated by the city Charter and other law, shall be subject to the discretion of the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 2-405; Code 2003, § 2-205) 
Secs. 2-189—2-212. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLERK 

Sec. 2-213. - Appointment. 
The city clerk shall be appointed by the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-401; Code 2003, § 2-201) 
Sec. 2-214. - Term of office. 
The city clerk shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-40; Code 2003, § 2-202) 
Sec. 2-215. - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city clerk shall give a good and sufficient bond, payable to the city council, such bond to be fixed and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-40; Code 2003, § 2-203) 
Sec. 2-216. - Duties. 
The city clerk's duties shall be assigned by and, unless otherwise dictated by the city Charter and other law, shall be subject to the discretion of the city manager. The city manager shall serve at all times as ex officio city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 2-404; Code 2003, § 2-204) 
Secs. 2-217—2-242. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-243. - Appointment and qualifications. 
The city attorney shall be appointed by the city council, and shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. No person shall be so appointed unless he is a member in good standing of the Georgia Bar and has been actively engaged in the practice of law for at least three years preceding his appointment. 
(Code 1980, § 2-601(1); Code 2003, § 2-231) 
Sec. 2-244. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city attorney shall take the oath prescribed by this article for city officers. 
(Code 1980, § 2-601(2); Code 2003, § 2-232) 
Sec. 2-245. - Powers and duties. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in such capacity shall: 
(1)  Advise the council or its committees or any city officer, when thereto requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of city business. 
(2)  Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the council or any committee thereof, and keep the Code up to date and properly indexed. 
(3)  Give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted to him by the council, or any of its committees, or by any city officer. 
(4)  Attend all council meetings in their entirety for the purpose of giving the council any legal advice requested by its members. 
(5)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party and approve, as to form, all bonds required to be submitted to the city. 
(6)  Prepare, when authorized by the council, all charges and complaints against, and appear in the municipal court in the prosecution of every person charged with a violation of this Code or of a city ordinance or of any regulations adopted under authority of the Charter, and see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the city. 
(7)  Defend any and all suits and actions at law or equity brought against the city, unless otherwise directed by the city council. 
(8)  Make an immediate report to the council of the outcome of any litigation in which the city has an interest. 
(9)  Make an annual report to the council of all pending litigation in which the city has an interest and the status thereof. 
(10)  Keep complete and accurate records of the following, which records shall forever remain the property of the city: 
a.  All suits in which the city had or has an interest, giving the names of the parties, the nature of the action, the disposition of the case or its status, if pending, and the briefs of counsel. 
b.  All written opinions prepared by the city attorney and all certificates or abstracts of titles furnished by him to the city, or any department or official thereof. 
(11)  Render such other legal services as may be required by the city manager or council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-601(3); Code 2003, § 2-233) 
Sec. 2-246. - Compensation. 
The city attorney shall submit to the council a monthly bill for his services, itemizing the type of work performed for the city and the number of hours engaged in each type of work during the month. 
(Code 1980, § 2-601(4); Code 2003, § 2-234) 
Secs. 2-247—2-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ENGINEER 

Sec. 2-271. - Appointment. 
The city engineer may be appointed by the city manager, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. 
(Code 1980, § 2-602(1); Code 2003, § 2-261) 
Sec. 2-272. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city engineer shall take the oath prescribed by this article for city officers. 
(Code 1980, § 2-602(2); Code 2003, § 2-262) 
Sec. 2-273. - Duties. 
The city engineer shall advise the council and city officials on all engineering matters referred to him and shall, from time to time as required by the city manager or council, make reports regarding public improvements, repairs of streets, bridges, and sidewalks, and prepare such other reports as the city manager or council may request. He shall keep accurate maps, plats, and records of all public works, lands, or property owned by the city, and perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him from time to time by the city manager or council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-602(3); Code 2003, § 2-263) 
Sec. 2-274. - Compensation. 
The city engineer shall submit to the council a monthly bill for his services, itemizing the type of work performed for the city and the number of hours engaged in each type of work during the month. 
(Code 1980, § 2-602(4); Code 2003, § 2-264) 
Secs. 2-275—2-296. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DISCIPLINE, APPEALS AND GRIEVANCES 

Sec. 2-297. - Employee discipline, appeals and grievances. 
Discipline, appeals and grievances shall be governed under the provisions as published in the city personnel handbook and, where applicable, in accordance with the standard operating procedures of the police department, both of which are on file in the city manager's office and available for public inspection. 
Secs. 2-298—2-327. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Expenditure of county funds for insurance and employment benefits authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11.1; employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-328. - Duties of department heads. 
All department heads shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Be kept informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the city manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the mayor; 
(4)  Have power, when authorized by the city manager, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(5)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
(Code 1980, § 2-102(2); Code 2003, § 2-322) 
Sec. 2-329. - Cooperation with other departments. 
Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the city manager, any other department such service, labor and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
(Code 1980, § 2-102(3); Code 2003, § 2-323) 
Secs. 2-330—2-346. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-347. - Composition. 
The police department shall consist of the police chief and such other officers and personnel as the city manager shall prescribe. 
(Code 1980, § 2-702(1); Code 2003, § 2-341) 
Sec. 2-348. - Rank. 
Following the police chief in rank shall be the captain, the lieutenants, and the police officers, in order of seniority in each group. 
(Code 1980, § 2-702(2); Code 2003, § 2-342) 
Sec. 2-349. - Police chief. 
(a)  Appointment and powers. The police chief shall be appointed by the city manager, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall be the chief executive officer of the police department, subject always to the orders and regulations of the city manager and the council. In the exercise of his duties, the police chief shall have the power to establish and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the members and employees of the department, which rules shall, however, be consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. 
(b)  Bond and cash. Prior to entering upon the discharge of his duties, the police chief shall execute a bond in the amount of $5,000.00 and shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by section 2-177. 
(c)  Duties. The police chief shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Attend all meetings of the city council and all trials before the municipal court. 
(2)  See to the proper service of all summonses, subpoenas, citations, executions, attachments, and rules of the city council. 
(3)  See to the collection of all fines and costs imposed by the municipal court. 
(4)  See that the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city and all statutes applicable therein are faithfully enforced. 
(5)  Preserve the public peace, prevent infractions of the law, and arrest violators thereof. 
(6)  Protect the rights of persons and property. 
(7)  Oversee the conduct of the officers and members of the police force, and to be held strictly responsible for such conduct and for the general good order of the department. 
(8)  Keep adequate records of all personnel and equipment of the department, including a log of all questions, activities, and investigations. 
(9)  Submit a monthly report to the city clerk outlining the number and type of arrests for state offenses, the number and type of cases involving violations of municipal ordinances, and the number of arrests made and cases reported by each police officer. 
(10)  Submit monthly to the state department of public safety the uniform crime report prescribed by state law. 
(11)  Discharge such other duties as may be required of him by the city manager or council. 
(d)  Resignation, removal, death or disability. In the event of resignation, removal, death or disability of the police chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been duly appointed. 
(Code 1980, § 2-702(3); Code 2003, § 2-343) 
Sec. 2-350. - Arrests. 
Police officers may make arrests for violations of municipal ordinances and state laws when such violations are committed in their presence or when they have obtained a valid arrest warrant from the judge of the municipal court or from some other proper authority. In exercising such power of arrest, all police officers shall see that all necessary warnings are given to the accused as required by law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-702(6); Code 2003, § 2-348) 
Sec. 2-351. - Entering private dwellings. 
No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless he is in pursuit of a fugitive who the police officer has personal knowledge or probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a felony. 
(Code 1980, § 2-702(7); Code 2003, § 2-349) 
Sec. 2-352. - Disposition of stolen, abandoned or impounded property. 
All personal property which comes into the custody of the police department, where such property has been stolen or impounded or where the ownership is unknown, shall be held for a period of 60 days awaiting claim by its owner. The owner of such property, upon proving ownership and paying all expenses and costs, including reasonable charges for storage, shall have the right to have such property returned to him. If, after the expiration of 60 days, the property is unclaimed, the police chief shall advertise the property for sale in the newspaper in which the city's legal advertisements are printed. Such advertising shall take place at least seven days before the date set for the sale and shall give a description of the property to be sold and specify the time and place of sale. If the property is still unclaimed by the time of the sale, it shall be sold as advertised and the proceeds shall be placed in the city treasury. 
(Code 1980, § 2-702(8); Code 2003, § 2-350) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Purposes. 
(a)  The purposes of this chapter shall include, without necessarily being limited to, the following: 
(1)  Compliance with and effectuation of the general state law; 
(2)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons; 
(3)  Ensuring that any licenses issued for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises are issued only to a legitimate restaurant or private club; 
(4)  The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions; 
(5)  Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  To the maximum extent permissible under state and federal law, the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall, under this chapter, be considered to be a privilege to be accorded in conformity with the foregoing and other public policies of the city, rather than a right. 
(Code 2003, § 6-1; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-101)) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, as amended. 
Alcoholic beverage means as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, as amended. 
Malt beverage means as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, as amended. 
Manufacturer means as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, as amended. 
Package means as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, as amended. 
Person means as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, as amended. 
Premises means on the property owned, leased or controlled by the holder of a license issued under this chapter and so connected with the business described in the license as to form a component or integral part of it. 
Retail means as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, as amended. 
Retail dealer means as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, as amended. 
Wholesale dealer means as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, as amended. 
Wholesaler means as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, as amended. 
(Code 2003, § 6-2; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-102)) 
Sec. 4-3. - Hours of sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, at wholesale or retail, in or upon any licensed premises, any alcoholic beverages, except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. Monday and 11:59 p.m. Saturday of each week; provided, however, that in any licensed establishment which derives at least 60 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 60 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption may also be sold or offered for sale between 12:30 p.m. on Sundays until 12:00 midnight on Sundays. 
(Code 2003, § 6-3; Ord. of 3-7-1989, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 4-4. - Sale to persons under age. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or cause to be furnished or to permit any such person in his employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to a person in violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended. 
(Code 2003, § 6-6; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-105)) 
Sec. 4-5. - Advertising restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license issued under this chapter to advertise in any news media or by other means the fact that alcoholic beverages may be purchased at such establishment except as permitted by state law and by regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Code 2003, § 6-7; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-218)) 
Secs. 4-6—4-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 4-29. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages within the city except under a valid license issued under this chapter and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2003, § 6-41; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-201); Ord. of 1-4-2011, § 3) 
Sec. 4-30. - Qualifications. 
No license required by section 4-29 shall be issued to: 
(1)  Any person unless the person or his manager or the person actually in charge of the operation of the business is a resident of the county. 
(2)  A person who, in the opinion and judgment of the city council, is not of good moral character in the community in which he resides. 
(3)  A person who, by reason of reputation, character or mental or physical capacity, is not, in the judgment of the city council, a fit or qualified person to conduct such business. 
(4)  A person found by the city council to have been convicted of any felony under federal or state law or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. 
(5)  A partnership, if any member of the partnership is disqualified under this section. 
(6)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof would not be eligible to receive a license under this article for any reason other than nonresidence in the county. 
(7)  A person whose business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the license holder. 
(8)  A person who has been convicted of the violation of any federal or state law or regulation respecting the manufacturing, possessing or sale of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 2003, § 6-42; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-202)) 
Sec. 4-31. - Types of licenses. 
Licenses may be issued for the following activities: 
(1)  Manufacturer of malt beverages. 
(2)  Manufacturer of wine. 
(3)  Wholesaler of malt beverages. 
(4)  Wholesaler of wine. 
(5)  Retail sale of wine, consumption on premises. This license permits the holder to allow the consumption on the premises of the holder of wine sold by the license holder. 
(6)  Retail sale of wine, consumption off premises. This license permits the sale of wine only in unbroken packages and does not allow consumption on the premises. 
(7)  Retail sale of malt beverages, consumption on premises. This license permits the holder to allow the consumption on the premises of the holder of malt beverages sold by the license holder. 
(8)  Retail sale of malt beverages, consumption off premises. This license permits the sale of malt beverages only in unbroken packages and does not allow consumption on the premises. 
(9)  Retail sale of distilled spirits, consumption on premises. This license permits the holder to allow the consumption on the premises of the holder of distilled spirits sold by the license holder. 
(Code 2003, § 6-43; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-203); Ord. of 1-4-2011, § 4) 
Sec. 4-32. - Fees. 
The annual fee for all licenses required by this article shall be established from time to time by the city council by appropriate resolution. 
(Code 2003, § 6-44; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-204)) 
Sec. 4-33. - Application procedure. 
(a)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any license under this article, the applicant shall furnish to the city clerk a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the state bureau of investigation for disposition required by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(c). 
(b)  The applicant for a license under this article shall complete and return to the city clerk an application in a form approved by the city council. 
(c)  No application for a license under this article shall be considered by the city council until the applicant shall have caused to be published, at such applicant's expense, a notice in the legal organ of the county one time at least ten days and not more than 21 days prior to the regular meeting of the city council at which such application is to be considered. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant, the location of the proposed business, the type of license applied for and the date, time and location of the meeting of the city council at which the application will be considered. 
(Code 2003, § 6-45; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-205)) 
Sec. 4-34. - Due process guidelines. 
The granting or refusal of any license under this article shall be based upon the following factors: 
(1)  The proximity of any other establishments engaged in the selling, distributing or manufacturing of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  The character of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location. 
(3)  The proximity of churches, schools and playgrounds to the proposed location. 
(4)  Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking for its patrons. 
(5)  Whether the proposed location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom. 
(6)  The information contained in the application. 
(7)  The qualifications contained in section 4-30. 
(8)  Whether any alcoholic beverage license previously issued for such location or to the applicant was ever revoked for cause by the city or state. 
(9)  The number of existing alcoholic beverage licenses already issued in the city. 
(10)  Compliance with zoning regulations. 
(Code 2003, § 6-46; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-206)) 
Sec. 4-35. - Final decision and appeal. 
All decisions approving or denying any license under this article shall be in writing with the reasons therefor stated and shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant. Upon written application delivered to the city clerk no less than one week after the decision of the council, any applicant aggrieved by such decision shall be afforded a hearing before the council within 30 days of such written application with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. After close of evidence, the council shall deliberate and render a written decision within ten days. 
(Code 2003, § 6-47; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-207)) 
Sec. 4-36. - Closing for emergencies. 
(a)  The police chief shall have the authority to close any location holding any license under this article for a period not in excess of 24 hours in the event there shall occur on the premises any violation of law, this chapter or any other ordinance of the city, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, or other occurrence which is contrary to the public health, welfare or safety when, in the judgment of the police chief, such action is necessary to protect the public health, welfare or safety. 
(b)  The police chief, with the concurrence of the city council, may close any location holding a license under this article in the event of disorders which threaten the public health, welfare or safety for the duration of the emergency. 
(Code 2003, § 6-48; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-208)) 
Sec. 4-37. - Suspension by mayor. 
The mayor may, upon recommendation by the police chief, suspend any license issued under this article pending the hearing provided for in this article, where, in the judgment of the mayor, such action is necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety. Any such decision shall be in writing and delivered to the license holder. 
(Code 2003, § 6-49; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-209)) 
Sec. 4-38. - Suspension and revocation. 
Any license issued under this article may be suspended for a period not to exceed one year or revoked in its entirety by the city council. 
(Code 2003, § 6-50; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-210)) 
Sec. 4-39. - Grounds for suspension and revocation. 
The following shall be grounds for the suspension and revocation of a license issued under this article: 
(1)  The violation by the license holder or his manager of any state, federal or city law or regulation involving moral turpitude or pertaining to alcoholic beverages. The determination of whether or not such violation has occurred shall be made by the city council and an actual conviction in a court shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license. 
(2)  The failure of the license holder or his manager to report with reasonable promptness to the police department any violation of law, this chapter or any other ordinance of the city, breach of peace, disturbance or altercation, occurring on the premises, or the removal of any customer from the premises by the license holder or his manager. 
(3)  Any conduct on the part of the license holder or his manager contrary to the public welfare, safety or health or in a manner constituting a nuisance. 
(4)  If subsequent investigation reveals false statements on the application for such license. 
(5)  Upon failure of the business or the operation or location thereof, or the owner or any person connected therewith, to continue meeting the qualifications for the issuance of such license as set forth in section 4-30. 
(6)  Where, in the judgment of the city council, the operation of the business by the license holder constitutes a nuisance, or poses problems of law enforcement and the maintenance of public order because of the number of fights and/or being frequented by known or reputed drug dealers and/or illegal sales or use of controlled substances and/or breaches of peace and/or violations of the law by patrons of the license holder in or about the premises. 
(Code 2003, § 6-51; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-211)) 
Sec. 4-40. - Procedures. 
(a)  Prior to the revocation or suspension of a license other than the suspension provided for in sections 4-36 and 4-37, the license holder shall be given notice in writing to show cause, before the city council at a time and place specified therein but not less than two days nor more than 14 days from the date of the service of the notice, why the license should not be revoked or suspended, as the case may be, stating the grounds therefor. 
(b)  At the appointed time and place the license holder shall have an opportunity to show cause, if any exists, why the license should not be suspended or revoked, after which the city council shall take such action as it, in its judgment and discretion, shall deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of the city council shall be in writing and mailed or delivered to the license holder. 
(Code 2003, § 6-52; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-212)) 
Sec. 4-41. - Final decision and appeal. 
All decisions suspending or revoking any license under this article shall be in writing with the reasons therefor stated and shall be mailed or delivered to the license holder. Upon written application delivered to the city clerk no less than one week after the decision of the council, any license holder aggrieved by such decision shall be afforded a hearing before the city council within 30 days of such written application with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. After close of the evidence, the council shall deliberate and render a written decision within ten days. 
(Code 2003, § 6-53; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-213)) 
Sec. 4-42. - Transfer of license. 
All licenses issued under this article shall be personal to the licensee to whom issued. Upon proper application, the city council may permit the license to be transferred upon payment of a transfer fee equal to one-half the original license fee, provided the transferee meets all of the qualifications which would have been required had the transferee been an applicant for a license under this article. Upon the death of any license holder, his personal representatives or his heirs may continue to operate under the license for the balance of the year with the payment of any fee, if otherwise qualified as license holders, or the license may be transferred to a qualified transferee within 30 days after the date of death of the license holder upon payment of the transfer fee set forth in this section. 
(Code 2003, § 6-54; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-214)) 
Sec. 4-43. - Sale of interest by license holder. 
Where the license holder under this article is a partnership or a corporation, one or more partners or stockholders may withdraw from the partnership or corporation in favor of one or more of the partners or stockholders who were partners or stockholders at the time of the issuance of the license. The sale by a partner or a stockholder of his interest in the partnership or corporation to a person who is not at the time of the sale already a partner or stockholder shall constitute grounds for revocation of the license unless the new partner or stockholder is a person qualified to hold a license, and unless the transaction is approved by the city council. 
(Code 2003, § 6-55; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-215)) 
Sec. 4-44. - Change of location. 
The location named in a license issued under this article shall not be changed. Any request for a change in location shall be considered as a new application and is subject to the provisions of this article regarding applications for licenses under this article. 
(Code 2003, § 6-56; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-216)) 
Sec. 4-45. - Duration. 
All licenses issued under this article shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued. All applications for renewal of the license for the ensuing year shall be treated as applications for new licenses, except that they need not be advertised as required by this article. 
(Code 2003, § 6-57; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § 1(3-217)) 
Secs. 4-46—4-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 4-64. - Grant of license for sale of alcoholic beverages. 
A license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold may be granted only to a restaurant, as defined under section 4-65, or a bona fide private club, as defined under section 4-66. 
(Ord. of 1-4-2011, exh. A(6-91)) 
Sec. 4-65. - Restaurant. 
In order to be eligible for a pouring or limited pouring license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, a restaurant shall: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals prepared on the premises are regularly served to the public for adequate pay each day the establishment is open for business; 
(2)  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(3)  Have employees available to serve meals prepared on the premises during any time the establishment is open for business; 
(4)  Have a valid county health department food service permit and any other applicable local, state, or federal permits, licenses, etc., required for food service establishments; 
(5)  On an annual basis, have at least 60 percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises; and for this purpose if a restaurant makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other nonfood or nonalcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale; and 
(6)  Have a permanent seating capacity at tables, not counting bar stools, of at least 50 persons. 
(Ord. of 1-4-2011, exh. A(6-92)) 
Sec. 4-66. - Bona fide private club. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a pouring or limited pouring license for the sale of mixed drinks for consumption on the premises, a bona fide private club must be a veterans organization, or a country club (whether established for profit or nonprofit), which meets all of the requirements of this section, and all of such organizations must be incorporated under state law, and: 
(1)  The local chapter or entity must have been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license. 
(2)  Have at least 75 regular dues-paying members. 
(3)  Be organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, and other such purposes. 
(4)  Own, hire, or lease a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining space and equipment; 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a)(4)c of this section, the term "fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for revenue of the club and shall not include any commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to a bona fide private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Bona fide private clubs licensed under the provisions of this section shall not be required to maintain the percentage sale of food/nonalcoholic beverages as compared to alcoholic beverages; however, any such organization shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. of 1-4-2011, exh. A(6-93)) 
Sec. 4-67. - Ratio of alcoholic/nonalcoholic sales. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, should the total sales from food and nonalcoholic beverages reported by any licensee for the sale of mixed drinks for consumption on the premises where sold not comply with the requirements of section 4-65(5) for any 12-month period, the license may be suspended or revoked, or, if an application for renewal is pending, renewal may be denied. 
(Ord. of 1-4-2011, exh. A(6-94)) 
Sec. 4-68. - Illumination of premises; location of sales restricted. 
(a)  All restaurants, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served, and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well-illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room which is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Private parties which have been scheduled in advance; 
(2)  Room service to hotel guests in their hotel rooms, provided a properly licensed restaurant is located on the premises; and 
(3)  Private clubs. 
(Ord. of 1-4-2011, exh. A(6-95)) 
Sec. 4-69. - Hours of sale. 
Consumption on the premises licensees, including, but not limited to, licensees selling mixed drinks for consumption on the premises where sold, shall only be authorized to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption during the hours that the restaurant or private club is open for business, but in no event shall any alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption be sold or offered for sale between 12:00 midnight on Sundays and 8:00 a.m. on Mondays; provided, however, that in any licensed establishment which derives at least 60 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 60 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption may also be sold or offered for between 12:30 p.m. on Sundays until 12:00 midnight on Sundays. 
(Ord. of 1-4-2011, exh. A(6-97)) 
Sec. 4-70. - Removal of beverages prohibited. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverages sold by consumption on the premises licensees, including, but not limited to, the sale of mixed drinks for consumption on the premises where sold, shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages, including mixed drinks, sold for consumption on the premises. Each licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person removes any alcoholic beverages, including mixed drinks, from the premises in any type of container, except as otherwise provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4 (removal of partially consumed bottle of wine from premises). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have in his possession an open container of any alcoholic beverage on any public street, sidewalk, park, or other public place within the city, or upon or within any motor vehicle on the streets, sidewalks, parks, and public places of the city, except as otherwise provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4 (removal of partially consumed bottle of wine from premises). 
(Ord. of 1-4-2011, exh. A(6-98)) 
Sec. 4-71. - Sexually oriented entertainment. 
(a)  No license holder under this article shall conduct, stage, arrange, or permit upon premises on which alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed for consumption the following: 
(1)  Any live performances which constitute or simulate: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
b.  The touching, caressing, or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying of any portion of the female breasts below the top of the areola or the displaying of any portion of any person's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals. 
(2)  The use of artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform, simulate, or depict any of the prohibited conduct or activities described in subsection (a) (1) of this section. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit performances in mainstream performance establishments, museums, or theaters. 
(Ord. of 1-4-2011, exh. A(6-99)) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement, Lee County enforces animal control throughout the county and prosecutes any violation that occurs in the city in Leesburg's municipal court. 
State Law reference— Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Self-inspection by plumbers, utility contractors. 
The city is exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d), relating to the self-inspection of certain water and sewer lines, and such provisions shall not be applicable in the city. 
(Code 2003, § 14-1) 
Secs. 8-2—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

Sec. 8-21. - Adopted. 
(a)  The following codes, as now or hereafter amended, including administration chapters and appendices also contained in such codes, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be amended by later additions as required by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, and shall be enforced by the city through an intergovernmental agreement with the county: 
(1)  International Building Code (ICC); 
(2)  National Electrical Code (NFPA); 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC); 
(4)  International Mechanical Code (ICC); 
(5)  International Plumbing Code (ICC); 
(6)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC); 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC); and 
(8)  International Fire Code. 
(b)  Official copies of such codes, and the administrative chapters and appendices of such codes, are on file in the office of the chief building official of the county. 
(Code 1980, § 6-104; Code 2003, § 14-31; Ord. of 9-17-1982, § 1) 
Sec. 8-22. - Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the construction or erection of any building, whether commercial, business or residential, unless such construction is accomplished in strict compliance with the various construction codes adopted by this article. 
(Code 2003, § 14-32) 
Sec. 8-23. - Enforcement and designation of administrator. 
The chief of police of the city or the chief building official of the county, or his designee, acting with the authority for the city, is hereby appointed to administer and through an intergovernmental agreement implement and enforce the provisions of this article. When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in the various construction codes adopted by this article, the designated city official shall be deemed to be the responsible official for the enforcement of such codes. 
(Code 2003, § 14-33) 
Sec. 8-24. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(b)  A conviction for violating any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall result in the automatic suspension of the business license of the offending contractor. The license may be reinstated by an application to the city council upon a showing of good cause. 
(Code 2003, § 14-34) 
Sec. 8-25. - Permit and inspection fees. 
Permit and inspection fees and any other charges imposed or due under the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county building inspection department. 
(Code 2003, § 14-35) 
Sec. 8-26. - Public utilities. 
(a)  No public utility may furnish temporary electrical, water or gas connection, for construction purposes, unless the contractor has been issued a construction permit by the county building inspection department. 
(b)  No public utility may furnish permanent electrical, water or gas connections until the contractor has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the county building inspection department. 
(c)  No public utility may furnish power to a mobile home site until the owner has been issued either a building permit or a certificate of occupancy by the county building inspection department. 
(Code 2003, § 14-36) 
Sec. 8-27. - Water supply and sewage disposal facilities. 
(a)  Building permits will not be issued until plans for water supply and sewage disposal have been approved by the county board of health. 
(b)  Certificates of occupancy will not be issued until the completed water supply and sewage disposal facilities have been approved by the county board of health. 
(Code 2003, § 14-37) 
State Law reference— Regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas, conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.l. 
Secs. 8-28—8-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNFIT DWELLINGS, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 8-58. - Adoption of regulations; definitions. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b), the ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted based upon a finding by the city council, that dwelling, building or structure conditions of the character described in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within any residential or commercial zoning district or within 500 feet of those zoning districts in the incorporated areas of the city, and the ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted pursuant thereto. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq. known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of said property and all individuals, associations, and corporations who have interest of record in the city where the property is located in a dwelling, building, or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians, and trustees. 
Public authority means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city or county relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city or county. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized pursuant to this article to exercise the powers prescribed by this article, or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means closing a dwelling, building, or structure for the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, or other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the city. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-51)) 
Sec. 8-59. - Designation of public officer. 
The primary responsibility and authority for the enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be vested in both the chief of police, or such chief's duly authorized representative, and/or the county building inspection department, or such department's duly authorized representative, who, for the purposes of this article, shall be deemed the public officer as more particularly defined in section 8-58. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-52)) 
Sec. 8-60. - Powers and duties of public officer. 
The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise the following powers and duties to carry out and effectuate the purpose of this article, as follows: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation, or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use, or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oath and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the person in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate from time to time. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-53)) 
Sec. 8-61. - Defects constituting an unfit dwelling, building or structure. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents in the city. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; 
(7)  Exclusive of the foundation, if 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50 percent of the damage or deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or coverings is present; 
(8)  Improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe; 
(9)  Previous damage by fire, wind, vandalism, or other cause; 
(10)  Decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or other such conditions likely to cause sickness or disease to occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure, or to the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; 
(11)  Inadequate means of ingress and egress, such as insufficient stairways, elevators, or fire escapes, so as to cause a danger to occupants or residents; 
(12)  Conditions which are otherwise unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the occupants or occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures, or other residents of the city; 
(13)  Dilapidation or disrepair to such an extent that portions of the dwelling, building, or structure may fall or cave in; and 
(14)  Buildings existing in violation of any provision of any code previously adopted by the city, including, but not limited to, any building code and any fire prevention code, previously adopted. 
(b)  The public officer shall also be authorized to determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation by the public officer or upon the report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed at the location of such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-54)) 
Sec. 8-62. - Petition; notice; hearing. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority, or by at least three residents of the city, alleging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use, or whenever it appears to the public officer on his own motion that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, or is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of, and any parties in interest in, such dwelling, building, or structure, a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer or his designated agent at a place within the county not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the date of service of said complaint; that the owner, and any party in interest, shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer. 
(b)  If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the dwelling, building, or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation, or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, or is vacant, dilapidated, or being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, the public officer shall state in writing her findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order as follows: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial, or business use or to vacate and close the dwelling, building, or structure as a human habitation; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(c)  In no event shall the public officer, or the city council, require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure, except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value such dwelling, building, or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this article. 
(d)  If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed or demolished. In addition, the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling, building, or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use. The use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use is prohibited and unlawful. 
Such placard shall bear the date posted, the street number of the dwelling, building, or structure involved, and be signed by the public officer or such officer's duly authorized agent. It shall thereafter be unlawful for such placard to be mutilated or removed or for such dwelling, building, or structure to be occupied until the required corrective action is taken. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be removed or demolished. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section, the public officer shall not be authorized to undertake the actions authorized in subsections (c) and (d) of this section until such time as the city council shall have by ordinance ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this article, and the state statutes authorizing this article, with respect to the particular property which the public officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, and said property shall be described in the ordinance. 
(g)  The public officer may, upon written request of the owner or parties in interest, grant an extension of time within which to comply with any order entered pursuant to this section upon a showing of a good faith effort to comply with said order. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-55)) 
Sec. 8-63. - Extensions of time. 
The city council may, in its discretion, grant an extension of time within which to comply with any order pursuant to this article, which extension shall be for a definite term and shall be in writing. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-56)) 
Sec. 8-64. - Costs constituting lien on property; filing; sale of materials. 
The amount of the cost of such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Said lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of demolition by the city council and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of said costs by the public officer in the office of the city clerk on a lien docket maintained by said clerk for such purposes. If the dwelling, building, or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the materials of such dwellings, buildings, or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-57)) 
Sec. 8-65. - Procedure for collection of amount due on lien. 
The collection of any amount due on the liens referred to in section 8-64 shall be enforced in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties in interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city council, within 30 days after the perfection of said lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the city council the remaining balance on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove provided. 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred, or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of said three-year period, then the entire balance on such lien shall be due and payable to the city council at that time. 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, remain unpaid after the passage of said three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (2) of this section, the city council may enforce the collection due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title, or interest in, or lien upon, said property, all as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et seq. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-58)) 
Sec. 8-66. - Service of notice and orders issued by public officer. 
(a)  Complaints, notices, or orders issued pursuant to this article shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of such property, each owner, and each party in interest; and the return of service signed by the public officer, or an affidavit of service executed by any citizen of the state, reciting that a copy of such complaint, notice, or order was served upon each person in possession of such property, each owner, and each party in interest, personally or by leaving such copy at the place of his residence, which shall be sufficient service as to the service of such person in possession, owner, or party in interest. 
(b)  If any of the owners or parties in interest shall reside outside of the county, service shall be effected by causing a copy of such complaint, notice or orders to be served upon such parties by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such parties, or such service may be made by any citizen; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy, or the affidavit of such citizen, that such parties were served, either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint, notice or orders at the residence of the person to be served, shall be conclusive of such service. 
(c)  Nonresidents of the state shall be served by publishing the same once a week for two successive weeks in the legal organ for the county. A copy of such complaint, notice or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint, notice, or order. Where the address of such nonresident is known, a copy of such complaint, notice, or order shall be mailed to such nonresident by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(d)  In the event that either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, or an insane person, or a person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served, and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county, or is a nonresident of the state, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section or in this subsection in such cases. If such minor or insane person has no guardian or personal representative, or in the event such minor or insane person lives outside the county, or is a nonresident of the state, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy of such complaint, notice, or order at the place of his residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person; in the case of other persons who live outside the county, or who are not residents of the state, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county, who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event that the whereabouts of any owner or any party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint, notice, or order upon such person shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (c) of this section, or service may be perfected upon any person, firm, or corporation holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(f)  A copy of such complaint, notice, and order shall also be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county, where notices of lis pendens are filed, and shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices as provided by law. Any such complaint, notice, or order or appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the city clerk. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-59)) 
Sec. 8-67. - Temporary injunction restraining public officer from carrying out provisions. 
As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13, any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court of the county for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the superior court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer, pending the final disposition of the matter; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be had by the superior court on petitions within 20 days of the filing thereof. The superior court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction pursuant to this section. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-60)) 
Sec. 8-68. - Eminent domain. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of the state, or permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of the state. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-61)) 
Sec. 8-69. - Use of revenues, grants, and donations to repair, close, or demolish unfit dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
The city council is authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary or appropriate and may accept and apply for and utilize grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this article. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-63)) 
Sec. 8-70. - Applicability. 
The powers and authority granted hereunder shall be in addition to and supplemental of any other powers and authority granted to the city council and its agents by any state statute or city ordinance. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-64)) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. ch. 13. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAWNBROKERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; municipal authorities may license pawnbrokers, define their powers and privileges by ordinance, impose taxes upon them, revoke their licenses, and exercise such general supervision, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136. 

Sec. 10-19. - Registers. 
(a)  All pawnbrokers, pawnshops, and similar establishments shall maintain a register in which shall be entered in legible English, at the time of each loan, purchase or sale, the information set out in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132. 
(b)  Such information described in subsection (a) of this section shall be maintained by the operator of such business for a period of four years from the date of entry and may be reviewed at any time by the police chief. 
(Code 2003, § 18-31; Ord. of 8-3-1993, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 10-20. - Compliance required. 
Failure to comply with all the provisions of this article shall be grounds for revocation of any business license issued to any such establishment. 
(Code 2003, § 18-32; Ord. of 8-3-1993, § 4) 
Secs. 10-21—10-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POOL AND BILLIARD TABLES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Power of local governments to license, regulate and tax billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-44. - Hours of operation. 
No pool table or billiard table shall be operated or conducted or permitted to be operated or conducted by the licensee between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. No pool table or billiard table shall be operated at any time on Sunday. 
(Code 1980, § 18-61; Code 2003, § 18-61) 
Sec. 10-45. - Gambling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any pool table or billiard table in the city for the purpose of gambling on the games. Proof of gambling thereon shall be considered prima facie evidence that such tables were kept in violation of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 18-62; Code 2003, § 18-62) 
Secs. 10-46—10-63. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 10-64. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct for hire or profit, in the city, any pool table or billiard table, without first having made written application for, and obtaining from the city council a permit to do so. 
(Code 1980, § 13-101; Code 2003, § 18-81) 
Sec. 10-65. - Application; information required. 
Applications for permits to conduct a pool table or billiard table shall be made in the name of the person desiring to engage in the business, and, in the case of firms or corporations, the individual names of those composing the firm and the managing officers of the corporation. The application shall specify the following information: 
(1)  The year which the permit is to cover. 
(2)  The location of the place of business. 
(3)  The number and kinds of tables to be operated. 
(4)  If such business is to be operated in connection with any kind of business, the nature of that business. 
(Code 1980, § 13-102; Code 2003, § 18-82) 
Sec. 10-66. - Granting of permit. 
No application for a permit to operate a pool table or billiard table in the city shall be granted until such application shall have been read one time at two regular meetings of the city council. When such application for a permit is presented to the council and before such application is finally acted upon, any adjoining property owners or tenants or any property owner or tenant within a radius of 300 feet of the main entrance of the building in which the proposed pool table or billiard table is to be operated may file with the council any objections, in person or in writing, that they may have to the granting of such permit. The council may hear evidence on such objections after notice and an opportunity to be heard to all parties and if, in the opinion of the council, such permit should not be granted, the council may refuse such application for a permit. 
(Code 1980, § 13-103; Code 2003, § 18-83) 
Secs. 10-67—10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLICITORS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq.; Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Registered solicitor means any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as provided in this article, which certificate is in the possession of the solicitor on his person while engaged in soliciting. 
Residence means every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
Soliciting means any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, or services of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character; 
(3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or 
(4)  Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation, or project. 
(Code 2003, § 18-101; Ord. of 10-4-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 10-92. - Certificate of registration required. 
Every person desiring to engage in soliciting from persons in residences within the city is required to make written application for a certificate of registration. Such certificate shall be carried by the solicitor. 
(Code 2003, § 18-102; Ord. of 10-4-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 10-93. - Application for certificate of registration. 
(a)  Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the city. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, as follows: 
(1)  Name and address of the present place of residence and length of the residence at such address; also the business address if other than the present address. 
(2)  Address of the place of residence during the past three years if other than the present address. 
(3)  Age of the applicant. 
(4)  Physical description of the applicant. 
(5)  Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association whom the applicant is employed by or represents; and the length of time of such employment or representation. 
(6)  Name and address of the employer during the past three years if other than the present employer. 
(7)  Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage. 
(8)  Period of time for which the certificate is applied. 
(9)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for certificate under this article, if any. 
(10)  Whether a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under this article has ever been revoked. 
(11)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United States. 
(b)  All statements made by the applicant upon the application for a certificate of registration or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
(c)  The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the police department of the city in connection with the application for the certificate of registration. 
(d)  The city clerk shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this article, and of the denial of applications. Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every certificate issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. 
(e)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United States, within five years of the date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, nor to any person whose certificate of registration issued under this article has previously been revoked as provided in this article. 
(Code 2003, § 18-103; Ord. of 10-4-1983, § 3) 
Sec. 10-94. - Revocation of certificate. 
Any certificate of registration issued under this article shall be revoked by the police chief if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the police chief to the holder of the certificate in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his residence address set forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of registration shall become null and void. The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof. 
(Code 2003, § 18-104; Ord. of 10-4-1983, § 4) 
Sec. 10-95. - Notice regulating soliciting. 
Every person desiring to secure the protection provided by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this article shall comply with the following directions. Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence, shall be given in the manner following: A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches in size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words, as follows: "Only Solicitors Registered in the City of Leesburg Invited" or "No Solicitors Invited." The letters shall be at least one-third inch in height. For the purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the police chief to persons requesting, at the cost thereof. Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the information contained thereon. 
(Code 2003, § 18-105; Ord. of 10-4-1983, § 5) 
Sec. 10-96. - Duty of solicitors. 
It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the city upon which a residence is located to first examine the notice provided for in this article, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on any notice. If the notice states "Only Solicitors Registered in the City of Leesburg Invited," then the solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of registration shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises; and if the notice states "No Solicitors Invited," then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(Code 2003, § 18-106; Ord. of 10-4-1983, § 6) 
Sec. 10-97. - Uninvited soliciting prohibited. 
It is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of section 10-96. 
(Code 2003, § 18-107; Ord. of 10-4-1983, § 7) 
Sec. 10-98. - Time limit on soliciting. 
It is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether registered under this article or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. of any weekday, or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday. 
(Code 2003, § 18-108; Ord. of 10-4-1983, § 8) 
Chapter 12 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— A comprehensive emergency operations plan was approved by city and county officials on April 1, 1994. The plan will be amended from time to time and activated by the county emergency management director when directed by the chairman of the board of commissioners or when an emergency is declared by the governor. An official copy of the plan is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible; to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Firefighting services; 
(2)  Police services; 
(3)  Emergency medical services; 
(4)  Rescue; 
(5)  Engineering; 
(6)  Warning services; 
(7)  Communications; 
(8)  Defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; 
(9)  Evacuation of persons from stricken areas; 
(10)  Emergency welfare services; 
(11)  Emergency transportation; 
(12)  Consequence management functions to include victim services; 
(13)  Plant protection; 
(14)  Temporary restoration of public utility services; and 
(15)  Other functions related to civilian protection; together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the functions enumerated in this definition. 
(Code 2003, § 22-31) 
Sec. 12-20. - Unlawful acts during emergencies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts during an emergency: 
(1)  Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management corps in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this article. 
(2)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy; imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of the city; or prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(3)  Wear, carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. 
(Code 2003, § 22-32) 
Secs. 12-21—12-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY AUTHORITY OF MAYOR 

Sec. 12-44. - Conditions authorizing declaration of emergency. 
The mayor shall have the right to declare an emergency to exist when, in his opinion, one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions. 
(2)  Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of city streets or areas difficult or impossible. 
(3)  Civil unrest, commotion or uprising is imminent or exists. 
(4)  There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city. 
(Code 2003, § 22-51) 
Sec. 12-45. - Powers after declaration. 
After declaration of an emergency under section 12-44, the mayor shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
(1)  Use employees of the city to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb and property of its citizenry. 
(2)  Close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists. 
(3)  Impose emergency curfew regulations. 
(4)  Close business establishments within the affected area. 
(5)  Close any or all city-owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public. 
(6)  Do all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the city. 
(Code 2003, § 22-52) 
Sec. 12-46. - Effective period of emergency powers. 
No emergency power as set forth in section 12-45 may be effective for more than 72 hours after the declaration of an emergency by the mayor. However, upon declaration of a second or further emergencies to exist, the emergency powers as set forth in section 12-45 may be exercised during such further emergency periods, but never for more than 72 hours in one declared emergency period. 
(Code 2003, § 22-53) 
Sec. 12-47. - Duration. 
No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular, special or called meeting of the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2003, § 22-54) 
Sec. 12-48. - Specified area. 
The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the city shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
(Code 2003, § 22-55) 
Secs. 12-49—12-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 12-70. - Participation. 
It is the desire and intent of the mayor and city council that the city be a part of the county emergency management agency. 
(Code 2003, § 22-81) 
Sec. 12-71. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 2003, § 22-82) 
Sec. 12-72. - Appointment of director. 
The chairman of the county commission, with concurrence of the mayors of cities within the county, shall nominate for appointment, by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. 
(Code 2003, § 22-83) 
Sec. 12-73. - Duties of director. 
When appointed, as stated in section 12-72, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the mayor and city council on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist city officials in organizing city departments. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county plan for emergency functions set forth in section 12-74. Such plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities therein for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices (e.g., financial, daily activity, etc.). 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, under the supervision of the county governing officials. 
(Code 2003, § 22-84) 
Sec. 12-74. - Composition; functions. 
(a)  The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing city and county departments. The emergency functions are assigned as follows: 

 
(b)  Heads of city departments listed in subsection (a) of this section are responsible for developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Code 2003, § 22-85) 
Sec. 12-75. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
Upon a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor separately, or jointly with the chair of the county commissioners, or in their absences their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise, for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  Enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources. 
(2)  Seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public. 
(3)  Sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)  Perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Code 2003, § 22-86) 
Sec. 12-76. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, volunteering in service pursuant to the defense under this article shall serve without compensation. While engaged in such service, they shall have the same immunities as officers and employees of the city performing similar duties. 
(Code 2003, § 22-87) 
Chapter 14 - COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Sessions. 
(a)  The municipal court for the city shall be convened and held at 9:00 a.m. on the second Tuesday of each month, unless such convening is made unnecessary by a lack of cases to try. 
(b)  The regular once monthly convening day or hour may be changed by the judge of such court when, in his discretion, such changes may be necessary. 
(Code 2003, § 26-1; Res. of 3-7-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Duty of police officers—Persons violating city ordinances. 
Any police officer of the city shall arrest and confine in the county jail, when necessary, any offender against ordinances of the city, where such arrest and confinement is necessary to secure such offender's appearance before the municipal court to answer for his offense, or where it is necessary to preserve the peace and good order of the city. 
(Code 2003, § 26-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Same—Persons violating certain state laws. 
Any person who shall, in the presence of any police officer, violate any penal laws of the state not punishable by city ordinances shall be arrested with or without a warrant and be carried before the appropriate judicial officer for examination and prosecution. 
(Code 2003, § 26-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Docket. 
It shall be the duty of the court clerk to keep a docket showing the disposition of all cases brought before the municipal court. At the trial of all cases, the court clerk shall record opposite the statement of the case the punishment inflicted and the date; and an entry shall be made under the sentence of the judge of the municipal court showing the final disposition of the case, including whether the fine, if any, was collected, the date of such collection and the disposition of such amounts. 
(Code 1980, § 14-105; Code 2003, § 26-4) 
Sec. 14-5. - Warrant or summons; issuance. 
It shall be the duty of any member of the police department, in all cases where complaint is made or information obtained of any violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the city, to issue an accusation/summons in the name of the city and directed to the accused, requiring him to appear before the municipal court to answer such charge, which accusation/summons shall designate the time and place of trial. It shall be signed by the officer issuing the accusation/summons, and a copy shall be served upon the accused personally. 
(Code 2003, § 26-5) 
Sec. 14-6. - Procedure for service of process on corporations. 
(a)  In addition to any other means provided by law, corporations may be served in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Whenever any charge shall be preferred against a corporation doing business in the city for violation of this chapter or other ordinance of the city, the court clerk shall issue an original and copy notice to the defendant corporation of the charge against such corporation, specifying the time when such charge shall be heard by the municipal court, which copy notice shall be served by the police chief or any police officer of the city, or the sheriff of the county, at least ten days before the time fixed for trial in the municipal court upon any officer of such corporation to be found in the city, or upon any agent of such corporation, or employee in charge of the business of such corporation, in the city. The officer serving such copy notice shall make an entry of such service on the original notice and return the notice to the municipal court. Such service shall be service upon the corporation; and such case shall, upon the return of such notice as provided in this section, stand for trial before the municipal court at the time stated in such notice. 
(Code 2003, § 26-7) 
Sec. 14-7. - Issuance of subpoenas. 
Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the municipal court to establish any fact, the court clerk shall issue a subpoena or summons directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, which shall be served as other process by the police chief, or other officer or police officer. 
(Code 2003, § 26-8) 
Sec. 14-8. - Failure of defendant to appear at trial; failure to plead; judge's entry of plea; conviction. 
At the time fixed for trial in municipal court, if the defendant corporation fails to appear, or appearing fails to plead, the municipal court judge or other official presiding over the municipal court shall cause to be entered a plea of not guilty, and the trial shall proceed as though the defendant had appeared and pleaded. Upon the conviction of any corporation in any such trial, there shall be rendered a judgment against it for the fine imposed, upon which an execution shall issue, signed by the municipal court judge and court clerk in favor of the city against the property of the defendant corporation. 
(Code 1980, § 14-110; Code 2003, § 26-9) 
Sec. 14-9. - Contempt for failure of witness to appear. 
If any person summoned as a witness shall fail, neglect or refuse to attend the trial, or render an excuse, sufficient in the judgment of the judge of the municipal court, the defaulting witness shall be liable to punishment for contempt of court. If the cause shall be continued on account of the absence of the witness, the court may issue attachment against the witness, requiring him to show cause on the day appointed for trial why he should not be further dealt with for contempt. The police chief shall, by virtue of the attachment, arrest such witness, or cause him to be arrested by some other officer or police officer, and shall confine him, so as to have him before the court at such time as may be appointed for further hearing of the original complaint. 
(Code 1980, § 14-106; Code 2003, § 26-10) 
Sec. 14-10. - Continuances. 
Where the ends of justice may require, all cases may be continued. Applications for continuance shall be addressed to the sound discretion of the court, under the rules governing in the superior courts of the state. All motions in the municipal court for a continuance of any case where the defendant is at liberty on bond shall be made by the defendant, his attorney at law or his attorney in fact, which designation shall not include the surety of his appearance bond. Where an appearance bond has been forfeited and the forfeiture is subsequently set aside for cause, no further motion to continue the case for trial shall be entertained until a forfeiture fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk, has been paid. 
(Code 2003, § 26-11) 
Sec. 14-11. - Holding defendant when court lacks jurisdiction. 
If, after an investigation of any case, it should appear that the municipal court has no jurisdiction to determine it, the judge shall require the defendant to enter into bond conditioned to appear before the next term of the court having jurisdiction, to answer such offense, which bond shall be turned over to the proper officer of such court. In default of such bond, the judge shall have power to commit the defendant to jail to answer the offense at the next term of court having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Code 2003, § 26-12) 
Sec. 14-12. - Rules of practice. 
The city shall have the opening and conclusion in each case unless the defendant introduces no evidence. The defendant shall then be entitled to the conclusion. The city shall announce first if it is ready for trial; and if not, it shall be held to as strict a showing for continuances as the defendant. The rules of evidence and examination of witnesses shall be the same as in the superior courts, so far as such rules are applicable to the case on trial. All officers, informers and persons injured shall be competent witnesses. In general, the municipal court shall be controlled by the rules of practice governing the superior courts, so far as they are applicable to municipal courts, and by a sound construction of the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 2003, § 26-13) 
Sec. 14-13. - Guilty pleas. 
Any party charged with the violation of any provision of this chapter or any ordinance of the city may file his plea of guilty under such rules as the court may direct. Upon a plea of guilty, the court shall pass sentence or judgment in the case as may appear reasonable and proper. 
(Code 2003, § 26-14) 
Sec. 14-14. - Minimum costs; working out. 
In each case of a conviction in the municipal court, the costs assessable shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. Costs shall go into the general fund of the city for general municipal purposes. Defendants unable to pay costs, and compelled in lieu of payment to work on the public works, shall be each required to work two days to cover costs. 
(Code 1980, § 14-111; Code 2003, § 26-15) 
Secs. 14-15—14-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPEARANCE BOND 

Sec. 14-32. - Persons refusing to give bond. 
If any arrested person or necessary witness shall fail to give the bond and security required of him, such person so refusing may be confined in the county jail, or be kept under guard so as to be present at his trial or to testify, as the case may be. 
(Code 2003, § 26-51) 
Sec. 14-33. - Delivery of principal prior to judgment and forfeiture; release of surety. 
Any surety upon any bail bond of any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter or other ordinance of the city may surrender his principal at any time before forfeiture to the chief of police, who shall confine such principal until discharged by order of the municipal court, or until such principal shall give other good and acceptable security; and the delivery of the principal by the surety shall discharge such surety from all liability upon the bond. 
(Code 2003, § 26-55) 
Sec. 14-34. - Disposition of money pledges. 
If the person arrested shall fail to appear at the place and time of trial so appointed, it shall be the duty of the judge of the municipal court to declare any pledge forfeited and to order the money to be paid into the city treasury as in other fines and forfeitures if it has not already been deposited in such treasury. If the person so arrested shall appear as engaged and is adjudged not guilty, the money and the property thus deposited shall be ordered by the court delivered up to the person making the deposit. Should any accused person be adjudged guilty and fined on his trial, the amount of the fine and costs of the trial shall be paid into the city treasury and the remainder, if any, refunded to the accused or to the person entitled to the fine and costs. 
(Code 2003, § 26-56) 
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Soil and sedimentation control, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7; jurisdiction of municipal courts to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within the motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14. 

Sec. 16-19. - Loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise declared unlawful; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise that unreasonably or unnecessarily annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against the following: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses that are noncommercial in character. 
(Code 2003, § 30-31) 
Sec. 16-20. - Certain acts constituting violations. 
The following acts, among others, shall constitute a violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns or signaling devices. 
a.  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city except as a danger warning; 
b.  The creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an unreasonable period of time; 
c.  The use of any signaling device, except a police whistle or one operated by hand or electricity; 
d.  The use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and 
e.  The use of any such signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, other machines or devices that produce or reproduce sound. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers, or other devices for production or reproduction of sound for advertising. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure without a special permit from the city clerk or city council. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer, in person, and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird that will disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise. 
(6)  Steam whistle. The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(9)  Loading, unloading, or opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except on urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the county building inspection department, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed by the city council for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the city council determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., and further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the council may grant permission for such work to be done from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., upon application made at the time the permit for the work is applied for or during the progress of the work. 
(11)  Schools, courts, churches, or hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while they are in session or adjacent to any hospital, and which unreasonably interferes with the work of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed about such institutions indicating the presence of such institutions. 
(12)  Hawkers, peddlers and vendors. The shouting and crying of hawkers, peddlers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(13)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, or sale by creation of noise. 
(14)  Transportation of metal rails, pillars or columns. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. 
(15)  Piledrivers, hammers, and other such appliances. The operation from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise without a special permit from the city council. 
(16)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(17)  Sound trucks. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes; the use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during such hours or in such places or with such volume as would constitute such use a public nuisance. 
(Code 2003, § 30-32) 
Secs. 16-21—16-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; power of municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise without limitation or impairment by provisions of state law, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-44. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything within the city that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. 
(Code 2003, § 30-61; Ord. of 4-5-1982, § 1(9-101)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. 
Sec. 16-45. - Certain conditions deemed nuisances. 
(a)  Nuisances nonexclusive but supplemental. The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this article. 
(b)  Declaration of nuisances. The following are declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the community. 
(2)  Obnoxious and offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood thereof. 
(3)  Discharging of offensive matter. The placing, throwing or discharging from any house or premises, and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(4)  Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. 
(5)  Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, as published and used by the United States Geological Survey, shall be the standard for such grading, and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(6)  Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  Nonconforming structures and machines. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or city ordinance. 
(8)  Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. 
(9)  Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city. 
(10)  Depositing trash, garbage, and refuse, on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish or trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the city or which unreasonably annoys others. 
(11)  Unoccupied buildings. Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleansed. 
(12)  Unsafe vehicles, machinery, and other personal property. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards). The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junked. 
(13)  Gutters or spouts. Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any street, lane or alley of the city. 
(Code 2003, § 30-62; Ord. of 4-5-1982, § 1(9-103)) 
Sec. 16-46. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city, and any such existing nuisance may be abated as provided in this article. 
(Code 2003, § 30-63; Ord. of 4-5-1982, § 1(9-102)) 
Sec. 16-47. - Issuance of summons for abatement. 
Whenever any nuisance exists within the city, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the city that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the city, and the owner or other person responsible therefor refuses or fails after reasonable notice to demolish, remove or abate such nuisance or condition, the police chief, or the officer having responsibility for the enforcement of such notice to abate, may issue a summons and cause such summons to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for such condition, describing the condition complained of and specifying the ordinances or parts thereof claimed to be violated thereby, and requiring such person to appear before the municipal judge at a time, date and place specified therein, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
(Code 2003, § 30-64; Ord. of 4-5-1982, § 1(9-104)) 
Sec. 16-48. - Order for abatement. 
(a)  If the municipal judge at the hearing required by section 16-47 shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this article or the ordinances of the city is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his order and judgment so finding and shall order the property owner or other person responsible therefor to demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. The order shall provide how the condition is to be abated, including, but not limited to, rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. The order shall further provide that if the property owner or other person responsible therefor shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the city shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever action is deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition, and the expense thereof shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for city taxes. 
(b)  Execution shall issue for such costs as in the case of city taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as in the case of city taxes. 
(Code 2003, § 30-65; Ord. of 4-5-1982, § 1(9-106), (9-108)) 
State Law reference— Authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 16-49. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth in sections 16-47 and 16-48. 
(Code 2003, § 30-67; Ord. of 4-5-1982, § 1(9-105, 9-110)) 
Sec. 16-50. - Service on nonresidents and others. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the city to proceed under sections 16-47 and 16-48 and the owner of the property or other person responsible therefor resides outside the city limits, or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by section 16-48 shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the property involved, and by publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the city once a week for four consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten days nor less than one day prior to the hearing. Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the person at such address by certified mail. In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person within the city limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
(Code 2003, § 30-68; Ord. of 4-5-1982, § 1(9-111)) 
Sec. 16-51. - Other powers preserved. 
Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish for any violations which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply with his order. 
(Code 2003, § 30-69; Ord. of 4-5-1982, § 1(9-109)) 
Secs. 16-52—16-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Counties and municipalities authorized to enact ordinances for removal of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 

Sec. 16-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Code enforcement officer means the code enforcement officer of the city and/or the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
Day or days means each and every day except that the first day shall not be counted but the last shall be counted; and if the last day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the party shall have the privilege or duty of acting to exercise its privilege or discharge its duty on the next business after such Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
Inoperative means not capable of being moved under its own power without additional work or repairs being completed to the motor vehicle, or without any additional components being added to or placed upon said motor vehicle. 
Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate and a current license decal, or the condition of such motor vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is or is intended to be self-propelled and designed to travel on the ground and shall include, but shall not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailers, as well as any part thereof. 
Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public property means any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly maintained way and dedicated to the purposes of vehicular traffic, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-65)) 
Sec. 16-77. - Declared nuisance. 
No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked motor vehicle of any kind upon any private property within any residential or commercial zoning district or within 500 feet of those zoning districts of the incorporated areas of the city for a period of time in excess of 30 calendar days. The presence of a junked motor vehicle, or parts thereof on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-66)) 
Sec. 16-78. - Exemptions. 
Those vehicles which are exempted from the provisions of this division are as follows: 
(1)  Any motor vehicles or parts thereof which are located on the premises of licensed automobile dealers; 
(2)  Any motor vehicles or parts thereof which are located on the premises of any licensed junkyard operated in compliance with state and local laws relating to licensing, regulating and zoning of such junkyards; 
(3)  Any motor vehicle enclosed within a building on private property which is not a hazard to public health and which is not an attractive nuisance to children; 
(4)  Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways; 
(5)  Any motor vehicles in the process of being restored to an operable condition, provided they: 
a.  Are limited to no more than one in number; 
b.  Are located in the rear yard and behind the house of the owner of such vehicles; 
c.  Are not visible from any road; 
d.  Maintain a current tag decal; and 
e.  Are enclosed or covered in such a way so as not to be an attractive nuisance to children. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-67)) 
Sec. 16-79. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever it comes to the attention of the code enforcement officer that any nuisance exists in the city, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the real property where the nuisance exists, upon the owner of the property, and upon the owner of the junked motor vehicle or other property which constitutes such nuisance, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and directing its removal within 30 days. In the event that such owners cannot be located, or in the event that the address of such owners is unknown, then notice shall be made to the last known address of such owners, or in the event that the identity of such owners cannot be ascertained after due investigation, such notice shall be posted in a prominent location on the premises where the nuisance exists, and upon the junked motor vehicle itself. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-68)) 
Sec. 16-80. - Responsibility for removal. 
Upon such notice, the owner of the junked motor vehicle, and the owner or occupant of the private property upon which the same is located, either, or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event that such owners fail to remove such vehicle and thereby abate such nuisance within the 30-day time period provided in the notice, the code enforcement officer shall be authorized to institute proceedings against such owner in the municipal court pursuant to the ordinances and rules of said court, and such person shall be notified of the date and time of the hearing scheduled no later than five days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall be served upon such owner in the same manner as provided for service of notice of ordinance violations in this Code. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-49)) 
Sec. 16-81. - Hearing. 
(a)  At the hearing, the court shall determine the owner of the vehicle and whether or not a nuisance exists and, if so, the court shall order abatement of such nuisance and shall impose such penalties as may be authorized by this division for failure to abate such nuisance. 
(b)  In the event that the court determines that a nuisance exists and abatement thereof is ordered, the court shall be authorized to grant the owner a period of time, not to exceed 15 days, to abate such nuisance. The court shall further include in its order provisions authorizing the city to abate such nuisance if such nuisance is not abated by the owner within the time period for such abatement as ordered by the court. Such order shall also include authority for the city to enter upon the premises upon which the nuisance exists and abate the same, and shall further provide that the cost of abatement of the nuisance incurred by the city shall be assessed against the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance existed. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-70)) 
Sec. 16-82. - Abatement by the city. 
In the event that the nuisance is abated by the city pursuant to the authority of the order of the court authorized by this division, the city shall abate the nuisance in the following manner: 
(1)  The city shall hire a wrecker service, or such other service as may be required, to remove the nuisance, and direct that the nuisance be removed to a local licensed junkyard or other similar facility. 
(2)  The wrecker service hired to remove the nuisance shall notify the owner of the property and the owner of the motor vehicle, within ten days of removal of the property, of the location of the junked motor vehicle and of the cost incurred by the owner in connection with the abatement service. Such cost may include the actual cost of removal of the motor vehicle and storage charges, if applicable, up to and including the date of payment by the owner. 
(3)  In the event that the owner does not pay the charges or otherwise recover the motor vehicle within such time as maybe established by the wrecker service or by state law, the wrecker service may be authorized to recover its costs and expenses and dispose of the property in accord with general provisions of state law. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-71)) 
Sec. 16-83. - Penalty for failure to abate. 
Each day which the court finds the nuisance has existed shall constitute a separate offense, and each such offense shall subject the violator, upon conviction therefor, to the punishment set forth under section 1-13. 
(Res. of 11-4-2008, § 1(14-72)) 
Secs. 16-84—16-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VEGETATION 

Sec. 16-110. - Planting and removal of trees and shrubs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure or cut any tree, bush or shrub in or from any public street, parkway or other public place without first obtaining the approval for such action from the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(11)(a); Code 2003, § 62-1) 
Sec. 16-111. - Advertisements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(11)(b); Code 2003, § 62-2) 
Sec. 16-112. - Dangerous trees. 
Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. The city manager may cause to be trimmed or removed any and all such trees or shrubs so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be removed. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(11)(c); Code 2003, § 62-3) 
Sec. 16-113. - Poles and wires. 
Any person or company which maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys, or other public places of the city shall keep such wires and poles free and away from any nearby trees or shrubs in such places, and keep all such trees or shrubs properly trimmed, so that no injury shall befall either the poles and wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact. 
Sec. 16-114. - Certain weeds, grasses and plants declared a nuisance; exemptions. 
(a)  Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city, and any weeds, grasses or plants other than trees, brushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the city are declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this division. 
(b)  Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section. 
(c)  The provisions of this division shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, and to the original city lots. They shall not apply to undeveloped areas of unsubdivided land within the city. 
(Code 2003, § 30-91) 
Sec. 16-115. - Notice to abate. 
(a)  For a violation of this division, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove such excess growth within seven days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, or may be served by registered or certified mail, or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. 
(b)  Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property, shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address could not be made. 
(Code 2003, § 30-93) 
Sec. 16-116. - Abatement by city; notice of abatement. 
(a)  Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified pursuant to the provisions of section 16-115, the city is authorized to have the contractor enter upon the property, and the contractor is authorized to enter such property, and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. The city shall issue a lot cleaning order to the contractor, who shall promptly perform the work and submit his bill to the city. The city shall inspect the work and, if satisfactory, shall approve the bill for payment and forward it to the finance director/tax collector for payment. 
(b)  The finance director/tax collector shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment thereof on or before a date named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than 15 days nor later than 45 days after payment to the contractor. 
(c)  If payment under subsection (b) of this section shall not have been made on or before the date named, the finance director/tax collector shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the municipal judge, notifying such owner to show cause before the judge at a time and place and on a date named therein why execution should not issue against the property for its approval amount. 
(d)  If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this division, that the notice required of section 16-115 was given, that the work was performed and the cost thereof paid by the city, and that the city has not been reimbursed, execution shall issue for such amount, signed by and executed by the police chief in the same manner as tax executions are executed. 
(e)  If the owner of the property is unknown, or cannot be located, the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply, but in lieu thereof a notice shall be published once a week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, which notice shall be addressed "To Whom It May Concern," shall describe with reasonable particularity the property involved, a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation, and shall notify all persons interested to show cause before the municipal judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue in rem against the property for such amount. In such event, subsection (a) of this section will apply, but the execution shall issue against the property in rem. 
(Code 2003, § 30-94) 
Sec. 16-117. - Remedies. 
The remedies provided in this division are cumulative of all other remedies the city has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this division. Nothing in this division shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code, all ordinances, laws or regulations of the city, or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance, and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 2003, § 30-95) 
Sec. 16-118. - Award of contracts for clearing of lots by city. 
Prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, the city shall obtain bids from contractors or other qualified persons for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation not in excess of two inches in diameter, and for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation in excess of two inches but not in excess of four inches in diameter, and the city manager shall award a contract to the lowest and best bidder, such contract to remain in effect during the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Code 2003, § 30-96) 
Secs. 16-119—16-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 

Sec. 16-150. - Nuisance declared. 
A violation of any provision of this division is a nuisance. 
(Code 2003, § 30-121) 
Sec. 16-151. - Keeping water in which mosquitoes may breed. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is so treated as to effectually prevent such breeding. 
(b)  The collections of water prohibited by subsection (a) of this section shall be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, or other similar water containers. 
(Code 2003, § 30-122) 
Sec. 16-152. - Treatment of collections of water. 
The method of treatment of any collections of water, as specified in section 16-151, directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes, shall be approved by the county health officer and may be one or more of the following: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way, or with any other material that will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers together with their thorough drying and cleaning. 
(3)  Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the county health officer. 
(4)  Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven days. 
(5)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish. 
(6)  Filling and draining to the satisfaction of the county health officer, his agent or accredited representative. 
(7)  Proper disposal by removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
(Code 2003, § 30-123) 
Sec. 16-153. - Mosquito larvae as evidence of breeding. 
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there, and failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the county health officer, his authorized agent or representative shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
(Code 2003, § 30-124) 
Sec. 16-154. - Failure to remedy conditions after notice. 
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent such breeding, within three days after due notice has been given to him, the county health officer or his authorized agent is authorized to do so, and all necessary costs incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending, as the case may be. 
(Code 2003, § 30-125) 
Sec. 16-155. - Right of entry of health officer. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this division, the county health officer, or his duly accredited agent under his authority, may at all reasonable times lawfully enter upon any land within the city. 
(Code 2003, § 30-126) 
Secs. 16-156—16-178. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 16-179. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer: 
(1)  Which has been left by the owner or some person acting for the owner with an automobile dealer, repairman, or wrecker service for repair or for some other reason and has not been called for by such owner or other person within a period of 30 days after the time agreed upon; or within 30 days after such vehicle is turned over to such dealer, repairman, or wrecker service when no time is agreed upon; or within 30 days after the completion of necessary repairs; 
(2)  Which is left unattended on a public street, road, or highway or other public property for a period of at least five days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(3)  Which has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a law enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim thereto; 
(4)  Which has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without the owner's having made claim thereto; or 
(5)  Which has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim thereto. 
Motor vehicle and vehicle mean motor vehicle or trailer. 
Owner means the owner, lessor, lessee, security interest holders, and all lienholders as shown on the records of the state department of revenue. 
(Code 2003, § 30-151) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. 
Sec. 16-180. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant, or otherwise to store or deposit, or cause or permit to be stored or deposited, any abandoned motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 2003, § 30-152) 
Sec. 16-181. - Removal—Required. 
Any abandoned or discarded motor vehicle shall be removed upon ten days' written notice to the owner or occupant of any premises upon which the motor vehicle is stored or deposited, or to the owner thereof if the identity of such owner of the motor vehicle can be ascertained through license plates or otherwise. If such motor vehicle is not removed after ten days' written notice, the police department shall remove such motor vehicle or cause the removal and sale at the cost of the owner or occupant of the premises, or the owner of such motor vehicle, if such owner can be ascertained. Sale shall be made to the highest of two bids obtained from dealers in such property. 
(Code 2003, § 30-153) 
Sec. 16-182. - Same—Notice to owner and state. 
(a)  Any person who removes a motor vehicle from public or private property at the request of someone other than the owner or who stores any motor vehicle which has been left unattended shall seek the identity of the owner of such vehicle and shall, within 15 days of the day such vehicle became an abandoned motor vehicle, give notice in writing to the state department of revenue and the state bureau of investigation, stating the manufacturer's vehicle identification number, the license number, the fact that such vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle, and the present location of such vehicle, and requesting the name and address of all owners, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of such vehicle. If a person removing or storing the vehicle has knowledge of facts which reasonably indicate that the vehicle is registered or titled in a certain other state, he shall check the motor vehicle records of that other state in an attempt to ascertain the identity of the owner of the vehicle. 
(b)  Upon ascertaining the owner of such motor vehicle, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall, within three days, by certified or registered mail, notify the owner, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of the location of such vehicle and of the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(c)  If the identity of the owner of such motor vehicle cannot be ascertained, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall place an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where such vehicle was obtained or, if there is no newspaper in the county, shall post such advertisement at the county courthouse in such place where other public notices are posted. Such advertisement shall run in the newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks or shall remain posted at the courthouse for two consecutive weeks. The advertisement shall contain a complete description of the motor vehicle, its license and manufacturer's vehicle identification numbers, the location where such vehicle was initially left unattended by the owner, the present location of such vehicle, and the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(Code 2003, § 30-154) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2. 
Secs. 16-183—16-202. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 

Sec. 16-203. - Title. 
This article will be known as the "Lee County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 10-4-2016, § I) 
Sec. 16-204. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) includes sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the state department of natural resources (DNR). 
Design professional means: 
(1)  A professional licensed by the state in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or 
(2)  A person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. 
Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable state law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Lower Chattahoochee Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 16-206(c). 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual, excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 16-205(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the State General Permit. 
Operator means the party that has operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia ("manual"), published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Lower Chattahoochee Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface water or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. ch. 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2016, § II) 
Sec. 16-205. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "Definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 16-206(c)(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2016, § III) 
Sec. 16-206. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Best management practices (BMPs). 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The local issuing authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15), (16) and (17) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  Minimum requirements. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsections (c)(16) and (17) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this subsection, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year-round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed ; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280 et seq., the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this subsection, maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat. 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a minor buffer impact as defined in Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Additional requirements. Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Presumption of violation. The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2016, § IV) 
Sec. 16-207. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county as established by intergovernmental agreement between Lee County and the cities of Leesburg and Smithville without first obtaining a permit from the county development services department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD, if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the director of planning and engineering of the county and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 16-206(b) and (c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans together with two copies of stormwater calculations. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-7-.10). 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fee of $450.00 payable to the county, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 16-206(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with the plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with the plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section or other violations within the Lee County Land Development Code (Appendix C to this Code), or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, on any single site or cumulative sites in the county within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(7)  The planning and engineering department shall be authorized to issue a land development permit to approved applicants only after the following items for a complete application have been submitted: 
a.  The $80.00 per disturbed acre fee has been paid with $40.00 paid to the district and $40.00 to the local issuing authority (i.e., Lee County). 
b.  Approval from NRCS of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. 
c.  The issuing authority (i.e., the county planning and engineering department) is provided with a copy of the NOI filed with the division for coverage under the general permit. 
d.  All other applicable fees have been paid in full. 
e.  All other requirements for issuance of a land development permit have been satisfied. 
f.  Written proof that the applicant for the permit is the owner or the contractor of the owner with respect to the proposed project for which such permit is sought. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 16-206(b) and (c), or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 16-206(c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 10-4-2016, § V) 
Sec. 16-208. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The planning and engineering director or his designee will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
(c)  The planning and engineering director shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission, or both, shall semiannually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission, or both, may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f) The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2016, § VI) 
Sec. 16-209. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 16-207(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2016, § VII) 
Sec. 16-210. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in such statute. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2016, § VIII) 
Sec. 16-211. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the county board of commissioners within 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2016, § IX) 
Sec. 16-212. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.) or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2016, § X) 
Chapter 18 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Authorization. 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § II and O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 18-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 18-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 18-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 18-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the zoning administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 18-7. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before September 2, 2009. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 2, 2009. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after September 2, 2009, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after September 2, 2009, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after September 2, 2009. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any chapter requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or, in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
(2)  For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include: 
a.  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 6) 
Sec. 18-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 18-7. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 2, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS, dated September 2, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for unincorporated Lee County, Georgia, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS (currently in the city's corporate limits). 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the offices of the county building inspector and code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 18-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 18-9. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 18-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter conflicts or overlaps with another chapter or ordinance, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 18-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 18-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 18-13. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 18-14—18-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 18-45. - Designation of administrator. 
The county zoning administrator, acting with authority for the city, is hereby appointed to administer and, through an intergovernmental agreement, implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 18-46. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 18-69(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
c.  The administrator shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 18-47. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
(a)  Duties of the administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-7, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 18-46(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 18-46(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 18-46(1)c and section 18-69(2) or 18-71(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 18-48—18-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 18-68. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 18-69. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. 
a.  Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-68(4). 
b.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 18-47. 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; 
where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (See section 18-68(6).) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  Meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of section 18-69(3)a. 
(4)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-7 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided that it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 18-70. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-7, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-7, then the administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-68(4). 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
b.  The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 18-71. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zone AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-7, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (Zone AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 18-69. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 18-72. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-7 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-68(4). The zoning administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 18-46(1)c and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 18-73. - Standards for subdivisions. 
The following standards shall apply to subdivisions: 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 18-74. - Standards for critical facilities. 
The following standards shall apply to critical facilities: 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 4, § G) 
Secs. 18-75—18-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 18-92. - Authority of city council. 
The city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 5, § A) 
Sec. 18-93. - Hearing and decision of appeals. 
The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 5, § B) 
Sec. 18-94. - Appeals to superior court. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 5, § C) 
Sec. 18-95. - Historic structures. 
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 5, § D) 
Sec. 18-96. - Functionally dependent uses. 
Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 5, § E) 
Sec. 18-97. - Floodways. 
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 5, § F) 
Sec. 18-98. - Considerations. 
In reviewing such requests, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 5, § G) 
Sec. 18-99. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(1)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)  The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 5, § H) 
Sec. 18-100. - Conditions attached to variance. 
Upon consideration of the factors listed in this article and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2009, art. 5, § I) 
Chapter 20 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Authority. 
The ordinance from which this chapter is derived is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the city council under Ga. Const. art. IX, § 4, ¶ 2 and other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 1.01) 
Sec. 20-2. - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall govern the design, location and occupancy of manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, the design and improvement of manufactured home sites located outside of manufactured home parks, and manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks within the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 1.02) 
Sec. 20-3. - Purpose and intent. 
The public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city require the harmonious, orderly, and progressive development of land within the city. In furtherance of this goal, the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is adopted for the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To encourage the development of economically sound and ecologically stable communities; 
(2)  To assure the provisions of required streets, utilities, and other services and facilities to new land developments; 
(3)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian in new land developments; 
(4)  To assure the provision of needed open space and building sites in new land development for recreational purposes; and 
(5)  To assure the wise development of land located within the incorporated areas of the city in harmony with the city's future land use plan. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 1.03) 
Sec. 20-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a detached building necessary as an adjunct to the establishment of a manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park and services rendered to its occupants. 
Accessory use means a use of land necessary as an adjunct to the establishment of a manufactured home park or a recreational vehicle park and services rendered to its occupants. 
Adjoining property line means the boundary between a manufactured home park, recreational vehicle park, or a site occupied by a manufactured home, and property under another ownership and shall for the purposes of this chapter include street, railroad or utility rights-of-way and easements. 
Alteration means the relocation of a manufactured home within a park or any change in the exterior dimensions of accessory structures; the term "alteration" also means any changes to an approved plat. 
Building permit means a duly authorized form, signed by the building official, authorizing the location of a manufactured home or the construction of an accessory structure, cabana, sign or other improvement. Such permit shall be valid for a period of one year and shall be accompanied by a plat showing the approved location of the manufactured home or construction. 
Cabana means a semi-permanent addition, measuring no greater than 900 square feet, to a manufactured home. 
Extension means the enlargement of a manufactured home park, or a recreational vehicle park by the provisions of further utility or road improvements or the addition of manufactured home or recreational vehicle lots to a park in excess of the number of improved sites existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Manufactured home means a factory built structure that is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 USC 5401 and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving it to a permanent site, and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A mobile home is not a manufactured home, except as provided in this chapter. 
Manufactured home pad means the paved portion of the manufactured home stand equal to the length and width of the manufactured home placed on the pad. 
Manufactured home park means the parcel of land under single ownership on which two or more manufactured homes are located on improved sites rented or leased for the purpose of locating a manufactured home. 
Manufactured home site means a parcel of land intended for the placement of a single manufactured home and for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Manufactured home stand means the improved site designed for the placements of one manufactured home and its accessory structures, utility connections, and off-street parking facilities. 
Manufactured home subdivision means the subdivision of land intended for the sale of lots to individuals for the placements and occupancy of manufactured homes. Such subdivisions shall conform to the requirements of the zoning, subdivision and land development ordinances. 
Mobile home means a structure transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on the site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. Mobile homes that were manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, do not meet current building codes. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of city citizens, mobile homes as herein defined are not authorized except as previously existing nonconforming uses and shall not be placed in the incorporated areas of the city. 
Modular home means factory built housing certified as meeting local or state building codes as applicable to modular housing. Once certified by the state, modular homes shall be subject to the same standards as site-built homes. 
Nonconforming manufactured home or recreational vehicle means a unit occupied as a permanent residence located within the confines of an approved manufactured home park or subdivision designed and approved for manufactured home living, or a manufactured home located on a site outside of a manufactured home park and its accessory structures occupied prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or which does not conform to the minimum construction or health standards required in this chapter. 
Nonconforming manufactured home or recreational vehicle site means a site located on private property which does not conform to the requirements set forth in this chapter, and the zoning, subdivision and land development ordinances. The term "nonconforming manufactured home or recreational vehicle" shall also refer to a manufactured home or recreational vehicle sites or lots located within a park which do not comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter, and the zoning and subdivision ordinances. 
Recreational vehicle means a portable vehicle of not more than eight feet in width, when traveling, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation uses. Motor homes and motor coaches are included in this definition. 
Skirting means a durable material used to enclose the space from the bottom of the manufactured home to finished grade. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 1.04) 
Sec. 20-5. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the planning director and chief building inspector or their designees. Such officials shall have the right to enter any building or property necessary to carry out their duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to locate or occupy a manufactured home until the building official has issued a building permit, and an occupancy permit for such manufactured home has been issued. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 1.05) 
Sec. 20-6. - Penalties and remedies. 
Any person violating, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 1.07) 
Sec. 20-7. - Variances. 
Where the city council finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with this chapter due to unusual topographic, health, public safety, or other conditions beyond the control of the applicant, it may vary the regulations so that substantial compliance may be achieved and the public interest secured; however, such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent or purpose of this chapter. A public hearing is required for all variances. Any variance thus authorized is required to be entered in writing in the minutes of the city council and the reason that justified the departure to be set forth. Variances shall only be granted upon a finding that: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
(2)  The application of this chapter to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public interest or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter; however no variance may be granted for a use of land or building prohibited in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 1.08) 
Secs. 20-8—20-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 

Sec. 20-33. - General requirements. 
(a)  Any manufactured home located within the incorporated areas of the city shall be located within a manufactured home park or on an approved site meeting the requirements and minimum standards set forth in this chapter, the subdivision and zoning regulations, and all other applicable federal, state and local regulations and ordinances. 
(b)  Building and construction codes. 
(1)  No manufactured home shall be admitted to any manufactured home park or allowed to be placed within the incorporated areas of the unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of the building, electrical, plumbing and other construction codes as adopted by the city council. An approved Housing and Urban Development Department (HUD) insignia may be accepted as evidence of a new manufactured home's construction meeting local building and construction codes. Cabanas and other accessory structures shall require a building permit and shall also meet all local building and construction codes. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the building official to inspect manufactured homes being placed within the incorporated areas of the city, after the placement of the manufactured home on its stand or foundation and prior to the connection of utilities and prior to occupancy of the manufactured home. 
(3)  The fees for permits and inspections prior to occupancy shall follow the procedures for residential structures followed by the building inspection department as established by the city council. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of an occupancy certificate for a manufactured home within the incorporated areas of the city, such manufactured home shall be connected to an approved water source and an approved sewage disposal method in such a manner as to comply with the state department of natural resources and the county health department regulations. 
(d)  Occupancy of a manufactured home within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  Manufactured home park. 
a.  If a manufactured home is placed in a manufactured home park, a building permit and inspection of the foundation and utility provisions and the manufactured home's construction, wiring and plumbing shall be required prior to the connection of utilities and occupancy. An approved Housing and Urban Development (HUD) insignia will be accepted as evidence of the home's construction meeting local building and construction codes for a new manufactured home. 
b.  No manufactured home in a manufactured home park shall have utilities connected to the home or be occupied until the appropriate permit is purchased, inspection has been made and the site foundation and utilities have been approved by the building official. All permit fees shall be consistent with the fee schedule set by the city council. 
(2)  Individual manufactured home site. 
a.  If a manufactured home is placed on a site in the incorporated area of the city, a building permit and inspection of the foundation, utility provisions, construction, wiring and plumbing shall be required prior to the connection of the utilities to the home or occupancy of the home. An approved HUD insignia will be accepted as evidence of the home construction meeting local building and construction codes if the manufactured home is new. No utilities shall be connected to the manufactured home nor shall it be occupied until the appropriate permit is purchased, an inspection has been made, the site foundation and utilities have been approved by the building official and a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
b.  All individual manufactured home sites must conform to subdivision and zoning regulations. All permit fees shall be consistent with the fee schedule set by the city council. 
(e)  Vacant manufactured homes shall not be stored in any residential zoning district. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 2.01) 
Secs. 20-34—20-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

Sec. 20-55. - General requirements. 
(a)  Manufactured home parks located in the incorporated areas of the city shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in this article and shall further conform to the subdivision and zoning regulations and the land development regulations as adopted by the city council. 
(b)  Prior to the initiation of development, a person desiring to develop a manufactured home park with the incorporated areas of the city shall submit a plat to be distributed to the planning commission and the city council and appropriate staff in accordance with the preliminary and final plat procedures of the subdivision regulations. These requirements shall be met before building permits or occupancy permits will be issued. 
(c)  Those desiring to expand existing manufactured home parks shall follow the procedure outlined in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Manufactured home parks in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall meet the minimum standards and requirements of this article in the time period established in the zoning ordinance for nonconforming uses. 
(e)  Length of residential occupancy. 
(1)  No space within a manufactured home park, except as provided in this chapter, shall be rented for residential use for a manufactured home except for periods of 30 days or more. 
(2)  If a manufactured home park owner desires to lease space for short-term occupancy of less than 30 days of manufactured homes, the park owner shall prepare and reserve an area that had been improved for temporary use and is separate and screened from the view of spaces leased for permanent occupancy. 
(f)  The following commercial establishments may be permitted as customary accessory uses in a manufactured home park, provided such uses do not occupy a total of more than ten percent of the area of the park; are located a minimum distance of 100 feet from any adjoining property line, street or highway right-of-way; and are intended for the convenience of and for service to the occupants of the park: 
(1)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments or pickup stations for dry cleaning and laundry concerns; beauty shops; barbershops; and similar personal service businesses. 
(2)  Retail stores intended for the convenience of and for service to the occupants of the park. 
(3)  Coin-operated vending machines, provided such are located within a building and are not visible from the street or adjoining property lines. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 3.01) 
Sec. 20-56. - Standards for design of manufactured home parks. 
(a)  The design of all manufactured home parks in the incorporated areas of the city shall conform to the standards of this section and all other applicable ordinances. 
(b)  The manufactured home park shall front upon at least one publicly dedicated road. The entrance to the park shall be constructed to the standards of the city as they pertain to residential developments and are administered by the manager of development services. 
(c)  A manufactured home park shall have a minimum area of five acres. 
(d)  The density (dwelling units per acre) of a manufactured home park shall not be more than the most dense single-family residential developments allowed under the zoning ordinance. If the manufactured home park uses septic tanks, density must comply with the county health department guidelines. 
(e)  All manufactured home parks shall be located on well-drained sites that are properly graded to ensure positive drainage. Drainage and grading plans shall be approved by the manager of development services. 
(f)  The internal streets of a manufactured home park shall be built to the standards outlined in the county land development regulations. 
(g)  The minimum lot width shall be 80 feet. 
(h)  Manufactured home parks shall be designed so that all homes front on an internal street. 
(i)  Manufactured homes on lots in a manufactured home parks shall meet the same setback requirements as all single-family residential developments. The required building setbacks are outlined in the zoning ordinance. 
(j)  Off street parking for manufactured home parks shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance and the land development regulations. 
(k)  Manufactured homes shall be plainly marked. Each manufactured home shall be numbered with minimum four-inch tall numbers with a stroke width of at least one-half inch, reflective numbers on a contrasting background, so they may be easily read from the street or private access road upon which the mobile home fronts. In the event a mobile home has the end fronting on the street, the numbers should be displayed on the end facing the street. All mobile home parks should have a uniform lot numbering system approved by the county E-911 coordinator. Additionally, parks with more than one continuous street shall post signs at all intersections indicating the lot numbers on that particular street The electrical service must also be permanently numbered with minimum 2½-inch-tall numbers with a stroke width of at least one-half inch for easy identification by meter readers. 
(l)  Each manufactured home stand shall conform to the Standard Building Code as adopted by the city council and administered by the building inspection department. 
(m)  All manufactured homes shall be anchored and blocked to conform to the Standard Building Code as adopted by the city council and administered by the building inspection department. 
(n)  All manufactured homes located in manufactured home parks shall have suitable skirting between the base of the home and the finished grade of the ground. The skirting shall be made of either block, wood, lattice or other approved materials. Openings in the skirting shall not be more than two inches square. 
(o)  Steps and landings are required of all homes and shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the standard building code as adopted by the city council. 
(p)  All manufactured home parks shall have buffers that conform to the requirements of section 3.12 of the zoning ordinance (see Appendix A to this Code). 
(q)  The towing apparatus, axle, and wheels of the manufactured home shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 3.02) 
Sec. 20-57. - Manufactured home park utilities and improvements. 
(a)  All fuel oil supply systems shall be constructed and installed in a manner that meets all city building codes. Bottled gas tanks shall be fenced so as not to be seen from the street or abutting properties. 
(b)  Sewage. 
(1)  Each manufactured home park shall be provided by the developer with a sewage collection system (public or individual) approved by the county health department and/or the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources, so that each manufactured home stand and commercial structure can be serviced. If such collection system cannot be connected to an existing publicly owned system, a sewage treatment plant that meets state requirements may be constructed and maintained by the developer of the park if authorized by the city utilities authority and approved by the county health department and/or EPD. 
(2)  Septic tanks shall be permitted only approved by the county health department. 
(c)  Water. 
(1)  A potable water supply meeting state and/or county health department requirements shall be provided by the park operator. If a publicly owned water system is available at the park site, water service shall be connected to the system. 
(2)  If a publicly owned water system is located within 1,000 feet of a manufactured home park, the owner or developer shall enter into negotiations to receive service. The owner or developer should submit a copy of the request to receive service at the time the preliminary plat is presented to the planning commission. Such request shall be considered a good faith effort to negotiate for the provision of services. The water source to be utilized shall be identified on the preliminary plat. 
(d)  Publicly dedicated easements of proper size for their intended purpose, as determined by the manager of development services, shall be provided within the park when uses are to be serviced with a public system. All drainage easements shall be dedicated to the city with sufficient width to provide adequate access for their maintenance. All such easements shall be accessible to public streets. 
(e)  All water, sewer, gas, electric, cable television, telephone and all other utility lines shall be buried a minimum of 24 inches below the finished grade surface of the park unless otherwise permitted by the manager of development services. Each lot shall be provided with adequate valve systems to allow the cutoff of utility service to a manufactured home stand at the stand and at the entrance of the utility to the lot. 
(f)  All garbage shall be handled in the manner outlined in chapter 26. 
(g)  Each stand shall be provided with an electrical power supply meeting the requirements of the electrical code adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 3.03) 
Secs. 20-58—20-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MANUFACTURED HOME SITES OUTSIDE OF MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

Sec. 20-88. - General requirements. 
Manufactured homes located on lots outside of manufactured home parks within the incorporated areas of the city shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in this article and shall further conform to the subdivision and zoning regulations, county health department regulations, the land development regulations, the comprehensive plan, and all building and construction codes as adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 4.01) 
Sec. 20-89. - Standards for design of manufactured home sites. 
(a)  All manufactured home sites located outside of manufactured home parks shall conform to all regulations for the zoning district in which the property is located. The regulations of this section are intended to supplement the zoning ordinance. Nothing contained in this section should infer that inferior development is permitted or expected. 
(b)  The use of flat or corrugated sheet metal, fiberglass, or similar substance for the exterior walls shall be prohibited. The exterior wall covering shall be either: 
(1)  Wood or masonry finish or its appearance; and/or 
(2)  Vertically or horizontally grooved siding or lap siding or its appearance; and 
(3)  The color and exterior materials shall be compatible with the adjacent single-family structures. 
(c)  The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation that complies with the city's building and construction codes for residential structures and all Federal Housing Administration (FHA) standards. The foundation shall either be a slab or contain a solid perimeter wall of masonry, brick or other similar material in all installations in which the finished floor is more than six inches above the finished grade at any point. 
(d)  The towing apparatus, axle and wheels of the manufactured home shall be removed. 
(e)  The manufactured home shall be oriented on the lot so that it meets all lot and area requirements of the zoning district in which the home is located. The home shall be located with its long axis parallel to the street. 
(f)  Steps and landings are required of all homes and shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Standard Building Code as adopted by the city council. A covered porch, deck, or entry area at least ten feet by ten feet shall be added for the front entrance to the manufactured home prior to occupancy. 
(g)  All manufactured homes located on individual lots shall comply with the National Manufactured Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq., and bear the insignia issued by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
(h)  All manufactured homes located outside of manufactured home parks shall be at least 16 feet wide at the main body's narrowest point. 
(i)  All manufactured homes shall have a pitched roof so that there is at least a four-inch vertical rise for each 12 inches horizontal run, with a minimum 12-inch roof overhang on each of the dwelling's perimeter walls such that the overhang is architecturally integrated into the design of the building. 
(j)  The roof of the manufactured home shall be covered with a material that is residential in appearance, including but not limited to wood shingle, wood shake, synthetic composite shingle, ceramic tile rib panel, standing seam or other similar approved material but excluding corrugated aluminum, corrugated fiberglass, sheet metal or other similar substance. 
(k)  No part of the finished grade under the manufactured home shall be below the 100-year flood level. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 4.02) 
Sec. 20-90. - Manufactured home site utilities and improvements. 
(a)  Fuel oil systems shall be constructed and installed in a manner that meets all city building codes. 
(b)  Each manufactured home site shall be provided by the owner with a sewage collection system (public or individual) designed to comply with the county health department or EPD requirements. 
(c)  A potable water supply meeting the city health department requirements shall be provided by owner of the lot. If a publicly owned water system is available at the lot site, water service shall be connected to the site. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 4.03) 
Secs. 20-91—20-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 

Sec. 20-109. - General requirements. 
(a)  Recreational vehicle parks and sites shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in this article and shall further conform to the subdivision and zoning regulations, and the land development regulations as adopted by the city council and all other applicable city ordinances. 
(b)  Each recreational vehicle park development shall be presented in plat form, as outlined in the major subdivision process, to the city council for approval and shall conform to the minimum design and improvement standards required in this article. Such plat shall bear the seal of a registered land surveyor. No construction or public improvements shall commence on any land to be used as a recreational vehicle park prior to the approval of its plat by the city council. 
(c)  Prior to the initiation of development, a person desiring to develop a recreational vehicle park within the incorporated area of the city shall submit 25 copies of the site plan to the planning commission and the city council for review showing those things required by the final subdivision procedure outlined in the subdivision regulations (see Appendix B to this Code). These requirements must be met before building or occupancy permits will be issued by the building officials or site construction permits will be issued by the planning and development department. 
(d)  The requirements for expanding existing recreational vehicle parks are the same as in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Recreational vehicle parks in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall meet the minimum standards and requirements stated in this article as stipulated in the zoning ordinance for nonconforming uses. 
(f)  All occupied recreational vehicles shall be placed only in approved recreational vehicle spaces in recreational vehicle parks or designated spaces in a manufactured home park. Unoccupied recreational vehicle can be stored on the vehicle owner's property within the limits established in this section and in the zoning ordinance. 
(g)  The residential occupancy of a recreational vehicle shall be limited to 90 continuous days of the following sites: 
(1)  Sites located in approved recreational vehicle parks; 
(2)  Sites specifically designated for recreational vehicles within manufactured home parks; and 
(3)  Sites specifically designated for recreational vehicles in any public or private recreation area. 
When a recreational vehicle is located on a private lot that is not a part of a recreational vehicle park, a manufactured home park with recreational vehicle sites, or public or private recreation areas with recreational vehicle sites, it shall not be utilized as a residence or occupied permanently or temporarily by household members or their guests, or used as a rental unit. 
(h)  Recreational vehicles, when stored on a residential lot, shall be placed in the rear yard of such lot and shall be located at least ten feet from adjoining property lines and at least ten feet from any residence unless it is stored within a portion of a dwelling or accessory structure. Plumbing facilities (both water and sewer) in such recreational vehicles shall not be connected while they are stored. Storage on public rights-of-way and easements is prohibited. 
(i)  The following commercial establishments may be permitted as customary accessory uses in a recreational vehicle park, provided such uses do not occupy a total of more than ten percent of the area of the park and are located a minimum distance of 100 feet from any adjoining property line, street or highway right-of-way, and are intended for the convenience of and for service to the occupants of the park: 
(1)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments or pick up stations for dry cleaning; beauty shops; barbershops; and similar personal service businesses; 
(2)  Retail stores intended for the convenience of and for service to the occupants of the park; 
(3)  Coin-operated vending machines, provided such are located within a building and are not visible from the street or adjoining property. 
(j)  Any recreational vehicle permanently or temporarily occupied in a manner not consistent with this chapter on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be removed within a period of 180 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or shall be removed immediately upon the termination of temporary occupancy of the recreational vehicle, whichever time period is the least. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 5.01) 
Sec. 20-110. - Standards for design of recreational vehicle parks. 
The following standards shall apply to the design of recreational vehicle parks: 
(1)  The recreational vehicle park shall front upon at least one publicly dedicated street having a right-of-way of 80 feet. Such entrance shall be 50 feet in width. It shall be paved and designed in such a way as to provide for the easy access of recreational vehicles and emergency vehicles and in compliance with the land development regulations. 
(2)  A recreational vehicle park shall have a minimum area of five acres. 
(3)  All recreational vehicle parks shall be located on well drained sites, properly graded to ensure positive drainage. Drainage and grading plans shall be approved by the manager of development services. 
(4)  A minimum of ten percent of the gross area of a recreational vehicle park shall be devoted to recreational and open space purposes. If a swimming pool is developed or planned as a part of the park, this facility shall be enclosed by a chain-link, masonry or wood fence not less than four feet high with a locking gate. 
(5)  The internal streets of a recreational vehicle park shall have a right-of-way of 50 feet and a paved surface not less than 25 feet in width. Culs-de-sac shall be provided at the closed end with a minimum 80-foot radius. All streets and culs-de-sac shall have a paved driving surface of concrete or asphalt approved by the manager of development services as meeting the requirements of the land development regulations and shall be kept in good repair by the park owner. 
(6)  The minimum lot size in a recreational vehicle park shall be 3,000 square feet where sewer is provided or as regulated by the health department where sewer is not available, but in no case less than 3,000 square feet. Minimum lot width shall be 35 feet. 
(7)  The recreational vehicle park shall be designed so that recreational vehicle lots front on a paved, internal street with a minimum frontage of 35 feet. No recreational vehicle shall front on a public street. 
(8)  Building setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  For recreational vehicle lots: 
1.  Front yard, 15 feet minimum. 
2.  Rear yard, ten feet minimum. 
3.  Side yard, ten feet minimum. 
b.  Recreational vehicle lots shall be designed so that recreational vehicles are located at least 30 feet from any publicly dedicated street and provide a distance of at least 20 feet of open space between recreational vehicles and other buildings and structures. 
c.  The minimum service building front yard setback shall be 50 feet from the property line. 
(9)  Parking requirements: 
a.  Each recreational vehicle lot shall contain a stabilized level vehicle parking pad of a suitable all weather wearing surface material. The parking pad shall be located at least ten feet from a designated lot line. 
b.  Two paved parking spaces per lot shall be provided, which can be part of the parking pad. Parking spaces shall be at least ten feet by 20 feet in size. No parking is allowed on the streets and road fronting the recreational vehicle lot. 
c.  In addition, the park shall provide adequate paved parking spaced for all buildings, accessory uses or recreational facilities in compliance with the zoning ordinance. The total parking requirement ration is one additional parking space for every five recreational vehicle lots. 
(10)  Recreational vehicle lots shall be plainly staked off and marked. Each lot shall be permanently numbered with minimum 2½-inch numbers and/or letters so that they may be easily read from the street. The electrical service shall also be permanently numbered for easy identification by meter readers. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 5.02) 
Sec. 20-111. - Recreational vehicle park utilities and improvements. 
(a)  Sewage. 
(1)  Each recreational vehicle park shall be provided by the developer with a sewage collection system (public or individual) designed to comply with the state department of natural resources environmental protection division or county health department requirements so that each recreational vehicle and accessory commercial structure can be serviced. If such collection system cannot be connected to an existing publicly owned system, a sewage treatment plant meeting all state and local requirements may be built and maintained by the owner of the park if authorized by the utility authority. 
(2)  Septic tanks shall be permitted only when the density of recreational vehicles allowed in the park is within the regulations of the health department. 
(b)  Each recreational vehicle lot shall be provided with an individual service line delivering safe, pure, potable water meeting county health department requirements, which shall be provided by the park owner. There shall be a cutoff valve installed on each lot. 
(c)  Publicly dedicated easements of proper size for their intended purpose, as determined by the manager of development services, shall be provided within the park when uses are to be serviced with a public system. All drainage easements shall be dedicated to the city with suitable width to provide access for their maintenance. All such easements shall be accessible to public streets. 
(d)  Utility placement. 
(1)  All water, sewer, gas, electric, cable television and phone lines shall be buried a minimum of 24 inches below the finished ground surface of the park unless otherwise permitted by the manager of development services. Each lot shall be provided with adequate valve systems to allow cutoff of utility service to a recreational vehicle lot at the recreational vehicle and at the entrance of the utility to the lot. 
(2)  Each recreational vehicle lot shall be provided with an individual electrical service mounted on a pedestal and meeting the requirements of the building and construction codes adopted by the city council and administered by the building inspection department. 
(e)  All recreational areas, accessory commercial buildings, park entrances, park streets and pedestrian easements shall be adequately illuminated as determined by the manager of development services. 
(f)  All garbage shall be handled in the manner prescribed in chapter 26. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 5.03) 
Sec. 20-112. - Use restrictions. 
(a)  No recreational vehicle shall be used as a permanent place of residence, dwelling or business. Continuous occupancy extending beyond three months in any 12-month period shall be considered prima facie evidence of permanent occupancy. Users of the spaces shall meet all other applicable laws. Spaces shall be rented by the day, week or month only; and an occupant of such space shall not remain in the same park for a period exceeding 90 days. 
(b)  Removal of the vehicle tag, wheels, tongue, hitch, A-frame, gas tanks, or other vehicle equipment from a recreational vehicle shall be prohibited and shall be considered prima facie evidence of permanent occupancy. 
(c)  Attachments to recreational vehicles shall be prohibited with the sole exception of pop-up units and similar structures integral to the recreational vehicle as originally manufactured. 
(Ord. of 7-2-2013(3), § 5.04) 
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Injuring property of city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally damage, in any way, any implement or other property of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 11-102; Code 2003, § 34-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to violate any of the following: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in danger of safety of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(5)  Any person who shall frequent any public place with the intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; 
(6)  Any person who assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick, to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or who shall aid or abet therein; 
(7)  Any person who shall use fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(8)  Any person who shall, by acts of violence, interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or 
(9)  Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of subsection (a) of this section may be charged with the offense of disorderly conduct and, on conviction thereof, may be found guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1980, § 11-121; Code 2003, § 34-2) 
Sec. 22-3. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter and punishable as such for any person to drink any alcoholic beverage, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, in any public building or other public place of the city, except upon the premises of any licensed retail beer parlor. 
(Code 1980, § 11-123; Code 2003, § 34-3) 
Sec. 22-4. - Drunkenness. 
No person shall be drunk or intoxicated on the streets or at any public places of the city, or on the premises of another, without consent of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 11-124; Code 2003, § 34-4) 
Sec. 22-5. - Malicious mischief. 
No person in the city shall commit any act of mischief which in any way tends to injure the person or the property of any other or to destroy such property or to injure or destroy any public property. 
(Code 1980, § 11-134; Code 2003, § 34-5) 
Sec. 22-6. - Camping. 
No person shall camp on the streets, square or any other public place of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 11-135; Code 2003, § 34-6) 
Sec. 22-7. - Obstruction of streets and littering. 
No person shall place any obstruction in or on any street, alley or ditch of the city; nor shall any person throw any waste matter, garbage, trash, or refuse matter of any kind upon the streets, alleys or ditches of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 11-136; Code 2003, § 34-7) 
Sec. 22-8. - Discharging firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire any gun, pistol or firearm of any type or any air rifle or slingshot within the city limits, except for persons discharging shotguns for recreational purposes on farmland only, provided that such discharge of shotguns shall not occur within 400 yards of any dwelling. 
(Code 1980, § 11-148; Code 2003, § 34-8; Ord. of 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 22-9. - Urination and defecation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any public place within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 11-162; Code 2003, § 34-9) 
Sec. 22-10. - Application of chemicals. 
The aerial application of herbicides, pesticides, and other chemicals within the corporate limits of the city is prohibited. 
(Code 2003, § 34-10) 
Sec. 22-11. - Vehicles in cemeteries. 
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to enter or park on the premises of the city cemetery after sundown. 
(Code 1980, § 5-101; Code 2003, § 34-11) 
Secs. 22-12—22-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CURFEW OF MINORS 

Sec. 22-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult means any person 18 years of age or older. 
Minor means any person under the age of 18 years. 
Public place means any street, highway, alley or right-of-way, including, but not limited to, any park, sidewalk or playground; any place, lot, land or building open to the public including, but not limited to, any mall, shopping center, restaurant, hotel or motel, place of amusement or entertainment, parking lot and adjacent areas thereto, cemetery, schoolyard, body of water or watercourse, and any vacant lot or land contained within the city limits. 
(Code 2003, § 34-41; Ord. of 9-3-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 22-42. - Prohibited activity; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to engage in any activity in any public place including, but not limited to, wandering, loitering, strolling, playing or driving, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, without supervision by an adult having lawful authority to be at such place; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours shall be between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following day; and provided, further, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor. 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor. 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places referred to in this section during the prescribed period of time. 
(4)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights. 
(5)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel, with interstate and intrastate travel through the city being excepted in all cases from this section. 
(Code 2003, § 34-42; Ord. of 9-3-1996, § 2) 
Sec. 22-43. - Responsibility of person having custody of minor. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any minor to encourage, permit, or by insufficient supervision allow such minor to be in or upon any public place listed or referred to in section 22-42 within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following day except in circumstances set out in section 22-42(1)—(5). A person charged with violation of this section for the first time shall be given a warning. Upon subsequent violation, the person shall be charged with such violation and, if found guilty, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 2003, § 34-43; Ord. of 9-3-1996, § 3) 
Chapter 24 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1—24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JOINT COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 24-19. - Created. 
There is created a joint planning commission to be known as the Leesburg-Smithville-Lee County Planning Commission. The planning commission shall exercise all powers delegated to it under respective zoning, subdivision and land development ordinances of the City of Leesburg, the City of Smithville, and the county now in effect and which may be adopted in the future, as well as any and all powers delegated to the planning commission under any other ordinance or resolution of the City of Leesburg, the City of Smithville, or the county. Without limitation on the delegation of power established in this section, the Leesburg-Smithville-Lee County Planning Commission shall also have the authority to conduct public hearings, to make recommendations to the governing bodies of the City of Leesburg, the City of Smithville, and the county regarding all matters of zoning and subdivision regulations and land development under the respective ordinances and/or resolutions of each of such governments. 
(Code 2003, § 38-31; Res. of 10-1-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 24-20. - Composition. 
The Leesburg-Smithville-Lee County Planning Commission shall be composed of seven members. The county board of commissioners shall appoint one member from each district established by the act of the general assembly providing for the election of the members of the county board of commissioners for a total of five members from such districts. One member shall be appointed by the Leesburg City Council. One member shall be appointed by the governing body of the City of Smithville. 
(Code 2003, § 38-32; Res. of 10-1-1996, § 2) 
Sec. 24-21. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
The members of the planning commission are authorized to promulgate certain rules and regulations governing the operation of the commission, including, but not limited to, the adoption of bylaws, the election of officers, and the conduct of public hearings and procedures as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 
(Code 2003, § 38-33; Res. of 10-1-1996, § 3) 
Chapter 26 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
Building material means any material defined as, but not limited to, lumber, brick, block, stone, carpet, plumbing materials, plaster, concrete, roofing, floor tile, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of the construction of or repairs or additions to structures or accessory structures or the demolition of such. 
Business trash means any accumulation of paper, cardboard, packaging materials, rags, or accumulations other than garbage or household trash, which result from the operation of stores, offices, and similar business or commercial enterprises. 
City public works director means the city public works director or his duly authorized representative. 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, restaurant, business, public or semipublic establishment of any kind, and any master-billed apartment. An operation conducted from a residence requiring a business license is a commercial establishment for purposes of this chapter. 
Container means a refuse receptacle. 
County administrator means the county administrator or his duly authorized representative. 
Disposal site means an area, location, tract of land or facility used or intended to be used for the disposal of solid waste, putrescible waste, or other waste. 
Garbage means the byproduct resulting from the growing, harvesting, processing, handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of animal or vegetable food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction for the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding areas or feeding material for flies, insects, or animals. 
Hazardous refuse means materials which constitute a hazard to health or safety, such as poison, acids, caustic matter or solutions, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, explosives, radioactive materials, and highly flammable substances. 
Household trash means waste accumulation usually attendant upon housekeeping, such as paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage. 
Industrial establishment means any establishment involved in the manufacture or assembly of a product or any part thereof. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by or resulting from the operation of factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Litter means all discarded manmade materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, household trash, industrial waste, building materials, appliances, or portions thereof, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Loading and unloading area means a space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons. 
Master-billed apartments means those complexes where the solid waste billing is paid by the owner of the complex. 
Multiple-family (multifamily) dwelling means a building designed for or occupied by two or more families, such as apartments, duplexes and triplexes. 
Refuse means solid waste accumulations consisting of any combination of ashes, building material, garbage, hazardous refuse, household trash, and other waste or discarded materials of all kinds. 
Refuse receptacle means a container approved by the county administrator as acceptable for the temporary reception and storage of refuse pending transportation to a permanent disposal site. The term "refuse receptacle" shall include plastic bags where approved by the county administrator. 
Scavenge and scavenging mean the unauthorized and uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
Tree, shrubbery and lawn trimmings means waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery cuttings or clippings, grass clippings or other natural waste. 
(Code 2003, § 42-1; Ord. of 3-29-1994, § I; Ord. of 11-4-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 26-2. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. It is the principal objective of this chapter to attain a clean and litter-free community and encourage recycling of selected material through education and voluntary compliance. Enforcement procedures shall be utilized only where other means fail. 
(b)  Solid waste management plans. A solid waste management plan must be submitted with every application for a building permit. The inspection department shall obtain the approval of the county administrator of such solid waste management plan. 
(c)  Monitoring by employees. Solid waste collection employees, inspection department employees and other city employees shall be alert to observe violations of the provisions of this chapter, including, but without limitations, loose trash and garbage, waste, litter, containers not in compliance, or any other thing or matter which may be in violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations of the city public works director on behalf of city employees or the rules and regulations of the county administrator on behalf of any inspection department employees. An employee observing such violation shall report such violations to his supervisor, who in turn shall cause the information to be conveyed to the city public works director for required action. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. The violation of any provision of this chapter, or of the rules and regulations of the city public works director promulgated under this chapter, or the failure to do any act or meet any standard required by this chapter, or the failure to comply in any way with any requirement of this chapter or such rules and regulations, shall constitute an offense triable in the municipal court, and punishable as provided in section 1-13. 
(e)  Prima facie case. Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, wagon, wheelbarrow, or other conveyance in violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations promulgated by the city public works director under this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this chapter. 
(f)  Presumption. Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this chapter or of the rules and regulations promulgated by the county administrator under this chapter is discovered to contain any article, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this chapter. 
(g)  Specific penalties cumulative. Where any section of this chapter contains specific remedies or punishments, such specific remedies or punishments shall not be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other remedies and punishments provided in this section or otherwise provided by law for the violation of or noncompliance with this chapter or the rules and regulations of the city public works director. 
(h)  Additional penalties. In addition to all punishments and penalties provided anywhere in this chapter, otherwise by law, the municipal court may impose the following additional or alternative sentences, either as a direct sentence, or as a condition to probation: 
(1)  The court may direct the convicted person to pick up and remove from any public street, highway or public right-of-way any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of the execution of the sentence; or 
(2)  The court may direct the convicted person to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of the execution of the sentence. 
(i)  Action in emergencies. Nothing contained in this section or elsewhere in this chapter shall require intermediate measures where the violation is of such nature or degree as to constitute an immediate, clear and present danger to the health and safety of the public. The failure to take the steps provided in this section shall not constitute a defense to any proceeding to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2003, § 42-2; Ord. of 3-29-1994, § VIII; Ord. of 11-4-2008(2), §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 26-3. - Authority of city public works director and/or county administrator. 
The city public works director and/or the county administrator, through an intergovernmental agreement for code enforcement purposes, shall have charge of the administration of this chapter insofar as it relates to code enforcement duties and/or permitting issues that are handled under by both the City of Leesburg and Lee County intergovernmental agreement for such services. The county administrator and/or the city public works director are authorized, with the approval of the city council, to adopt and promulgate rules and relations concerning such waste collection conveyance and disposal and respecting the size, type, specifications, number and allocations of all containers and fees charged for such collections. Such rules and regulations shall have the force of law but shall not be contrary to anything in this chapter, but shall be considered supplemental thereto. 
(Code 2003, § 42-3; Ord. of 3-29-1994, § II(1); Ord. of 11-4-2008(2), § 4) 
Sec. 26-4. - Residential and commercial service. 
All residential and commercial units in the incorporated portions of the city are required to utilize the solid waste collection service of the city for disposition of refuse. Garbage and household trash shall be collected once per week. Disposal of all other refuse shall be the responsibility of the residential or commercial unit producing the refuse. Each residential unit shall pay the sum as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, on file in the office of the city clerk, for collection of household garbage and household trash by the city or its designee. Each commercial unit shall pay for collection of solid waste in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges, on file in the office of the city clerk. Additionally, the city clerk shall maintain a record of any other fees for disposal of other items not specifically listed in this section as the city council may deem necessary and as may be amended by the city council from time to time to reflect the current cost of the city for disposal of additional items. Such items shall include household furniture and furnishings and appliances as defined in section 26-6(10) and (11), respectively. 
(Code 2003, § 42-4; Ord. of 3-29-1994, § II(2); Ord. of 11-4-2008(2), § 5) 
Sec. 26-5. - Receptacles and containers. 
(a)  Required. Every person in possession, charge or control of any building or premises upon which refuse is accumulated or produced shall be required by this chapter to provide and keep in a suitable place readily accessible to the solid waste collection crews of the county, or its designee, as the case may be, receptacles and containers approved by the county administrator as suitable for the storage of all such refuse which will normally accumulate between the established collection dates. The county administrator shall determine the type, size, specifications, number and location of receptacles and shall determine whether such receptacles and containers are in a serviceable condition. 
(b)  To be safe. All receptacles and containers shall be maintained in good serviceable condition at all times. Any receptacle or container which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter or to the rules and regulations of the county administrator, or which has ragged or sharp edges or other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents therefrom or the public generally, shall be replaced promptly by the user thereof. If any such container, after request, has not been replaced, the county shall have the right to suspend further collection of refuse from such container until such time as the container is brought into compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 2003, § 42-5; Ord. of 3-29-1994, § II(3), (4)) 
Sec. 26-6. - Precollection practices. 
The following practices and procedures shall be followed by persons in the unincorporated areas of the county in order to facilitate the collection of solid waste: 
(1)  Refuse. All refuse shall be placed and maintained in containers satisfying the requirements of this chapter and of the rules and regulations of the county administrator. Containers shall be maintained at all times with tightfitting lids or covers, and secured in such manner as to prevent the overturning by the elements or by dogs or other animals. Building materials, or any other refuse, garbage or trash items which may accumulate during the construction of any development, shall be adequately containerized in a trash bin, drop-off trailer, or similar container. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any developer, contractor, or landowner to allow building materials to accumulate other than in a container from which such items cannot escape, except by human force, and from which such items may be easily gathered for disposal. Violation of this provision shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and the building inspector shall be authorized to revoke the building permit of any person in violation until such violation is corrected. 
(2)  Garbage. Garbage placed in containers for collection shall be enclosed in paper or plastic bags. Household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its being placed in refuse receptacles. Household trash shall be combined with garbage. 
(3)  Injurious trash items. Waste material with potential for inflicting injury, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes, and television tubes, shall be securely packaged or wrapped in such a manner as will prevent injury to the collection crews or other persons. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to material placed in mechanically handled containers. 
(4)  Hazardous refuse. Hazardous refuse will not be collected by the county. No person shall place any items of hazardous refuse in any refuse receptacle or other container for collection by the county. Federal and state hazardous waste laws shall be observed by all persons, and any violations will be reported to the applicable state or federal authorities. 
(5)  Building materials. Building materials will not be collected by the county. The owner of the premises or the contractor, builder or person doing the repairs, remodeling construction or demolition shall be required to haul away and legally dispose of all such debris. 
(6)  Tree and vegetation removal by home occupants. Trees cut by the owner or occupant shall be promptly taken by such owner or occupant to an approved landfill. When a tree is cut from private property by anyone other than the owner, such party shall remove and legally dispose of all wood and limbs. The owner, tenant, or other persons in possession of the property shall be responsible to see that such tree trimmer or other person outlined in this subsection complies with this provision. 
(7)  Grass clippings, leaves, pine straw, pine cones. Grass clippings, leaves, pine straw and/or pine cones shall be delivered to an approved landfill by the residential or commercial unit producing such solid waste. 
(8)  Ashes. It shall be unlawful to deposit hot ashes in garbage containers. Ashes or clinkers shall not be placed or deposited upon streets, sidewalks or sideparks. 
(9)  Pet litter. Pet litter must be placed in securely tied plastic bags not to exceed ten pounds in weight and placed in the container. 
(10)  Household furniture and furnishings. Household furniture and furnishings shall be delivered to an approved landfill by the residential or commercial unit generating such solid waste. 
(11)  Appliances. Appliances shall be delivered to an approved landfill by the residential or commercial unit generating such solid waste. 
(12)  Disposable diapers. Disposable diapers must be placed and tied securely in plastic bags and placed in a regular container. 
(Code 2003, § 42-6; Ord. of 3-29-1994, § III; Ord. of 2-23-1995) 
Sec. 26-7. - Collection practices. 
(a)  Residential. Garbage and household trash accumulated by residents shall be stored in refuse receptacles complying with the requirements of the county administrator as to size, shape and materials, and shall be placed at such locations convenient for servicing by the county as shall be designated by the county administrator for weekly pickup. Service for disabled citizens will be handled on a case-by-case basis once disability is certified by a licensed physician and the certification is submitted to the county for approval. 
(b)  Commercial. Refuse accumulated by commercial establishments shall be stored in containers meeting the requirements of the county administrator as to size, shape and materials, and such receptacles compatible with the collection equipment and methods of the county. 
(c)  Issuance of permits. The building inspector of the county shall not issue a building permit for industrial, commercial or multifamily dwellings until the county administrator gives his approval to proposed plans for the storage and collection of solid waste. 
(d)  Location of containers. The county will not collect solid waste from industrial, commercial, or multifamily dwellings unless the solid waste is placed in approved containers and located at a place approved by the county administrator. 
(e)  Multifamily units. All multifamily units of 50 units or more serviced by the county shall be containerized with plastic or metal containers furnished by the county. Multifamily units of less than 50 units serviced by the county may be containerized with plastic or metal containers furnished by the county as determined by the county administrator in accordance with section 26-5(a). 
(f)  Containerizing trash. All commercial and industrial users shall containerize all solid waste generated by the establishment including outside as well as inside debris from the premises. 
(Code 2003, § 42-7; Ord. of 3-29-1994, § IV) 
Sec. 26-8. - Wheeled garbage containers. 
(a)  Inspections. Where a wheeled garbage container is furnished by the county, it shall be normally the only container authorized for garbage collection and shall be subject to inspection by the county. Should additional containers be needed, they may be obtained for a fee by contacting the county administrator. 
(b)  Placing for collection. The owner, occupant, tenant or other person occupying any building, house or structure within the unincorporated areas of the county as a residence or business using a wheeled garbage container shall have such container at the curb or designated location not earlier than 7:00 a.m. on the day before and not later than 7:00 a.m. on the designated garbage pickup days. 
(c)  Removal after collection. The owner, occupant, tenant or other person occupying any building, house or structure within the unincorporated areas of the county as a residence or business using a wheeled garbage container for curbside service shall return such container to the site or rear of the building no later than 24 hours after collection. Where the collection point is located more than 100 yards from a home, the container may be stored at another location approved by the county administrator. 
(d)  Vacating dwelling. Wheeled garbage containers furnished by the county shall not be removed from the premises to which they are delivered. 
(e)  Loss or damage to container. If the wheeled container furnished by the county is damaged, lost or destroyed through negligence of the person to whom the container was assigned, the person shall reimburse the county for the cost of a replacement container. 
(Code 2003, § 42-8; Ord. of 3-29-1994, § V) 
Sec. 26-9. - Commercial establishments. 
(a)  Generally. Commercial establishments shall store refuse in containers meeting the requirements of this chapter and of the rules and regulations promulgated by the county administrator so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about the establishment. Any spillage or overflow shall be cleaned up immediately by such establishment. 
(b)  Loading and unloading areas. All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash and refuse. The owner or occupant of the commercial establishment shall place a sufficient number of containers, not less than the number required by the county administrator for that establishment, in such area to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. The occupant of the premises shall maintain surveillance to ensure that all refuse is placed in the proper container and that the area is kept clean and free of litter. 
(Code 2003, § 42-9; Ord. of 3-29-1994, § VI) 
Sec. 26-10. - Prohibited activities. 
The following activities are declared to be unlawful and in violation of this chapter: 
(1)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any litter, refuse, garbage or trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any other public property, nor upon any private property except with the written consent of the owner or occupant thereof, and then only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Blockage of drainage. No person shall place any litter, refuse, trash, trees, grass, refuse receptacles, containers or garbage on, over, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. 
(3)  Appliances. No person shall leave outside any building, in a place accessible to children, any appliance, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing therefrom the door. This section shall not apply to any appliance, refrigerator or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and which has been crated, strapped or locked so that it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment thereof. 
(4)  Vacant units, lots and rental units. The county will not remove garbage, trash, building material, household trash or tree shrubbery or lawn trimmings or any other debris that is accumulated. Once advised of a violation of this subsection in writing, the owner/manager shall have seven calendar days to remove or have removed all debris. If not accomplished in such allotted time, the county shall dispose of the debris and charge the owner/manager the amount necessary to pay for such removal. 
(5)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof shall disturb or interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, remove any contents therefrom, or remove such container from its location. 
(6)  Scattering of refuse and littering prohibited. No person shall throw or deposit the following: 
a.  Any refuse on any public or private street or to scatter such refuse or litter on any public or private property. 
b.  Any refuse, trash or debris in any marsh area, stream, drainage ditch, body of water or beach area. 
(7)  Use of streets. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any of the roads of the county to transport such loose material without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle in such manner as to prevent such loose material from being deposited on the streets or adjoining areas. 
(8)  Accumulation of litter. No owner or occupant of any property in the unincorporated areas of the county shall allow litter, garbage, refuse, rubbish, filth, carrion and debris to accumulate thereon. If any owner, occupant, or other person responsible for the existence of any of such conditions shall fail to remedy such conditions within seven days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after notice to remedy the condition from the county administrator, inspection department or the sheriff's department. Such condition shall be a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided in section 1-13, and abatable as a nuisance. 
(9)  Unlawful dumping. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, drop, dump, or otherwise leave any litter on the premises of another without the consent of such other person, and without complying with the other provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations of the county administrator adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(10)  Ownership of refuse. All refuse, including refuse deposited in refuse containers provided by the county, shall be and shall remain the property of the owner or occupant until such refuse has been placed in vehicles of the county or its designee. The county has no responsibility or liability for any injuries or damage resulting from such refuse. 
(Code 2003, § 42-10; Ord. of 3-29-1994, § VII) 
Chapter 28 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Maintenance and repair of public streets. 
All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(1); Code 2003, § 46-1) 
Sec. 28-2. - Maintenance of sidewalks. 
It shall be the duty of all owners of property in the city upon which sidewalks have been laid to keep such walkways in good repair at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(2); Code 2003, § 46-2) 
Sec. 28-3. - Maintenance of property between sidewalks and streets. 
All persons who own real estate in the city, whose real estate abuts upon any sidewalk which is paved, shall be required to keep that portion of such sidewalk which lies between the property line and the curbline of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts, in good and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and other obnoxious and unsightly vegetation or other thing which would mar or detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property abuts. Any property owner who shall place or allow grass to grow upon the portion of the sidewalk lying between the property line and the curbline of such street, and upon which his real estate abuts, shall keep such grass properly mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. If such owners are not in the possession of their property, then this section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession or control of such property. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(3); Code 2003, § 46-3) 
Sec. 28-4. - Defacing sidewalks, streets and curbs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, street or curb in the city by painting any signs thereon, whether for commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk or drive any vehicle upon or injure in any way any newly laid street, sidewalk or curbing pavement while such street, sidewalk or curb is guarded by a warning sign or barricade or is soft or newly laid. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(4); Code 2003, § 46-4) 
Sec. 28-5. - Obstructions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as may be provided in this chapter or in the ordinances and laws of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(5); Code 2003, § 46-5) 
Sec. 28-6. - Deposits and discharges onto streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other article which may do injury to any person, animal or property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged onto any public street or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste milk, or other organic material. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(6); Code 2003, § 46-6) 
Sec. 28-7. - Report of defects, obstructions, deposits and discharges. 
It shall be the duty of every city officer and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction, or of any unlawful deposit or discharge, in or on any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk or other public way of the city to report such defect, obstruction, deposit or discharge to the city manager as soon as possible. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(7); Code 2003, § 46-7) 
Sec. 28-8. - Private use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to write or make any sign or advertisement on any such pavement. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(8); Code 2003, § 46-8) 
Sec. 28-9. - Encroachments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property, or to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley or other public way without having first secured the permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(9); Code 2003, § 46-9) 
Sec. 28-10. - Openings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk or alley without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk. All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(10); Code 2003, § 46-10) 
Sec. 28-11. - Burning of leaves and rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 17-101(12); Code 2003, § 46-11) 
Sec. 28-12. - Railroads. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Street , where used without designation of name or number, includes all roads, streets, avenues and ways. 
Train includes a railroad engine or propelling unit with or without cars attached, and shall include two or more railroad cars when attached together, whether or not there shall be an engine or propelling unit attached thereto. 
Vehicular traffic means all motorized traffic upon the streets or avenues of the city and does not include trains or railway cars. 
(b)  No directing officer or the operator of any railroad train shall direct the operation of or operate such railroad train while engaged in local switching or any other intracity transit in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street within the city for purposes of travel by motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic for a period of longer than five minutes. 
(c)  No officer or employee of any railroad company or corporation or any other person shall leave railroad cars uncoupled from a propelling unit within 1,000 feet of either side of the intersection of Fourth Street and the railroad tracks of the Norfolk Southern, formerly known as the Central of Georgia Railway, presently running north and south through the city for a period of more than 24 hours. 
(d)  No act which is caused by breakdown of equipment or other mishap nor any act done to prevent personal injuries or property damage shall be a violation of this section. 
(Code 2003, § 46-12; Ord. of 11-10-1981, §§ 1—4) 
Secs. 28-13—28-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 28-43. - Council resolution. 
Whenever the improvement of any street or part thereof shall be deemed necessary by the council, a resolution stating the nature and location of the proposed improvement shall be declared and published once a week for three consecutive weeks in the newspaper in which the county sheriff's advertisements are published. If the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the lands abutting on the proposed improvement do not, within 15 days after the last day of publication of such resolution, file with the city clerk a written protest against such improvement, contracts for the work to be done shall be entered into and assessments and liens shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 
(Code 1980, § 17-102(1); Code 2003, § 46-41) 
Sec. 28-44. - Barricades. 
Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work, which barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. 
(Code 1980, § 17-102(2); Code 2003, § 46-42) 
Secs. 28-45—28-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET NAMING AND PROPERTY NUMBERING 

Sec. 28-62. - Display required. 
Every house, mobile home, apartment, business, or other business having a street number assigned to it under the system of numbering in the city shall display such number in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this article. Mobile home parks and apartment complexes shall also be required to have each individual pad, lot number, or apartment number displayed in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this article. Such lot, pad, or apartment number shall be in sequence unless directional signs are provided for numbers not in sequence. 
(Code 2003, § 46-71; Ord. of 11-5-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 28-63. - Placement. 
Assigned street numbers may be affixed to the house, apartment, business, or other building itself, provided that such house, apartment, business, or other building is not more than 50 feet from the curbline, pavement edge, or edge of the travelway of the street in front of the house, apartment, business, or other building, and the number is readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. Street numbers may also be placed on mailboxes or signs located on the premises in front of the house, apartment, business, or other building provided that such signs are of a durable type and are located not more than 50 feet from the curbline, pavement edge, or edge of the travelway of the street in front of the property and provided that the numbers of such signs shall be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. 
(Code 2003, § 46-72; Ord. of 11-5-1996, § 2) 
Sec. 28-64. - Signs or mailboxes. 
If the house, apartment, business, or other building to be numbered is more than 50 feet from the curbline, pavement edge, or edge of travelway of the street in front of the property, or if for any reason a street number affixed to the building would not be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along with a street in each direction, the street number shall not be displayed on the building, but must be displayed on a sign or mailbox complying with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 46-73; Ord. of 11-5-1996, § 3) 
Sec. 28-65. - Height, color and condition. 
Street numbers affixed to a building or sign shall be a minimum of four inches in height. Those affixed to mailboxes in the manner specified in this article shall be a minimum of two inches in height. All such signs should be of a color contrasting to the background so as to be clearly visible. Street numbers and signs to which they are to be affixed shall be maintained at all times in good condition. 
(Code 2003, § 46-74; Ord. of 11-5-1996, § 4) 
Chapter 30 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(a) and (b)(2); ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Finance director/tax collector. 
(a)  The finance director/tax collector shall have such authority as is set forth in the city Charter, this chapter, state law, and the reported decisions of the state courts of appeals and the state supreme court. 
(b)  The finance director/tax collector is also designated as the ex officio sheriff for the city so as to enable such officer to do all things required by the city Charter, this chapter, and state law, including, but not limited to, conducting levies and sales under tax executions and collecting all costs, penalties, interest and permissible charges associated with any actions taken in such capacity. 
(Code 2003, § 50-1; Ord. of 12-14-1994) 
Secs. 30-2—30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE EXCISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to impose excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130; levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; authorization to levy tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 

Sec. 30-21. - Malt beverage excise tax; imposition; collection. 
(a)  There is imposed and levied a specific tax upon all retail dealers in malt beverages within the city limits as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  Each distributor, wholesale dealer or manufacturer selling, shipping or delivering malt beverages to any retail dealer in the city shall collect the excise tax as set forth in subsection (a) of this section and shall remit the tax to the city not later than the tenth of the month following collection. Each monthly remittance will be accompanied by invoice copies of all sales or deliveries to all retailers in the city for resale in the city, together with the sworn affidavit of such distributor, wholesale dealer or manufacturer, that the attached invoices are true, correct and complete. 
(Code 1980, § 19-10; Code 2003, § 50-31) 
State Law reference— Imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 
Sec. 30-22. - Wine excise tax; imposition; collection. 
(a)  In addition to the annual retail wine license fee, there is levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter, and a proportionate tax on all fractional parts of a liter which shall be paid to the city council on all wine sold, displayed or stored in the incorporated area of the city. The tax shall be collected by wholesale distributors and paid to the council by the wholesale distributors on all wine sold to retailers in the incorporated area of the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping, or in any way delivering wine to any retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the tax together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the following month. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any wine on which the tax has not been paid. 
(c)  Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the council a summary of all purchase invoices for wine sold to each retailer in the incorporated area of the city on or before the 15th day of each month following such purchases. The invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Code 2003, § 50-32) 
State Law reference— Authorization to levy tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 30-23. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall submit a return required by this article which is false or fraudulent, or who shall assist any person to evade the payment of any license tax provided in this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 2003, § 50-33) 
Sec. 30-24. - Retailers' records. 
All retail dealers in malt beverages and/or wine, and all persons selling malt beverages and/or wine at retail, shall keep a complete and correct record of all purchases of malt beverages and wine, and shall require all persons from whom they purchase malt beverages or wine to furnish and deliver to them, at the time of delivery of such beverages, a correct invoice of purchase, which invoice shall be kept and preserved by the retailer at his place of business for a period of six months from the date of purchase. Such invoices and all records of retailers of malt beverages and/or wine shall be subject to inspection by any authorized representative of the city. All records of purchase shall be kept for a period of at least three years from the date of such purchase or sale before being destroyed. 
(Code 2003, § 50-34) 
Sec. 30-25. - Distilled spirits excise tax. 
(a)  In addition to the annual retail liquor license fee, there is levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter, and a proportionate tax on all fractional parts of a liter which shall be paid to the city council on all distilled spirits, displayed or stored in the city. The tax shall be collected by wholesale distributors and paid to the council by the wholesale distributors on all distilled spirits sold to retailers in the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits to any retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the tax, together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer, on or before the tenth day of the following month. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any distilled spirits on which the tax has not been paid. 
(c)  Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the council a summary of all purchase invoices for distilled spirits sold to each retailer in the city on or before the 15th day of each month following such purchases. The invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Code 2003, § 50-35) 
State Law reference— Authority to impose excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
Secs. 30-26—30-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 30-54. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-95. 
(Code 2003, § 50-71) 
Sec. 30-55. - Business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. 
(Code 2003, § 50-72; Ord. of 11-1-1983, §1) 
Sec. 30-56. - Filing of return. 
Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Code 2003, § 50-73; Ord. of 11-1-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 30-57. - Minimum tax. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Code 2003, § 50-74; Ord. of 11-1-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 30-58. - Due date. 
The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 2003, § 50-75; Ord. of 11-1-1983, §2) 
Secs. 30-59—30-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURANCE COMPANIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Insurance generally, O.C.G.A. title 33; fees and taxes, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-1 et seq.; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2; licensing of agents, solicitors, brokers, counselors and adjusters, O.C.G.A. § 33-23-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-90. - Insurer license fees. 
There is levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 30-91, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is levied a license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Code 2003, § 50-111; Ord. of 11-1-1983, §1; Ord. of 11-9-1993, § 1) 
Sec. 30-91. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 2003, § 50-112; Ord. of 11-1-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 30-92. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies and brokers not otherwise licensed. 
There is levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 30-90 in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk for each such location within the city. 
(Code 2003, § 50-113; Ord. of 11-1-1983, §3; Ord. of 11-9-1993, § 1) 
Sec. 30-93. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 30-90. 
(Code 2003, § 50-114; Ord. of 11-1-1983, § 4) 
Sec. 30-94. - Gross premiums tax levied upon all other insurers. 
There is levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 30-90. 
(Code 2003, § 50-115; Ord. of 11-1-1983, § 5) 
Sec. 30-95. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 30-90, 30-91 and 30-92 shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. 
(Code 2003, § 50-116; Ord. of 11-1-1983, § 6) 
Secs. 30-96—30-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OCCUPATION TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-2 et seq. 

Sec. 30-119. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Location or office does not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Code 2003, § 50-154; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § IV(A), (B)) 
Sec. 30-120. - Revenue collection agency. 
Within and as a part of the city finance department, there is established a revenue collection agency which shall have responsibility for the administration of this article, including, but not limited to, preparing and taking applications, collecting fees, inspection and regulation of applicants, and reviewing and approval or denial of applications. The city clerk shall also head the revenue collection agency and shall serve as the revenue collection agent. The revenue collection agent is authorized to appoint staff members to assist such agent in carrying out the terms and conditions of this article and in collecting the tax, fees, penalties and interest due as provided in this article. 
(Code 2003, § 50-155; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § IV(C)) 
Sec. 30-121. - Required for business dealings in the city. 
(a)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 1995, and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city limits, or, in the case of an out-of-state business, with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation. 
(b)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 1995, and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the unincorporated areas of the county or, in the case of an out-of-state business, with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay a non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $10.00 annually for all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, review, or reopening of those accounts. 
(c)  The occupation tax provided for in this section shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city limits and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees. 
(d)  The tax rate determined by the number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation will be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city manager. 
(Code 2003, § 50-151; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § I; Ord. of 11-6-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 30-122. - Regulatory fee structure imposed. 
(a)  Any person who shall operate or conduct any business, profession, trade, or occupation shall, as a condition precedent, pay a regulatory fee as allowed under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. The regulatory fee shall be in addition to any occupation tax or administrative fee imposed upon such business, trade, or occupation. 
(b)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in regulated occupations and professions shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city manager. 
(c)  The city and county inspection department shall continue to impose permit fees for construction and development in compliance with the regulations currently in place. It is the express intent of this article that such regulations shall not be affected by this article. 
(Code 2003, § 50-152; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § II) 
Sec. 30-123. - Business license issued; violation for failure to pay and obtain license. 
(a)  Upon payment of the occupation tax, administrative fee, and regulatory fee, or any such combination thereof as required in this article, the applicant, person, business, trade, profession, or occupation shall receive a business license which shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business license shall be shown to any police officer or enforcement officer of the city upon request. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to operate or conduct a business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the unincorporated areas of the county or, in the case of an out-of-state business, with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, or to exercise, conduct or operate any business subject to a regulatory fee, without having first filed a return for payment of the applicable occupation tax, administrative fee, and regulatory fee (or such combination as applicable to such person), paid the applicable occupation tax, regulatory fee, and administrative fee (or such combination thereof as applicable to such person), and obtained and displayed a business license. Where a person is subject to paying an occupation tax, administrative fee, and regulatory fee under this article, such person shall obtain one business license which shall reflect payment of all such charges. 
(Code 2003, § 50-153; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § III) 
Sec. 30-124. - Paying tax of out-of-state business. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax in accordance with the fee scale as established by the city council, from time to time, is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 2003, § 50-156; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § V) 
Sec. 30-125. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration or application for payment of taxes and fees filed with the revenue collection agency of each business operated in the city shall identify the line of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the revenue collection agency and that line of business being noted upon the business license which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Code 2003, § 50-157; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § VI) 
Sec. 30-126. - Number of businesses considered to be operated in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Code 2003, § 50-158; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § VII) 
Sec. 30-127. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on the number of employees as set forth in section 30-121. 
(2)  A fee of $250.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service upon which such tax is to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 15 of each year. 
(Code 2003, § 50-159; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § VIII) 
Sec. 30-128. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 2003, § 50-160; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § IX) 
Sec. 30-129. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the city pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 2003, § 50-161; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § X) 
Sec. 30-130. - When tax and fees due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent; effect of section on the police powers of the city. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, each such occupation tax, administrative fee, and regulatory fee shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by January 15 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling, the registration and tax and/or fees shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a $50.00 penalty shall be imposed. Such tax and/or fees for new businesses shall not be prorated. The tax and fee registration and application provided for in this article shall be issued by the revenue collection agency and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a business license shall, after such registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained such business license, such offender shall, upon conviction by the judge of the municipal court for the city, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(b)  Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the business license provided for in this article before commencing such business; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained such business license shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(c)  In addition to the remedies of this section, the city clerk may proceed to collect amounts due in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the city council to regulate the exercise of business in its jurisdiction and, where authorized by state, federal, or local law or ordinance, to deny persons seeking a business registration or license, or both; nor shall this section in any way limit the authority of the city council to establish laws or regulations setting conditions for the registration and licensure of businesses, trades, occupations or professions. Nothing in this section is intended to limit police powers of the city with regard to business practices as such business practices may be established by state, local, or federal law. 
(Code 2003, § 50-162; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XI) 
Sec. 30-131. - Allocation of tax based on employees within jurisdiction area. 
Only employees who work in the city's jurisdictional territory will be counted for purposes of determination of the applicable taxes. 
(Code 2003, § 50-163; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XII) 
Sec. 30-132. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city business license may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 2003, § 50-165; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XIV) 
Sec. 30-133. - Evidence of qualification required, if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business license, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 2003, § 50-166; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XV) 
Sec. 30-134. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the judge of the municipal court for the city, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 2003, § 50-167; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XVI) 
Sec. 30-135. - Subpoena and arrest powers. 
The chief of police or his designee shall be classified as deputy marshal business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Code 2003, § 50-168; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XVII) 
Sec. 30-136. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 40-1-116. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(11)  Duly licensed not-for-profit organizations. 
(Code 2003, § 50-169; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XVIII) 
Sec. 30-137. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Code 2003, § 50-170; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XIX) 
Sec. 30-138. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from the commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid according to such estimate. 
(Code 2003, § 50-171; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XX) 
Sec. 30-139. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place in the city or where the business includes more than one line, such business shall be required to obtain the necessary business license for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Code 2003, § 50-172; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XXI) 
Sec. 30-140. - Inspections of books and records. 
The finance department of the city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books or records pertaining to employees of a business listed under this article or person for which the returns are made. The finance department shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the finance department such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the finance department at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, then, in addition to any money owed, a penalty in the amount as set forth in section 1-13 will be assessed for the period delinquent. The right of inspection in this section shall be limited to those records which reflect the number of employees of the person, business, trade, occupation or profession. 
(Code 2003, § 50-173; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XXII) 
Sec. 30-141. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, or permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay such occupation tax, administrative fee, or regulatory fee, or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of such returns within the time required in this article, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 30-140, any business license granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of such business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business license shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided for in this article is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the finance department in accordance with provisions found in section 30-140. In the case of those practitioners where the city cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the city in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Code 2003, § 50-174; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XXIII) 
Sec. 30-142. - Lien taken for delinquent administration and/or tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided for in this article for the collection of the occupation tax, regulatory fee, and administration fee levied by this article, the finance department, upon any installment of such tax and fee becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of such tax against the person, partnership, or corporation liable for such tax and fee, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for such tax and/or fee, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien and/or fee shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the finance department of the city upon the property of the defendant located in such jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of such execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in such execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the finance department against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax and fee, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Code 2003, § 50-175; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XXIV) 
Sec. 30-143. - Amendment or repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax and fee rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Code 2003, § 50-176; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XXV) 
Sec. 30-144. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions of this article, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 2003, § 50-177; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XXVI) 
Sec. 30-145. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
The city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. However, regulatory fees shall be added, increased, modified or altered as suggested by the finance department, or otherwise by amendment or resolution without prior public hearing. 
(Code 2003, § 50-178; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XXVII) 
Sec. 30-146. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council meeting. 
(Code 2003, § 50-179; Ord. of 1-3-1995, § XXVIII) 
Secs. 30-147—30-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISE TAX 

Sec. 30-176. - Rate of levy. 
There is set and levied on each electric light and power company, gas company, telephone and telegraph company, water company, and other public utility making use of the streets, alleys, or other public ways or places of the city, for the purpose of rendering utility services, a franchise tax in the amount of four percent of the annual gross revenues received from residential, commercial and industrial sales. 
(Code 1980, § 19-103(1); Code 2003, § 50-211) 
Sec. 30-177. - Due date and required report. 
The public utility franchise tax shall be paid on or before the 20th day of the month following the calendar month in which the utility was provided and the sale was made, and payment shall be accompanied by a report showing the volume of gross sales by service classification (residential, commercial, industrial) for such preceding month. 
(Code 1980, § 19-103(2); Code 2003, § 50-212) 
Chapter 32 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Adoption of Uniform Rules of the Road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372, the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-397, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 10-101; Code 2003, § 54-1; Ord. of 9-6-1983, § 1) 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 32-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the roads of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police chief may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them, shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this chapter. 
(Code 2003, § 54-2) 
Sec. 32-3. - Parental responsibility. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years to permit, whether knowingly or through ineffective control or supervision, such minor to violate any provision of this chapter or state law regarding the operation of vehicles. 
(Code 2003, § 54-3) 
Sec. 32-4. - Cutting corners. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut corners at intersections by driving through service station areas or other properties for the purpose of avoiding traffic signal devices or stop signs. 
(Res. of 4-1-2003, § 1(54-4)) 
Secs. 32-5—32-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 32-27. - General speed limit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or portion of a street in the city at a rate of speed greater than 30 miles per hour unless another speed limit is posted or otherwise designated for such street or portion of a street. 
(Code 2003, § 54-31) 
Sec. 32-28. - Maximum speed limits on specific streets. 
The mayor and city council may alter the maximum speed limits established by section 32-27 on any street or portion thereof within the city in accord with the provisions of state law. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit. 
(Code 2003, § 54-32) 
Sec. 32-29. - Traffic, speed and zones; signs and traffic control devices. 
(a)  Upon approval of the council, the police chief is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)  Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians. 
(3)  Traffic lanes. 
(4)  Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones. 
(5)  Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices. 
(6)  Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the city. 
(b)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this article for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this article shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(c)  The city clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate official map setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs and other traffic control devices. The map and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by the council and the map shall be known as the official traffic control map of the city. An official copy thereof shall be kept in the office of the city clerk; shall be available to the public; and copies certified by the city clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device. 
(d)  No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this article shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 54-33) 
Sec. 32-30. - Speed detection devices. 
(a)  The city is authorized to use speed detection devices for the purpose of traffic control on the roads and streets in the city. 
(b)  Such speed detection devices shall be used only for the purpose of public safety and traffic control, and shall not be used for the purpose of raising revenue. 
(Code 1980, § 10-104; Code 2003, § 54-34) 
Sec. 32-31. - Parking in deceleration or acceleration lanes prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any automobile, truck, bus, truck tractor, trailer, tractor, trailer combination, motorcycle, moped, or other motor vehicle within or upon the deceleration or acceleration lanes lying in the unincorporated areas of the city. 
(b)  Deceleration and acceleration lanes shall be defined for the purpose of this section as those strips of pavement lying adjacent to and to the east of the northbound lanes of traffic and adjacent to and to the west of the southbound lanes of traffic which are not part of the regular roadway but afford access into and out of the driveways and side roads along the highway. 
(c)  Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a violation of a city ordinance and shall be prosecuted in the municipal court. A violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 2003, § 54-36) 
Chapter 34 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide stormwater, sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consumer means any person, establishment, unit or space served on or through any water meter other than the customer in whose name the meter is listed or from whom payment may be required. 
Customer means the owner of the property served by a utility service connection, or the tenant, lessee, renter, establishment or occupant of such property, or the person in or against whose name such connection for such property is listed on the books and records of the city, and who is responsible to the city for payment of bills incurred for such utility service furnished to such property and for use by such property of the public sewer system of the city, either or both. 
Structure includes the supply of utility service prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
Temporary includes the supplying of any utility service to any structure prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
User means a customer of any utility service furnished by the city whose property also discharges sewage, wastes or water into the public sanitary sewer system of the city in any quantity. 
Utility means water, sewer, solid waste collection and disposal and/or any other utility service furnished by the city to consumers thereof. 
(Code 2003, § 58-1; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 1) 
Sec. 34-2. - Scope of chapter. 
All pertinent provisions of this chapter are made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city shall furnish any utility service to any person, or whereby the city shall make any utility connections or perform any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of any utility service pursuant to the rules and regulations of the city manager. 
(Code 2003, § 58-2; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 2) 
Sec. 34-3. - Service to comply with technical provisions. 
Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with and in compliance with all applicable technical provisions of this chapter, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Code 2003, § 58-3; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 3) 
Sec. 34-4. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall have the authority to establish, by rule or regulation, such standards and specifications as may be deemed necessary for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility service system owned and operated by the city, within or without the city, and under the management of the city. Such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Violation of such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 2003, § 58-4; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 4) 
Sec. 34-5. - Service outside city. 
In order to protect the utility service supply, the city will not make any taps or connections outside the city limits until the premises involved have been inspected and approved by the city. Utility service shall not be provided to persons or groups outside the city limits except on the basis of a written contract approved by the city manager. 
(Code 2003, § 58-5; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 5) 
Sec. 34-6. - Right of entry. 
Any authorized inspector of the city shall have free access at any reasonable time to go upon the land of all premises supplied with any utility service by the city for the purpose of examination in order to protect the utility services from abusive use. 
(Code 2003, § 58-6; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 6) 
Sec. 34-7. - Termination or refusal of service. 
The city shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any utility service for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law. 
(2)  Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service. 
(3)  Nonpayment of bills. 
(4)  Willful or negligent waste of any utility service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise. 
(5)  Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility service. 
(6)  Theft or diversion and/or use of any utility service without payment therefor. 
(7)  Vacancy of premises. 
(Code 2003, § 58-7; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 7) 
Sec. 34-8. - Liability of city for damage. 
The city shall not be liable for any damage to any customer of any utility service furnished by the city due to backflow of the sewerage system, failure of supply, interruption of service or any other cause outside the direct control of the city. 
(Code 2003, § 58-8; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 8) 
Sec. 34-9. - Application for service. 
Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city shall make application for such service to the city manager. Such application shall contain the applicant's name, address and the uses for which such utility service is desired. 
(Code 2003, § 58-9; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 9) 
Sec. 34-10. - Service not available to debtors. 
The city may decline or fail or cease to furnish utility service to any person who may be in debt to the city for any reason, except ad valorem taxes and special assessments. 
(Code 2003, § 58-10; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 10) 
Sec. 34-11. - Permit. 
Approval of the application for any utility service by the city manager shall be deemed permission for such service. 
(Code 2003, § 58-11; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 11) 
Sec. 34-12. - Use assumed. 
All premises connected to any utility service of the city shall be assumed to be using such utility service and the owner or occupant shall be charged therefor so long as such premises remain connected with the utility service. 
(Code 2003, § 58-12; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 12) 
Sec. 34-13. - Use contrary to permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having a permit from the city for the use of any utility service offered by the city to use such utility service for any purpose other than mentioned in such permit or to make any unauthorized changes in such service. 
(Code 2003, § 58-13; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 13) 
Sec. 34-14. - Damage of equipment, and trespass. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, not having authority to do so, to open any hydrant or tamper with any utility service furnished by the city to consumers, or to in any other way molest, damage or trespass upon any equipment or premises belonging to the city connected with any utility service. 
(Code 2003, § 58-14; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 14) 
Sec. 34-15. - Unlawful supplying of service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to supply any utility service, including electricity, to any structure on a temporary basis without proof being shown that a building permit has been issued by the city to the owner, builder or other person in control of such structure for such structure. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to supply any utility service, including electricity, to any structure on a permanent basis without proof being shown that a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city to the owner, builder or other person in control of such structure for such structure. 
(Code 2003, § 58-15; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 15) 
Sec. 34-16. - Interruption of service; notice. 
The city reserves the right to cut off any utility service without notice in case of emergencies. When an interruption in service is necessary for the maintenance and improvement of the utility system, affected customers will be notified as circumstances permit. 
(Code 2003, § 58-16; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 16) 
Sec. 34-17. - Restricting use. 
The city reserves the right to at any time restrict or prevent the use of any utility service furnished by the city during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restriction or prevention of use. 
(Code 2003, § 58-17; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 17) 
Sec. 34-18. - Sale of service by customer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resell any utility service obtained from the city to others except by special arrangement with the city manager. 
(Code 2003, § 58-18; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 18) 
Sec. 34-19. - Service connections. 
(a)  Supervision. Connections for any utility service furnished by the city shall be made under the supervision of the city manager. 
(b)  Separate connections. Every building, structure or consumer in the city shall have a separate utility service connection. 
(c)  Owner's consent. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection in any manner to any utility system, whether owned by the city or not, without the prior knowledge and consent of the owner of such utility system. 
(Code 2003, § 58-19; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, §§ 19—21) 
Sec. 34-20. - Unlawful use. 
No person, other than employees of the city, shall be authorized to connect, turn on, turn off or disconnect any utility service offered by the city, or remove, replace or repair any equipment connected to any such utility service. 
(Code 2003, § 58-20; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 22) 
Sec. 34-21. - Maintenance of equipment by consumer. 
The consumer of any utility service furnished by the city shall maintain and keep in good repair all connections, appliances and other apparatus installed and used in connection with such utility service. 
(Code 2003, § 58-21; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. I, § 23) 
Secs. 34-22—34-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHARGES 

Sec. 34-46. - Meters. 
Meters for the measurement of utility services furnished by the city shall be furnished and installed by, and shall remain the property of, the city. 
(Code 2003, § 58-51; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. II, § 1) 
Sec. 34-47. - Deposit. 
(a)  Required. Along with the application for utility service, the applicant therefor may be required to pay to the city a deposit as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Refund. Refunds of deposits made for utility services shall be made upon the termination of such utility service only after payment of all indebtedness to the city for such utility service. Application of deposit may be made in partial or total settlement of accounts when supply is cut off for nonpayment of a bill, or for any infraction or violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation of the city relative to utility services offered by the city. 
(Code 2003, § 58-52; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. II, §§ 2, 3; Res. of 5-2-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 34-48. - Determination of connection charges. 
The charges and fees for connection to utility services furnished by the city shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 2003, § 58-53; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. II, § 4; Res. of 5-2-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 34-49. - General rates established. 
The monthly rate schedule for all users of any utility service furnished by the city shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 2003, § 58-54; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. II, § 5) 
Sec. 34-50. - Combining meters. 
Two or more meters, unless installed at one location, cannot be combined for billing purposes to take advantage of more favorable bulk rates. 
(Code 2003, § 58-55; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. II, § 6) 
Sec. 34-51. - When payment due. 
All bills for utility services furnished by the city shall be due and payable prior to 12:00 midnight of the tenth day following the date of such bill; provided, however, if such due date shall fall on a Sunday or a legal holiday observed by the city, such bill shall be due and payable by 12:00 midnight of the following business day. 
(Code 2003, § 58-56; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. II, § 7) 
Sec. 34-52. - Late payment penalty. 
A penalty will be added to the utility bill if such bill is not paid on or before the date as shown on the face of the bill. 
(Code 2003, § 58-57; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. II, § 8) 
Sec. 34-53. - Disconnection for nonpayment. 
If bills for utility services are not paid when due, the city shall have the right to disconnect and discontinue all utility services furnished by the city to the consumer so in arrears. 
(Code 2003, § 58-58; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. II, § 9) 
Sec. 34-54. - Reconnection after disconnection. 
If a utility service is disconnected for nonpayment of the bill, the consumer thereof shall have the right to have such service reconnected only upon the payment of the amount due and a reconnection fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 2003, § 58-59; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. II, § 10) 
Sec. 34-55. - Voluntary discontinuance of service. 
Consumers wishing to discontinue the use of any utility service shall give written notice thereof at the city hall. Failure to do so shall render the consumer liable for the payment of all bills until such notice has been given. 
(Code 2003, § 58-60; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. II, § 11) 
Secs. 34-56—34-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER CONSERVATION 

Sec. 34-84. - Imposition of restrictions. 
If the city's water supply becomes critical and the city manager advises the council that it is necessary to impose restrictions on the use of water by consumers thereof, the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, may impose restrictions on such use for the health and safety of city consumers. 
(Code 2003, § 58-91; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. III, § 1) 
Sec. 34-85. - Issuance of proclamation; determining restrictions on water use. 
If the mayor shall determine that a condition exists warranting the imposition of restrictions on the use of city water, he shall issue a proclamation thereof imposing one or more of the following restrictions: 
(1)  No outside watering of any kind, including street flushing, public fountains, park irrigation, watering lawns, gardens, shrubbery, or other plants. 
(2)  No commercial and/or public water use such as swimming pools and motor vehicle washing of any kind. 
(3)  No commercial and home laundry use except during the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. only. 
(Code 2003, § 58-92; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. III, § 2) 
Sec. 34-86. - Right of entry. 
Inspection of all premises in the city by duly authorized city officers bearing proper identification shall be permitted. Such officers may enter upon the land of all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2003, § 58-94; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. III, § 4) 
Sec. 34-87. - Issuance of warning. 
Any person found to be violating the provisions of this article shall be served a written notice stating the nature of the violation and shall be issued a warning summons for this violation. 
(Code 2003, § 58-95; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. III, § 5) 
Sec. 34-88. - Penalty for subsequent violations. 
Any person found guilty of a violation of this article, subsequent to being issued a warning summons, shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 2003, § 58-93; Ord. of 7-3-2001, art. III, § 6) 
Secs. 34-89—34-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SANITARY SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-120. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles per liter. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures or lagoons used for treating sewage presently owned or afterward acquired by the city. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Storm sewer and storm drain mean a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Superintendent means the superintendent or director of public works of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative, as designated by the city manager council. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids; and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1980, § 15-101; Code 2003, § 58-131) 
Sec. 34-121. - Power and authority of inspectors. 
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon the land of all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 15-107; Code 2003, § 58-132) 
Sec. 34-122. - Service charges. 
Sewer service charges for the purpose of financing and maintaining a municipal sewer system are levied per month as follows: $2.00 plus $0.25 for 1,000 gallons of water used per month. 
(Code 1980, § 15-109; Code 2003, § 58-134; Ord. of 9-1-1981) 
Sec. 34-123. - Unsanitary deposits of wastes prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be placed or deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1980, § 15-102(1); Code 2003, § 58-135) 
Sec. 34-124. - Discharge of wastes into natural outlets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 15-102(2); Code 2003, § 58-136) 
Sec. 34-125. - Privies and similar facilities prohibited. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain or cause to be constructed or maintained any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1980, § 15-102(3); Code 2003, § 58-137) 
Sec. 34-126. - Protection of structures and equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city sewerage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct or malicious mischief. 
(Code 1980, § 15-102(4); Code 2003, § 58-138) 
Sec. 34-127. - Connection of public sewers. 
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the corporate limits of the city and located within 250 feet of a line of public sanitary sewer now in existence or hereafter constructed, to which such house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity, is required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with such line of public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 60 days after the date of official notice to do so. The charge for connection to a public sewer line shall be equivalent to the actual costs of such connection, but not less than $250.00 for each connection. 
(Code 1980, § 15-103; Code 2003, § 58-139; Ord. of 11-9-1995, § 2) 
Sec. 34-128. - Private sewage disposal. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 34-127, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 15-104(1); Code 2003, § 58-140) 
Sec. 34-129. - Permit required; procedures for private sewage disposal. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and the inspection fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk, shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1980, § 15-104(2); Code 2003, § 58-141) 
Sec. 34-130. - Inspection and approval of private disposal system. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed and to the satisfaction of the superintendent. The superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(Code 1980, § 15-104(3); Code 2003, § 58-142) 
Sec. 34-131. - Specifications for private disposal system. 
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of natural resources. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1980, § 15-104(4); Code 2003, § 58-143) 
Sec. 34-132. - When connection to public system required. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 34-127, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1980, § 15-104(5); Code 2003, § 58-144) 
Sec. 34-133. - Maintenance of private disposal facilities. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1980, § 15-104(6); Code 2003, § 58-145) 
Sec. 34-134. - Additional requirements. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 1980, § 15-104(7); Code 2003, § 58-146) 
Sec. 34-135. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 34-126, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 34-126 or who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in section 34-127 or who shall continue any other violation of this article beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1980, § 15-108; Code 2003, § 58-133) 
Secs. 34-136—34-153. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 34-154. - Permit required. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(1); Code 2003, § 58-171) 
Sec. 34-155. - Classification of permits. 
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(2); Code 2003, § 58-172) 
Sec. 34-156. - Application for permit. 
In case of either building sewer permit stated in section 34-155, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form designated by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer permit, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk, shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(2); Code 2003, § 58-173) 
Sec. 34-157. - Liability for costs and expenses. 
All costs and expenses incident to the connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the city property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection of the building sewer. Any connection from the city property line into the public sewer shall be made by the city, for which the owner shall pay the city a standard sewer tap fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk for residential taps, and for commercial taps. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(3); Code 2003, § 58-174; Ord. of 10-7-1980, § 3; Ord. of 4-7-1981, § 1) 
Sec. 34-158. - Separate sewers for separate buildings. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(4); Code 2003, § 58-175) 
Sec. 34-159. - Use of old sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(5); Code 2003, § 58-176) 
Sec. 34-160. - Specifications. 
The building sewer shall be cast iron pipe ASTM Specification A74; vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM Specification C13; or concrete sewer pipe, ASTM Specification C14. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the superintendent where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(6); Code 2003, § 58-177) 
Sec. 34-161. - Size and slope. 
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(7); Code 2003, § 58-178) 
Sec. 34-162. - Point of connection. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(8); Code 2003, § 58-179) 
Sec. 34-163. - Lifting mechanisms, when required. 
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(9); Code 2003, § 58-180) 
Sec. 34-164. - Excavations. 
All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipelaying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(10); Code 2003, § 58-181) 
Sec. 34-165. - Joints and connections. 
All joints and connections for building sewers shall be made gastight and watertight. Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly placed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead, federal specification QQL-156, not less than one inch deep. Lead shall be run in one pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish or other coating shall be permitted on the joint material until after the joint has been tested and approved. Rubber joint cast iron pipe may be used as an alternative. All joints in vitrified clay or concrete pipe or between such pipe and metals shall be made with approved hot-pouring jointing material, as specified in this section, or by using rubber gaskets or preformed factory-applied couplings having resilient properties in accordance with ASTM Specification C443-59T for concrete pipe, and ASTM Specification C425-64 for vitrified clay pipe, or the latest revisions thereof. Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit, nor be soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp or similar approved material. Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval of the superintendent. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(11); Code 2003, § 58-182) 
Sec. 34-166. - Location of connection. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the locations specified by the superintendent. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction of an angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(12); Code 2003, § 58-183) 
Sec. 34-167. - Notice of readiness for inspection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(13); Code 2003, § 58-184) 
Sec. 34-168. - Protection of public. 
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in conformance with the land development regulations and other city ordinances. 
(Code 1980, § 15-105(14); Code 2003, § 58-185) 
Secs. 34-169—34-189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGES INTO PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 34-190. - Regulation of discharges. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to a sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1980, § 15-106(1); Code 2003, § 58-211) 
Sec. 34-191. - Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as is specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1980, § 15-106(2); Code 2003, § 58-212) 
Sec. 34-192. - Restricted discharges. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of fat, oil or greases. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood paunch, manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewerage works. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. The fixed upper limits for the constituents listed, in parts per million, shall be as follows: 

 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 15-106(3); Code 2003, § 58-213) 
Sec. 34-193. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(b)  Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
(c)  When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 15-106(4), (5); Code 2003, § 58-214) 
Sec. 34-194. - Certain discharges restricted. 
(a)  The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes having characteristics as follows shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent: 
(1)  A five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater than 300 milligrams per liter; 
(2)  Containing more than 350 milligrams per liter of suspended solids; 
(3)  Containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in section 34-192; or 
(4)  Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city. 
(b)  Where necessary, in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(1)  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to 350 milligrams per liter; 
(2)  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 34-192; or 
(3)  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
(c)  Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approval is obtained in writing. 
(Code 1980, § 15-106(6); Code 2003, § 58-215) 
Sec. 34-195. - Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1980, § 15-106(7); Code 2003, § 58-216) 
Sec. 34-196. - Control manhole. 
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner, at his expense, and the owner, at his expense, shall maintain the manhole so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 15-106(8); Code 2003, § 58-217) 
Sec. 34-197. - Standards for measurements, tests and analyses. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes, which reference is made in section 34-192 and section 34-194, shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, shall be determined at the control manhole provided in section 34-196, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Code 1980, § 15-106(9); Code 2003, § 58-218) 
Sec. 34-198. - Special agreements or arrangements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1980, § 15-106(10); Code 2003, § 58-219) 
Secs. 34-199—34-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 34-220. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance." 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the provisions of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells or springs which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 34-221. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitation reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, is disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § 2) 
Sec. 34-222. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle, the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 500 feet. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § 3) 
Sec. 34-223. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection areas: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § 4) 
Sec. 34-224. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses of conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 34-223: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings and street and driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 34-223; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks; 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § 5) 
Sec. 34-225. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including, without limitation, those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § 6) 
Secs. 34-226—34-243. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-244. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Identity Theft Prevention Program." 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 1(31-1)) 
Sec. 34-245. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 1(31-2)) 
Sec. 34-246. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 1(31-3)) 
Sec. 34-247. - Findings. 
The city makes the following findings: 
(1)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(2)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, and garbage. 
(3)  The city has no previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts. 
(4)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(5)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(6)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
a.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
b.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
c.  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
d.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 1(31-4)) 
Sec. 34-248. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system, another filing system, or both, and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 1(31-5)) 
Sec. 34-249. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password shall be changed by the city clerk on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 1(31-6)) 
Sec. 34-250. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 1(31-7)) 
Sec. 34-251. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The social security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, the city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns (for example, the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments). 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 1(31-8)) 
Sec. 34-252. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city clerk, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile the red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city clerk, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 1(31-9)) 
Sec. 34-253. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 1(31-10)) 
Sec. 34-254. - Program administration. 
The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city clerk is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city clerk, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The city clerk will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city clerk shall exercise his discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 1(31-11)) 
Sec. 34-255. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the city clerk shall exercise his discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 1(31-12)) 
Secs. 34-256—34-273. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 34-274. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR 681.1, the purpose of this division is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 2(31-22)) 
Sec. 34-275. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to the requirements set forth in the United States Code Annotated, that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 2(31-23)) 
Sec. 34-276. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 USC 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 2(31-24)) 
Sec. 34-277. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 2(31-25)) 
Sec. 34-278. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2008, div. 2(31-26)) 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the zoning ordinance, adopted by the mayor and council on October 3, 2017. Amendments to the zoning ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. For stylistic purposes, the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in The Code of Leesburg, Georgia, has been used. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule planning and zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INTRODUCTION 

Sec. 1.01. - Authority for enactment. 
The Leesburg City Council enacts this ordinance pursuant to the City of Leesburg's authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, article 9, section 2, paragraph 4, Planning and Zoning, and by article 9, section 2, paragraphs 2 and 3; pursuant to chapters 66 and 70 of title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; by the Georgia Planning Act of 1989 as amended; by the City of Leesburg's authority to enact regulations and powers granted by its Charter, by local laws and by the city's general police powers; and by other powers and authority provided by federal, state, and local laws applicable hereto. 
Sec. 1.02. - Jurisdiction. 
This ordinance shall apply to the incorporated areas of the City of Leesburg. 
Sec. 1.03. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations shall be to promote the proper location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; to assure the appropriate sizes of yards, courts, and the use of other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; and the use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other purposes, so as to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to prevent urban sprawl; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; to promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; to encourage better design of the built environment in a manner that improves the aesthetic conditions of the city so as to promote the health, safety and welfare of citizens and visitors; to protect against blight and depreciation; to secure economy in governmental expenditures; to conserve the value of buildings and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and structures; and for other purposes. 
Sec. 1.04. - Severability of parts of ordinance. 
It is declared to be the intention of the Leesburg City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this ordinance shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this ordinance, since they would have been enacted by the city council without incorporation in this ordinance of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1.05. - Interpretation, purpose and conflict. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comforts, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with, or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises, and likewise not in conflict with this ordinance; nor is it intended by this ordinance to interfere with, or abrogate, or annual any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction or requires larger open spaces, or larger lot areas than are imposed or required by such ordinance or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
Sec. 1.06. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance shall upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by imposition of the appropriate fine or by imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 1.07. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of these regulations certain words and tenses, used herein, shall be interpreted or defined as follows: 
•  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
•  The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular. 
•  The word "person" includes a corporation, partnership, or association as well as an individual. 
•  The term "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
•  Terms not herein defined shall have the meanings customarily assigned to them. 
•  The term "governing body" shall mean the city council of Leesburg, Georgia. 
Accessory building: A detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to, customarily associated with and related to the principal structure or use of land, and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use. Accessory buildings shall include storage buildings, tool houses, party houses, bathhouses (used in conjunction with swimming pools) and similar uses. 
Accessory use: The use customarily incidental and accessory to the principal use of a building located upon the same building site as the principal use. 
Agriculture: Agriculture shall be considered to mean the raising of soil crops and/or livestock in a customary manner on tracts of land 25 acres or more in size and shall include all associated activities. Retail selling of products raised on the premises shall be considered a permissible activity provided that space necessary for the parking of customer's vehicles shall be provided off the public right-of-way. 
Alley: Any dedicated public way providing a secondary means of ingress to or egress from land or structure thereon. 
Alteration: Any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy; any change in the structural members of the building, such as walls, partitions, columns, beams, girders, or any change which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
Apartment: A room or suite of rooms used as dwelling for one family which does its cooking therein. 
Apartment houses: A residential structure containing three or more apartment units. 
Automobile wrecking yard, automobile used parts or auto graveyard: Means anywhere three or more vehicles not in running condition, or the parts thereof, are stored in the open or any building or structure used principally for wrecking or storage of automobiles not in running condition for automobile parts. 
Basement: A portion of a building partly below grade and having less than five feet above the finished grade level of the building. 
Block: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, drainage ways, or boundary lines of municipalities or counties. 
Buffer: That portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established as landscaped open space for the purposes of screening and separating properties with incompatible land uses, the width of which is measured from the common property line and extends the developed portion of the common property line. A buffer consists of trees, shrubs, and other natural vegetation undisturbed by grading or site development and replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access and utility crossings. 
Building: Any structure having a roof, supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal or goods. Where roofed structures are separated from each other by party walls having no opening passage, each portion so separated shall be considered a separate building. 
Building height: The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished grade to the highest point on the roof surface. 
Building inspector: The highest ranking building official of the governing body, or his representative. 
Building setbacks: The distance any part of any structure must be from any front, rear, or side property line. Building setbacks are established in this ordinance. 
Caretaker or employee residence: An accessory residence located inside or in addition to the principal structure or use of a parcel of land. Said residence must be occupied by a bona fide caretaker or the owner himself as necessary to the property's orderly operation or safety. 
Clerk: The clerk of the governing body. 
Clinic: A professional office where the services of more than one practitioner can be obtained and where patients are studied or treated on an outpatient basis and where no overnight accommodations are provided. 
Club: An organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, science, literature, politics or the like, but not for profit. 
Conditional use: A use which within certain districts specified by this ordinance is not permitted as a matter of right but may be permitted within these districts by the city council after the planning commission has: 
(1)  Reviewed the proposed site plans for the use, its arrangement and design, its relationship to neighboring property and other conditions peculiar to the particular proposal which would determine its desirability or undesirability; and 
(2)  Has found the proposal not to be contrary to the intent of this ordinance. All conditional use applications will follow the same public notice, public hearing and review process as any application for rezoning. 
Day care facility: A day care facility is an individual or jointly owned facility designated to offer care and/or training to children unrelated to the owner or director for any part of a day on a regular basis. Such facility may or may not be operated for profit. Day care is not a baby-sitting service to be used for the convenience of the parents at irregular intervals (drop-ins). 
(1)  A group center (day nursery, day care center) is defined as a facility for six or more children, regardless of age, whose primary purpose is the care of the child for part of a day, while his parent or parents are absent from home. 
(2)  A nursery school is defined as a school for two-, three-, and four-year-old children which operates for periods not to exceed four hours a day and whose primary purpose is education and guidance for healthy emotional and social development of children. 
(3)  Kindergarten is defined as a school for four- or five-year-old children which operates for periods not to exceed four hours a day and whose primary purpose is education and guidance for healthy emotional and social development. 
(4)  Family day care is defined as a service in a private home, offering care in a family setting to a maximum of five children, including the foster family's own children during part of the day while the natural parents are absent from their home. 
(5)  Adult day care is defined as personal care and supervision in a protective setting for adults outside their own home for less than 24 hours per day. The program may include the provisions of daily medical supervision, nursing and other health care support, psycho-social assistance, or appropriate socialization stimuli or a combination of these. Adult day care is available for those persons who do not require 24-hour-per-day institutional care, but who, because of physical and/or mental disability, are not capable of full-time independent living. 
Density: The number of dwelling units developed on an acre of land. As used in this ordinance, all densities are stated in dwelling units per gross acre. 
District: A portion of the jurisdiction of the governing body within which, on a uniform basis, certain uses of land and buildings are permitted and within which certain yards, open spaces, lot areas and other requirements are established. 
Drive-in restaurant: A restaurant or other establishment serving food and/or drink so developed that its retail or services character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle. 
Dwelling, multiple: A building or portion thereof used or designed as a residence for three or more families living and cooking independent of each other in said building. This definition includes three-family houses, four-family houses and apartment houses, but does not include hotels, motels, trailer camps or mobile home parks. 
Dwelling, single-family: A building used or designed for use as a residence for a single family. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex): A duplex is a building either designed, constructed, altered or used for two adjoining dwelling units that are connected by a common wall and/or if two stories by a common floor. 
Erected: Includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises required for the building. Excavations, fill, drainage, and the like, shall be considered a part of the erection. 
Essential services: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities, governmental departments or commissions, of underground, surface, or overhead; gas, communication, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, sewers, pipes, conduits, cable, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrant and similar accessories in connection therewith, but not including buildings, which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or governmental departments for the general public health, safety, convenience or welfare. 
Family: No more than six unrelated persons or one or more related persons occupying a housing unit and using common kitchen facilities and entrances, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, or personal care home. 
Farm: A platted or unplatted parcel of land 25 acres or more in an area which is used for growing crops, raising livestock or other agricultural purposes. 
Farm stand: A booth or stall located on a farm from which produce and farm products are sold to the general public. 
Group home: A group home is a residential use (home) of a property for the care of individuals in the home environment which have mental and/or developmental disabilities or individuals who will benefit socially from living in a group environment. All group homes must be licensed by the appropriate state agency and must have a conditional use permit granted by the city council prior to opening. 
Halfway house: A group home facility, which is licensed or supervised by any federal, state or county, to be used for health/welfare rehabilitation or similar purposes. 
Home occupation: Any use conducted entirely within the dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character thereof. Provided further, that no article or service is sold or offered for sale on the premises, except such as is produced by such occupation; that such occupation shall not require internal or external alterations or construction, open storage or signs not customary in residential areas. Signs for home occupations are required to meet the requirements of article XVI of this ordinance. Clinics, hospitals, childcare centers, and day nurseries, among others, shall not be deemed to be home occupations. 
Hospital: An institution providing health services, primarily for inpatients and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. 
Junk: Any motor vehicle, machine, appliance, scrap material or other items that are in a condition which prevents its use for the purpose for which it was originally manufactured. 
Junk yard: Includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any area of more than 200 square feet for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles, or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
Kennel: Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, four months or older, are kept either permanently or temporarily for commercial or breeding purposes. 
Landscape strip: That portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established as landscaped open space, the width of which is measured from the common property line and extending the developed portion of the property line. A landscape strip, as distinguished from a buffer, may be disturbed by grading or site development but shall be maintained as landscaped open space. A landscape strip may consist of grass lawns, decorative planting, berms, walls, fences or other approved features designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect within the development. 
Loading strip: An off-street space on the same parcel of property with the building or group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or use and any accessory building and uses customarily incident to it, and including open spaces not less in extent than those required in connection therewith by these regulations. 
Lot area: The size of a lot measured within the lot lines as expressed in terms of acres or square feet. 
Lot, corner: A lot abutting on two streets at their intersection. The minimum front yard setback shall be observed on both street frontages. 
Lot, flag: Lots which have adequate land area for two lots but which do not have adequate street frontage for more than one lot. The standards require access for fire protection and also require screening in the higher density residential areas to protect the privacy of abutting residences. The intent of flag lots is to provide additional housing and commercial opportunities and to promote the efficient use of land. 

Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot lines: The property lines bounding the lot. 
(1)  Front lot line: On a lot abutting upon a public street, the front lot line shall mean the line separating such lot from such street right-of-way. 
(2)  Rear lot line: Ordinarily, the lot line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular shaped lot the city planner shall designate the rear lot line. 
(3)  Side lot line: Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line. 
Lot of record: A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a map or plat on file with the clerk of superior court of the county and which actually exists as shown, or any part of such parcel held in a recorded ownership separate from the ownership of the remainder thereof. 
Lot width: The distance between the side lot lines, measured along the front building line and parallel to the street right-of-way. 
Manufactured home: A factory built structure that is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 USC 5401 and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving it to a permanent site, and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A mobile home is not a manufactured home, except as may be hereafter otherwise provided. 
Manufactured home park: A licensed business operation which leases spaces for permanent or for temporary occupancy for periods exceeding 30 days for manufactured homes and, under some conditions, travel trailers. 
Maximum lot coverage: The part or percentage of the lot that may be occupied by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings or structures. 
Mobile home: A structure transportable in one or more sections which, in the travelling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or when erected on the site is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. Mobile homes were manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, and do not meet current building codes. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of citizens mobile homes as herein defined are not authorized except as previously existing lawful nonconforming uses and shall not be placed in the incorporated areas of the city. See section 14.02. 
Motor vehicle repair: General repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; overall painting; but not including undercoating of automobiles unless conducted in a completely enclosed spray booth. 
Nonconforming use: Any building or land use which lawfully exists at the time of adoption of this ordinance or amendments thereto and which does not now conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Nursery (tree and shrub): An area or establishment devoted to the raising and care of trees, shrubs, or similar plant materials. 
Off-street parking lot: A facility providing vehicular parking spaces, along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exits for the parking of more than two automobiles. 
Open space, landscaped: That portion or portions of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking access and service areas, set aside and maintained as a buffer, landscape strip or other approved open area. 
Outdoor display: The open display of items, outside of any principal or accessory building that does not include walls for enclosure, that is for the primary purpose of attracting attention to the specific item from nearby or adjacent streets or roads. 
Outdoor storage: The open storage of any items, whether business related or personal, outside of any principal or accessory building or structure that does not include walls for enclosure. 
Parking space: An area of not less than nine feet wide and 20 feet long, for each automobile or motor vehicle, such space being exclusive of necessary drives, aisles, entrances or exits and being fully accessible for the storage or parking of permitted vehicles. 
Personal care home: A dwelling in which aged or infirm persons are boarded and receive personal care on a 24-hour basis. All such homes shall be licensed by the appropriate state agency. 
Place of worship: A lot or building wherein persons assemble for religious worship. 
Planned unit development: A planned unit development is a single parcel of land within which a number of buildings (uses) are located or intended to be located in accordance with an overall plan of design and not in relation to a prearranged pattern of land subdivision. Examples of a planned unit development (PUD) include a complex of apartment buildings, offices and a shopping center with a number of stores. 
Prime farm land: Land in the city which is best suited for producing feed, forage, fiber, and oil seed crops and also available for these uses. It has the soil quality, growing season, and moisture supply needed to produce sustained good yield of crops economically if treated and managed, including water management, according to modern farming methods. 
Screening: Also referred to in the text as "protective screening," screening is a visual and acoustical barrier which, through the use of buffers, natural topography, landscaping, fences, walls, beams or approved combination thereof, is of such nature and density that provides year-round maximum capacity from the ground to a height of at least six feet that screens structures and activities on the lot from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot. 
Service station: A building or structure designed or used for the retail sale or supply of fuels, lubricants, air, water and other operating commodities for motor vehicles, aircraft or boats, and including the customary space and facilities for the installation of such commodities on or in vehicles, and including space for facilities for the temporary storage of vehicles, minor repair or servicing. 
Shopping center: Two or more commercial establishments planned and managed as a single unit with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property. 
Story: That portion of a building, other than the cellar or mezzanine, included between the surface of any floor and the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. For the purpose of these regulations, a basement or cellar shall be counted as a story if over 50 percent of its height is above the level from which the height of the building is measured, or if it is used for business purposes, or if it is used for dwelling purposes by other than a janitor or domestic servant employed in the same building including the family of the same. 
(1)  Ground story: The lowest story of a building, the floor of which is not more than 12 inches below the elevation of the reference level. 
(2)  Half-story: The part of a building between a pitched roof and the uppermost full story, said part having a finished floor area which does not exceed one-half of the floor area of said story. 
(3)  Mezzanine: Shall be deemed a full story when it covers more than 50 percent of the story underneath said mezzanine, or, if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor above it is 24 feet or more. 
Street: A thoroughfare which affords traffic circulation and principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare except an alley. A public street is a street accepted by dedication or otherwise by the governing body. A private street is a street not so accepted. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on or in the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, manufactured homes, signs, swimming pools and fallout shelters but do not include walls or fences. 
Swimming pool: Any structure or container intended for swimming or bathing located either above or below grade designed to hold water to a depth of greater than 24 inches. 
Townhouse: One of a group of two or more attached single-family residences. Each townhouse unit is separated from the adjoining unit or units by an approved firewall or walls. Firewalls shall be located on the lot line. Each townhouse has a front and rear ground level entrance. The townhouse is located on its own approved, recorded, lot. 
Use: The purpose for which land, premises, or a building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied, maintained, let, or leased. 
Variances: A variance is a relaxation to the terms of this zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the particular property and not the result of any action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance requirements would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Water system, community: A public water system which serves at least 15 service connections used by year-round residents or regularly serves at least 25 year-round residents. 
Yard, front: A space extending the full width of the lot and situated between the right-of-way line of the abutting street and the front line of the principal building. 
Yard, rear: A space extending across the full width of the lot between the rear line of the principal building and the rear line of the lot. 
Yard, side: A space situated between the principal building and side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zero-lot-line: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the building sides rest directly on a lot line. 
Zoning administrator: The head of the planning and zoning department of Lee County, Georgia, or his designee, acting with authority for the City of Leesburg, Georgia, through an intergovernmental agreement. 
ARTICLE II. - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 2.01. - Districts. 
The incorporated portions of the city are hereby divided into ten classes of districts known as the following: 

 
Sec. 2.02. - District boundaries and official zoning maps. 
The boundaries of the above districts are shown on the set of maps designated "Official Zoning Maps, Leesburg, Georgia." These official zoning maps, together with all explanatory matter thereon, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by this reference and hereby made a part of this zoning ordinance. The official zoning maps shall be identified by the signature of the mayor or city clerk and shall be labeled "Official Zoning Maps, Leesburg, Georgia." Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the official zoning maps, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where zoning district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of roads or highways or railroad right-of-way lines extended, such centerlines or railroad right-of-way lines or such lines extended, shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the county line, or the corporate limits line of any incorporated place or the militia district line of any militia district, or the land lot line of any land lot; such county line, corporate limits line, militia district line or land lot shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets or highways, such district boundaries unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall be construed as being parallel thereto, and each above district boundary shall be shown at scale on the official zoning map of the city. 
(4)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streambeds or riverbeds, such centerlines or such lines extended shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
Sec. 2.03. - District boundary lines dividing a lot. 
In the event that a district boundary line on the zoning map divides a lot of record held in one ownership on the date of passage of the zoning ordinance, each part of the lot so divided shall be used in conformity with the regulations established by this ordinance for the district in which each such parcel is located. Except, that if one zoning district comprises more than 75 percent of said lot area, a use allowed in the district of majority may be extended to the existing property lines beyond the district boundary line in accordance with setbacks and yard requirements of the district into which the use is encroaching, with the administrative approval of the planning director. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3.01. - Applicability. 
Except as hereinafter specifically provided, the regulations of this article shall apply. 
Sec. 3.02. - Conflicting regulations. 
Whenever any provision of this article imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by any other city ordinance this article shall govern. 
Sec. 3.03. - Scope. 
No building or structure, as defined herein, or part thereof, shall hereinafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered and maintained, and no new use or change in use shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 3.04. - Only one principal building per lot. 
Except as herein provided, there shall be no more than one principal building per lot other than within a planned unit development. 
(1)  In residential zoning districts an "in-law suite" may be allowed. When such a second accessory dwelling is constructed, the following rules shall apply: 
a.  The in-law suite shall not be larger than 75 percent of the footprint of the primary dwelling, with a maximum square footage of 1,500 square feet. 
b.  The in-law suite shall be used for housing family members only. No in-law suite shall be rented to non-family members. No commercial use of the in-law suite shall be permitted. 
c.  The in-law suite shall meet all building setback requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. 
d.  Each in-law suite shall be so defined by permanent physical markers as to be given a numerical address and location designation. 
e.  Each in-law suite shall receive approval from the county health authorities as to its suitability as a site for an effective sanitary sewage disposal system designed to accommodate wastes generated by the user of that land site. 
f.  An acceptable domestic water supply shall be available to such dwelling and such water supply shall meet local public requirements as administered by the county health authorities. 
g.  Each in-law suite shall be accessible either by private drive or public roadway to the public thoroughfare system. 
h.  Each in-law suite established under this section shall meet the requirements of local construction and use codes established by the local governing authority. 
i.  Building permits for construction will not be issued prior to the approval of each of the aforementioned conditions by the planning director, or his designee. 
Sec. 3.05. - Substandard lots. 
Any lot which was of record at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this ordinance derives that does not meet the requirements of this ordinance for yards or other area or open space, may be utilized for a use for which it is zoned, provided that all applicable health and safety standards are observed. The purpose is to permit utilization of recorded lots, which lack adequate width or depth as long as reasonable living or working standards can be provided. Substandard lots under the same ownership shall be combined where possible, to make standard lots, or to make the lots as close to being standard as possible. 
Sec. 3.06. - Substandard lots resulting from public dedication or condemnation. 
In the event that a lot of record is reduced in size through an act of public dedication or condemnation for public purposes the development standards contained in the zoning ordinance of the city, for width, depth, or area may be waived by the planning director and such property may be utilized for all permitted and, where authorized, conditional uses. Said waiver is permissible only if the county health department determines that the health and general welfare of the lot owner and the city will not be affected by the intended use. Undeveloped lots of record in single ownership, which are affected by the public dedication or condemnation for public purposes, shall be recombined where possible, to standard lots. 
Sec. 3.07. - Lot frontage. 
Every new residential lot shall abut a public street. No building shall be erected on a parcel that does not abut a public street, or road, except as otherwise provided for herein. If a property, residential or commercial, that was recorded prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance does not abut a public road, the lots shall be recombined or redivided to provide the required road frontage access, if possible, or a legal easement shall be recorded and a recorded copy submitted with the permit application before a building permit may be issued. 
Sec. 3.08. - Sight distance at intersections. 
In all districts, no fence, wall, hedge, shrub planting, or other plant or structure, which obstructs the site lines at elevations between two and 12 feet above the roadways shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points 25 feet from the intersection of the street lines, or in the case of a rounded property corner, from the intersection of the street property lines extended. No trees shall be permitted to remain within such distances of such intersections unless the foliage line is maintained to comply with the above site lines. 
Sec. 3.09. - Reduction of lot area prohibited. 
No lot shall be reduced in size so that the yard, lot width, lot area or other requirements of this ordinance are not maintained, except in cases where the size of a lot of record is reduced as a result of public dedication or condemnation for public uses and where such size reduction has been approved by the planning director. This includes lots of record at the time of the adoption of this ordinance. 
Sec. 3.10. - Accessory buildings. 
Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of this ordinance applicable to principal buildings. 
(2)  Accessory buildings, except garages, may be erected in any required yard except a front yard, providing further that in no instance shall such a building be nearer than ten feet to any adjoining side lot line or rear lot line. 
(3)  In residential districts, an accessory building shall not exceed two stories and in no instance shall the square footage of the footprint of the accessory building, or combination of accessory buildings, exceed the square footage of the ground floor area of the principal building. 
(4)  No detached accessory building shall be located closer than 15 feet to any principal building. 
(5)  In the case of corner lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both street frontages. 
(6)  Garages. In any residential zone, no garage shall be erected closer to the side lot line than the permitted distance for the dwelling. 
(7)  Carport. In any residential zone, no carport shall be erected, constructed or altered closer to the side lot line than the permitted distance for the dwelling, nor beyond the front line of the house to which it is attached. 
(8)  Manufactured homes, mobile homes or tractor-trailers shall not be used as accessory buildings. 
Sec. 3.11. - Prohibited in all residential districts. 
(a)  It shall be prohibited in all residentially zoned districts to park or store in the open power driven construction equipment, used lumber or metal, or any other miscellaneous scrap or salvageable material in quantity. 
(b)  Vehicles larger than a regularly maintained pickup or panel truck of 7,500 pounds, or greater, gross vehicle weight capacity, tractor-trailer combinations, tractors, or trailers shall not be placed, parked, or stored in residentially zoned districts except on lots five acres or greater and shall be located in the rear yard. Vehicles so allowed shall not exceed one in number per lot. Trucks used, or intended for use, for commercial purposes, less than 7,500 pounds gross vehicle weight capacity shall be limited to no more than one per lot and shall be located in the rear yard, behind the principal building. 
(c)  Kennels shall be prohibited in residential districts. 
Sec. 3.12. - Landscaping and screening. 
(a)  Landscape maintenance. 
(1)  All landscape installed in accordance with this section shall be maintained for a two-year period (hereinafter referred to as the "maintenance period") from the issuance date of the certificate of occupancy (CO). 
(2)  The procedures for administering the inspections for landscapes are as follows: 
a.  The zoning administrator shall make three inspections of the landscape improvements on a six-month interval basis. If any deficiencies exist, a written report outlining the deficiencies shall be prepared by the zoning administrator and given to the owner. The owner shall make any necessary repairs or modifications required by the report of the zoning administrator. 
b.  Forty-five days prior to the expiration date of the maintenance period, the zoning administrator shall make inspections for final landscape approval. If any deficiencies exist, a written report outlining the deficiencies shall be made and given to the owner. The owner shall make any necessary repairs or modifications required by the report of the zoning administrator. 
(3)  Failure to maintain landscape for the required two-year maintenance period or to make repairs reported by the zoning administrator shall be deemed to be a violation of the zoning ordinance and shall subject the owner of the property to the penalties provided for such a violation. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The following regulations are designed to promote the health, safety, order, aesthetics and general welfare by protecting incompatible uses of land, providing for a more attractive urban environment, assuring adequate open space, and reducing noise, night lighting, odor, objectionable view, loss of privacy and other adverse impacts and nuisances through the use of buffers and landscaping. 
(c)  Submittal of landscape plans. A landscape plan shall be submitted to the planning and development department together with the site development plan if one is required. If a site development plan is not required by the land development ordinance, then landscape plans must still be submitted to the planning and development department before a building permit may be issued. The following information shall be shown on the required landscape plan: 
(1)  Calculation of net site area showing all existing and proposed structures, parking and access, other paved areas, and all required buffer yard areas pursuant to this section; 
(2)  Calculation of required landscape area; 
(3)  Location and dimensions of areas to be landscaped and total amount of landscaped area; 
(4)  Location of all trees larger than 24 inches in caliper. 
(d)  Landscape area required. 
(1)  Calculation of landscape area. The area to be landscaped shall be calculated using the amount of disturbed area delineated in any type of development. 
(2)  Commercial or institutional uses. A minimum of ten percent of net site area shall be landscaped. In addition: 
a.  For every 500 square feet, or fraction thereof, of required landscape area, one tree of three-inch caliper or larger is required. Up to 50 percent of the required number of trees may be replaced by five-gallon shrubs at the rate of one tree equals ten shrubs. 
b.  For every 50 square feet, or fraction thereof, of required landscape area, one shrub a minimum of five gallons in size is required. Up to 50 percent of the required number of shrubs may be replaced by three-inch caliper trees at the rate of ten shrubs equals one tree. 
(3)  Industrial uses. A minimum of four percent of net site area, or, at the option of the developer, a landscape area of at least 30 feet in depth along the property frontage on all public rights-of-way adjacent to the property. In addition: 
a.  For every 500 square feet, or fraction thereof, of required landscape area, one tree of three-inch caliper or larger is required. Up to 50 percent of the required number of trees may be replaced by five-gallon shrubs at the rate of one tree equals ten shrubs. 
b.  For every 50 square feet, or fraction thereof, of required landscape area, one shrub a minimum of five gallons in size is required. Up to 50 percent of the required number of shrubs may be replaced by three-inch caliper trees at the rate of ten shrubs equals one tree. 
(4)  Landscape strip required. All properties except those containing single family detached or attached residences, or two-family residences, shall provide landscape strips, as herein defined, of ten feet in width along the developed portion of side and rear property lines. This landscape area may account for up to 25 percent of the landscape area required by 3.12(d). It shall be the responsibility of the property owner of a lot to be used or built upon to install the required landscape strips. Installation of landscape strips may be phased in accordance with approved building plans. 
(e)  Street trees. Trees shall be required along all parkways and roads built within a development. These trees shall be planted outside the right-of-way. The street tree requirement shall be one tree with a minimum three-inch caliper for every 30 linear feet of roadway. The trees may be placed in a linear pattern or be clustered to create a more natural effect. 
(f)  Parking lot landscape requirements. Landscaping shall be required in all commercial, institutional, or industrial developments. A minimum of five percent of net parking area shall be landscaped. In addition: 
(1)  For every 100 square feet, or fraction thereof, of required landscape area, one tree of three-inch caliper or larger is required. Up to 50 percent of the required number of trees may be replaced by five-gallon shrubs at the rate of one tree equals ten shrubs. 
(2)  For every 50 square feet, or fraction thereof, of required landscape area, one shrub a minimum of five gallons in size is required. Up to 50 percent of the required number of shrubs may be replaced by three-inch caliper trees at the rate of ten shrubs equals one tree. 
(g)  Acceptable material. If a wall or fence is not used pursuant to this section, then the following must apply: 
(1)  Multiple-family residential and non-residential property abutting single-family residential property. Where non-residential property abuts property zoned for residential use, landscaping shall be provided along the side and rear property lines so that a solid screen five feet in height when planted is formed and will, within a year, grow to six feet. If deemed necessary by the planning director, or his designee, due to topographical changes between the multiple-family residential or non-residential and residential property, the minimum height may be increased to eight feet. At a minimum, materials shall consist of 25 percent evergreen trees a minimum of six feet tall, 25 percent ornamental and/or shade trees with a minimum three-inch caliper or in small groups of ornamental and/or shade trees six feet tall having the same effect of a three-inch caliper ornamental and/or shade tree, and 50 percent evergreen and deciduous shrubs, provided that no more than 25 of the shrubbery may be deciduous. When planted, this landscaping shall form a continuous screen that is at least six feet in height. 
(2)  Ground cover. Except where occupied by planting beds, all perimeter-landscaping areas shall be sodden or seeded. If seeded, grass shall be established through proper watering and fertilization as needed. 
(h)  Preservation of trees. In order to encourage the preservation of existing trees, the area within the drip line of trees of 12 to 24 caliper inches that is protected by fencing during grading and construction and is included in the required landscape area shall receive double credit toward the required landscape area. If the tree is in the buffer area, such credit can be given in the buffer area as long as the desired buffer zone effect is accomplished. Otherwise, the credit shall be given to other areas, not located in the buffer area. Any tree 24 caliper inches or over shall be preserved, unless approved for removal by the planning director, or his designee where removal of such tree is mandated by development constraints that cannot reasonably be altered. If such tree is approved for removal, the tree must be replaced by a tree, or cluster of trees, that, when planted, has an overall caliper of at least six inches. 
(i)  Exemptions from landscape requirements. The following are not subject to these landscape requirements: 
(1)  Structures that do not create or expand building square footage and temporary structures such as job shacks or trailers associated with construction activities; 
(2)  Change in existing structure, unless the structure is expanded in accordance with subsection (i)(1) of this section; 
(3)  Temporary buildings in place for a maximum of five years and erected as accessory buildings for elementary and secondary schools and institutions of higher education. 
(j)  Installation and maintenance. 
(1)  The owner and/or user of the property shall be responsible for installing all required landscaping and maintaining them in a neat and orderly appearance. This includes irrigating or watering, fertilizing, pruning and replanting where necessary. Where fences or walls are involved, this also includes any and all necessary maintenance and/or repair. 
(2)  Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property owner or user of the property to maintain the health of all plant and landscaping materials, to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance, and to assure that all screening actually serves the purpose for which it is intended. In cases of noncompliance, the planning director, or his designee, shall be empowered to take action as provided by law to ensure maintenance of all plant and landscaping materials. 
(k)  Miscellaneous requirements. 
(1)  All required landscape areas adjacent to vehicle use areas shall be protected by wheel stops, curbs, or other physical barriers. 
(2)  All required landscape areas shall be located outside the exterior perimeter of the footprint of a building or structure. 
(3)  With the exception of landscaping required in the side and rear yards, a minimum of 75 percent of all remaining required landscape areas shall be located in the front yard between the building line and the front property line. For lots with multiple street frontages, the minimum percentage to be placed on either frontage shall be determined by the planning director, or his designee. 
(4)  No artificial plants, trees, ground cover or other artificial vegetation may be installed. 
(5)  Unless otherwise specified by this section, any walls constructed pursuant to the requirements of this section shall be a minimum of six feet in height and constructed of brick, stone, or concrete block textured or coated with an architectural finish (paint, stucco, etc.). Walls shall be located in a manner that accomplishes the purposes of this section. 
(6)  When fencing is provided pursuant to this section, the finished surface of the fence shall face externally to the project. Fences shall be located in a manner that accomplishes the purposes of this section and shall be constructed of solid wood or other approved material that achieves the desired visual and acoustical screening. 
(7)  Areas reserved for stormwater detention/retention are not permitted within buffers of landscape strips. However, exceptions may be granted by the planning director, or his designee, if, after consultation with the manager of development services, no reasonable alternatives are available or undue hardship is shown. 
(l)  Modification of landscape requirements. The planning director, or his designee, may approve minor variations in the location of required landscape materials due to unusual topographic restraints, sight restrictions, siting requirements, preservation of existing stands of native trees or similar conditions, or in order to maintain consistency of establish setbacks. These minor changes may vary the location of landscape materials, but may not reduce the amount of required landscape area or the required amount of landscape materials. The landscape plan shall be submitted and specify the modifications requested and present a justification for such modifications. 
(1)  Acceptable tree types. The following is a list of example tree types that are indigenous to the area and tend to grow well. This list is not all-inclusive. 
a.  Shade trees. 
American Beech 
American Holly 
Bald Cypress 
Black Tupelo 
China Fir 
Dawn Redwood 
Deodar Cedar 
Florida or Southern Sugar Maple 
Gingko or Maiden Tree 
Green Ash 
Japanese Crytomeria 
Japanese Pagodatree 
Laurel or Darlington Oak 
Live Oak 
Loblolly Pine 
Longleaf Pine 
Overcup Oak 
Red Cedar 
Red Maple 
River Birch 
Sawtooth Oak 
Scarlet Oak 
Shumard Oak 
Slash Pine 
Southern Magnolia 
Swamp Chestnut Oak 
Sweetgum 
Tulip Tree or Yellow Poplar 
Water Oak 
White Ash 
White Oak 
Willow Oak. 
b.  Ornamental trees. 
Bradford Pear 
Cabbage Palmetto 
Carolina Laurel Cherry 
Cassine Holly 
Caste Tree 
Chinese Pistache or Pistachio 
Chinese Tallow Tree 
Crepe Myrtle 
Croonenburg Holly 
Dogwood 
Fringe-Tree or Grancy Graybeard 
Goldenrain Tree 
Hybrid Holly 
Japanese Evergreen Oak 
Japanese Flowering Apricot 
Japanese Maple 
Japanese or Saucer Magnolia 
Leyland Cypress 
Lost Gordonia 
Nellie R. Stevens Holly 
Purpleleaf Plum 
Redbay Persea 
Redbud or Judas Tree 
Savannah Holly 
Sassafras 
Sweetbay Magnolia 
Trident Maple 
Virginia Pine 
Weeping Yaupon Holly 
Weeping Willow 
Yaupon Holly. 
c.  Shrubbery. 
California Privet 
Clayeria 
Euonymus 
European Privet 
Japan Yew 
Japanese Privet 
Northern Bayberry 
Pittsporum 
Red Tip Photinia 
Southern Wax Myrtle. 
Sec. 3.13. - Animals in residential districts. 
It is the intent of this section to permit in residential zoning districts the keeping of limited numbers of domestic animals where it is recognized that such areas are changing from agricultural to suburban residential in character. This section is further intended to minimize problems that may arise from such animal uses and to provide suitable standards for protection of health, safety, welfare and preservation of residential districts from inappropriate raising of animals. 
(1)  The animals authorized herein shall be allowed only where the primary dwelling exists already and is on the same lot. 
(2)  These provisions apply only to the outside of the residence on an individual lot and are not intended to restrict the type or number of animals kept entirely within a residence. 
(3)  Animals permitted. 
a.  Domestic pets. Cats, dogs, rabbits or other generally recognized domestic pets may be kept by persons residing on the property for their use and enjoyment. 
b.  Livestock. Unless otherwise specified, horses may be kept in R-1 and R-3 residential zoning districts, provided that the lot is not less than five acres total, that the area where the horses are kept is not less than 50,000 square feet per every three such animals and that the area shall be fenced and maintained at least 25 feet from any property line. Up to three horses may be kept per each 50,000 square feet of fenced area. 
c.  No keeping of livestock, fowl, domestic pets or any other animal shall become a nuisance as defined in the city nuisance ordinance. 
(4)  Conditional uses. The following animals may be authorized upon conditional use permit being granted by the city council where authorized in R-1 and R-3 zoning districts. 
a.  Livestock. Unless otherwise specifically stated, horses, cows, ponies, donkeys and other domestic livestock may be kept, raised or bred for home use and enjoyment; provided that the lot is not less than five acres total, that the area where the livestock are kept is not less than 50,000 square feet per every three such animals and that the area shall be fenced and maintained at least 25 feet from any property line. 
b.  Fowl. Ducks, quail, chickens, turkeys, pigeons, pheasants, and other fowl may be raised for home use, provided such fowl are adequately contained within that property in the rear yard and at least 25 feet from any property lines. 
(5)  Uses prohibited. The keeping, breeding or training of any animals or fowl for monetary gain or profit shall be deemed a commercial business and is expressly prohibited in all residential districts except where such operations may qualify as a nonconforming use as defined in this ordinance. 
Sec. 3.14. - Conditional uses. 
(a.)  Before a building permit shall be issued for a conditional use, application shall be made to the planning commission which, after public hearing and careful review of any applicable sections of this ordinance and the criteria below, may recommend to the city council the issuance of such permit or approval if in the judgment of the planning commission the application meets the criteria below and will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the city. 
(b.)  The public notice and procedures for the required public hearings by the planning commission and the city council shall be as set forth in article XVII herein. 
(c.)  An application to establish a conditional use shall be approved following a public hearing and recommendation by the planning commission, and a public hearing and determination by the city council, that satisfactory provisions and arrangements have been made by the applicant concerning each of the following criteria, all of which are applicable to each application: 
(1)  The proposed use shall not be contrary to the purpose of this article; 
(2)  The proposed use shall not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood nor affect adversely the health and safety of residents and workers; 
(3)  The proposed use shall not constitute a nuisance or hazard or otherwise provide inadequate provisions regarding the following: the number of persons who will attend or use such facility; vehicular movements, ingress and egress to the subject property and generation of traffic, noise, odor, dust or vibration generation that negatively impacts surrounding properties; or type of physical activity; 
(4)  The proposed use can be adequately serviced by public or private facilities providing necessary services such as water, wastewater treatment, stormwater management, parks, utilities, and schools; 
(5)  The proposed use will not be affected adversely by existing uses, and the proposed use will be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of said use; and 
(6)  The parking and all development standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may be granted can be met. 
(d.)  The planning commission may recommend and the city council may impose or require such additional restrictions and conditions as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, to ameliorate any negative impacts of the proposal on surrounding properties, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood. Wherever the city council shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations that any term, conditions or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said council shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing. 
(e.)  Conditional uses shall not be transferable except upon written approval of the city council and shall be implemented within a period of 12 months from the time the use is granted or become null and void and subject to procedures for resubmission as established above and are subject to all other applicable laws and regulations. 
Sec. 3.15. - Variances. 
(a)  The city council shall authorize, after public hearing and review of the planning commission, in specific cases such variances from the terms of this ordinance as will not in its opinion, be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship. Such variance may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon consideration of the following criteria: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
(2)  The application of the ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public interest or impair the purposes and intent of this ordinance; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building which is prohibited by the zoning ordinance. The city will control the actual use of properties through zoning and conditional uses and not through variance. 
(b)  In exercising the above powers, the city council shall not consider any nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district, nor permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts, as grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(c)  The public notice and procedures for the required public hearings by the planning commission and the city council shall be as set forth in sections 17.03 and 17.04, provided that said notice and procedure provisions shall be modified when applied to variances so as to clarify that the matter being reviewed is a variance request. 
(d)  The city council shall review the application materials and documents of record, the staff comments, the planning commission record and recommendation, and the facts and materials presented to the city council and apply the subsection (a) of this section variance criteria to make a final decision on the variance request. The final decision, and the basis for that decision, shall be set forth clearly in the minutes of the meeting at which the variance was decided. 
(e)  Variances shall be implemented within a period of 12 months from the time the variance is granted or become null and void and subject to procedures for reapplying and are subject to all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(f)  Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the city council regarding a variance is authorized to seek review of such decision by petitioning the Superior Court of Lee County for a writ of certiorari, setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly the alleged error(s). Such petition shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the city council is rendered. 
Sec. 3.16. - Site plan review. 
(a)  In order to assure that the requirements of this ordinance are complied with, all applications for a building permit shall be accompanied by a building site plan which shall conform to the following list of requirements and which shall be reviewed by the city planner, or his duly authorized representative, to determine compliance with this article before a building permit is issued. A building permit application shall not be issued for proposed site plans that do not meet all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The site plan shall be drawn to scale. The planning director, or his designee, may request that the plan be drawn by a registered engineer or surveyor certified to work in Georgia if questions of flood zone locations exist within the property for which a building permit is being sought. 
(2)  The plan shall show the complete outline of each proposed building at the location it is proposed to be built. The plan shall also show the actual size of the building to be erected. The plan shall also show all existing structures located on the property and their exact dimensions. 
(3)  The plan shall show all property lines. The plans shall also show the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon. 
(4)  The plan shall show all required property setback lines. No part of any permanent structure shall encroach upon or violate any required setback. 
(5)  The plan shall show the exact location of all easements on the property. No part of any permanent structure shall encroach upon any easement. 
(6)  The plan shall show all parking, driveways, well location, septic tank location, drainfield location, trees larger than 24 inches in caliper and landscape buffers and all other requirements as set out in this ordinance. 
(7)  The plan shall show all other structures on adjacent lots within ten feet of the appropriate property line. 
(8)  The plan shall show front, side, and rear elevations indicating the building height from finished grade. 
(b)  After the city planner or his duly authorized representative has approved the site plan such approval shall be noted on the permit application. 
(c)  Before construction begins, the builder shall locate and clearly mark all lot corners. 
(d)  At the time the building inspector conducts the foundation inspection, he may undertake whatever measurements he may deem appropriate including, but not limited to, measurements from the property lines to the proposed outermost edge of the building, so as to assure compliance with the approved site plan. 
Sec. 3.17. - Flag lots. 
Flag lots shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Flag lots shall be measured from the mid-point between two opposite lot lines of the flag portion of the lot. 
(2)  When calculating lot area the pole portion shall not be counted. 
(3)  The minimum required lot area shall be the same as that required in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(4)  The access pole must be part of the flag lot and must be under the same ownership as the flag portion. An easement shall not be allowed as a means of access to a flag lot. 
(5)  Flag lots shall not be permitted whenever their effect would be to increase the number of driveways taking access to a collector or arterial road. Shared driveways shall be used to eliminate additional points of access. This criterion prohibits one of the most common abuses, the use of flag lots to avoid the developmental costs of roads. These sites are best developed without flag lots, even if the cost of the lots is thereby increased, since controlling access reduces congestion on major roads. 
(6)  Any land division that creates one or more lots, flag or otherwise, with or without common access shall be a minor subdivision and shall meet all applicable regulations of the city subdivision ordinance. 
(7)  All applicable regulations of the land development regulations must be met. 
(8)  Flag lots have required building setbacks that must meet the requirements in the zoning district in which it is located. The pole portion shall not be considered when determining required building setbacks. 
(9)  The access pole shall have a minimum width of 30 feet and shall not be greater than or equal to the minimum required width for building in the applicable zoning district. The purpose of this maximum width criterion is to prevent an abuse of flag lots in order to circumvent the city's length versus width requirement in the subdivision of lots. The maximum length of the pole of the lot shall be no more than five times the lot width of the flag portion. 
Sec. 3.18. - Land conservation. 
In order to protect open green space and to reduce the cost of development of a residential subdivision, this ordinance establishes density neutral development requirements by establishing the total number of units a specified amount of developable land will yield. This total yield must not include undevelopable areas such as stormwater management ponds, and similar areas. In order to protect significant natural areas, wetlands and other similar areas may be used to meet the greenspace requirement. Wetland areas may also be used to meet stormwater management requirements in accordance the land development regulations. In order to do this, where the property is to be developed as a major subdivision, the following process must be followed: 
(1)  Delineate all unbuildable lands such as steep slopes, stormwater retention areas, etc. 
(2)  Then, out of the remaining buildable land, determine the number of dwelling units desired, provided that the maximum density allowed by this ordinance is not exceeded. 
(3)  Once subsection (2) of this section is done, where the property is to be developed as a major subdivision with at least a city-provided water system or a city-provided sewer system, unless otherwise specified, a minimum of 25 percent of the remaining developable land shall be preserved. Where the property is to be developed with wells and septic tanks, a minimum of ten percent of the developable land shall be preserved. Preservation under this section shall be accomplished by delineating any potential conservation areas such as significant tree stands, fields, historic or cultural areas. These areas shall be preserved as a common area for the residents of the subdivision. Unless the conservation area is conveyed to and accepted by the city, a legal entity such as, a homeowner's association, or trust for maintenance and care must be established and evidence thereof provided to the city and filed with the subdivision files. Such legal entity must have perpetual existence and be responsible for the continued preservation of the preserved land. Whenever an adjacent development has already preserved greenspace, all greenspace areas must be connected among the different developments in order to provide a connected greenspace "belt." 
(4)  Once potential conservation areas noted in subsection (3) of this section are delineated, the next step is to locate potential house sites on the remaining land. 
(5)  Once potential house sites are located, streets should be aligned with the houses. Trails, separate from public roads, may also be used to connect the house sites to allow neighborhood connectivity. 
(6)  The final step is to draw in lot lines. These cannot include unbuildable lands noted in subsection (1) of this section or land delineated as conservation areas per subsection (3) of this section. Unless the entire property consists of buildable lands, both requirements of subsection (1) or (3) of this section must be complied with by the developer; provided, however, that in no event shall less than 25 percent of the total tract be preserved in developments where wells and septic tanks are not to be used, and no less than ten percent of the total tract shall be preserved in developments where wells and septic tanks are to be used. 
Sec. 3.19. - Buffers in residential districts. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all new residential subdivision developments and additions thereto, where preliminary plat plans have not been approved prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance. New phases that are being developed under a previously approved general development plan will have to meet this requirement for all phases that have not received preliminary plat approval prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The following regulations are designed to promote the health, safety, order, aesthetics and general welfare by protecting incompatible uses of land, providing for a more attractive residential environment, to promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods, assuring adequate open space, and reducing noise, night lighting, odor, objectionable view, loss of privacy and other adverse impacts and nuisances through the use of residential buffers and landscaping. 
(c)  Submittal of buffer plans. A buffer plan shall be submitted to the planning and development department together with the preliminary plat. The buffer plan may be included on the preliminary plat. The following information shall be shown on the required plan: 
(1)  Clearly state what level of service will be provided to the development and what level of service will be provided to adjacent residential developments. 
(2)  Location and dimensions of areas to be buffer area. 
(3)  Delineation of buffer area as restricted easement of private lots or dedicated to the city. 
(d)  Level of service. Buffer areas shall be required between all developments served by a different level of public utilities. The levels of service of public utilities that may be provided are: 
(1)  Level 1—Individual well and septic system. 
(2)  Level 2—City water system and individual septic system. 
(3)  Level 3—City water system and city sewer system. 
(e)  Buffer area required. A minimum 20-foot natural or landscape-enhanced buffer shall be provided along the side and rear property lines of development with differing levels of service. This buffer area may account for the land conservation area required by section 3.18 of this ordinance. It is the responsibility of the developer to provide the required buffer area prior to final acceptance of the development by the city council. 
(f)  Acceptable buffer. 
(1)  Natural buffer. In cases where the natural vegetation is mature enough to provide a solid visual buffer there should be no disturbance within the buffer area. If the buffer area is included within a private lot, a restrictive easement shall be recorded with the lot indicating the area of easement, restricting use of the easement, and requiring the easement to remain undisturbed. The restrictive easement shall state that failure to leave the buffer undisturbed shall result in the property owner being required to bring the buffer area into compliance with the following subsection (f)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Landscape-enhanced buffer. In cases where the natural vegetation is not adequate to provide a solid visual buffer between developments then landscaping shall be required to supplement the natural vegetation. This landscaped buffer area shall consist of trees and shrubs that are indigenous to the area and tend to grow well. All existing vegetation shall not be disturbed. 
(g)  Installation and maintenance. The owner and/or user of the property shall be responsible for installing all required buffers and maintaining them in a neat and orderly appearance. Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property owner or user of the property to maintain the health of all plants, to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance, and to assure that all buffers actually serve the purpose for which they were intended. In cases of noncompliance, the planning director, or his designee, shall be empowered to take action as provided by law to ensure maintenance of all plants and buffer areas. 
(h)  Miscellaneous requirements. 
(1)  No artificial plants, trees, ground cover or other artificial vegetation may be installed. 
(2)  Areas reserved for stormwater detention/retention are not permitted within buffer areas. However, exceptions may be granted by the planning director, or his designee, if, after consultation with the manager of development services, no reasonable alternatives are available or undue hardship is shown. 
(i)  Modification of buffer requirements. The planning director, or his designee, may approve minor variations to the buffer requirement due to unusual topographic restraints, sight restrictions, siting requirements, preservation of existing stands of native trees or similar conditions. The buffer plan shall be submitted and specify the modifications requested and present a justification for such modifications. 
Sec. 3.20. - Fences. 
Walls or fences shall be permitted in any zoning district and are not subject to setback requirements, except that in a residential zoning district: 
(1)  No wall or fence shall exceed eight feet in height within a side yard or rear yard. 
(2)  Any wall or fence that extends into the front yard shall not exceed three feet in height, except fences enclosing stormwater facilities that may not exceed six feet in height. Any wall or fence that extends into the front yard shall not encroach upon the right-of-way. 
(3)  Fences enclosing tennis courts may not exceed 12 feet in height. 
(4)  No wall or fence constructed of woven wire or metal fabric (hog wire, barbed wire, or similar types of fencing) shall extend into a front yard, except fences enclosing stormwater facilities that may be vinyl coated chain link. No wall or fence shall be constructed of exposed concrete block, tires, junk, wooden pallets, or other discarded materials. Chain-link fences are expressly allowed in front yards. 
(5)  Any wall or fence that extends into the required front yard shall be ornamental or decorative and constructed of brick, stone, wood, stucco, wrought iron, split rail, or similar material. 
(6)  Any subdivision entrance, wall or fence shall not exceed eight feet in height and shall be subject to approval of the director of planning. 
(7)  Above-ground electric and barb wire fences shall be prohibited in residential districts except on lots that meet or exceed the minimum requirements for the raising and keeping of livestock (five acres) and then must only be located in the rear yard. 
(8)  For the purpose of measuring the height of a fence under this section, such measurements shall be made from the ground directly below the fence and not from the bottom of the fence itself. 
Sec. 3.21. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be located: 
(1)  Along the street frontage of all non-residential developments. The planning director may waive the installation of sidewalks if the development is agricultural or located on a rural road section. 
(2)  Along the street frontage of all developments within a one-half mile radius of any public school. 
(2[3])  Along the interior streets of all residential developments with a minimum lot size of three-quarters acre or smaller. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall be installed on one side of the street if there are fewer than 100 homes in the entire development. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of the street if there are more than 100 homes in the entire development. The total number of lots in a development shall be calculated using all phases of the development, including phases already completed, phases included on the approved general development plan, and phases completed by other developers with the same subdivision name. 
(c)  Sidewalks in subdivisions shall be continued to the nearest arterial street. 
(d)  Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with section 8.12 of the land development regulations. 
(e)  The home builder shall install sidewalks along the entire frontage of each permitted dwelling prior to the certificate of occupancy (CO) being issued for the residence. Prior to commence of construction of the residential development, the developer of the residential subdivision shall post a bond in the estimated amount of 125 percent of the total cost of the sidewalk construction and installation for a period of two years from the date that such bond is posted. At the expiration of the two-year period, sidewalks shall be constructed by the developer in front of any lots where sidewalks have not already been installed by the home builder. Any damage to existing sidewalks caused by the developer or the home builder, or their respective agents or subcontractors, during construction on individual lots shall be repaired by the individual lot permit holder prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued for the residence being constructed. All repairs shall be in accordance with section 8.12 of the land development regulations. 
Sec. 3.22. - Public water and sewer. 
No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be occupied until public water and sewer, if available, are connected and in usable condition. 
Sec. 3.23. - Residential home occupations. 
The following standards shall apply to residential home occupations: 
(1)  The home occupation use shall only be allowed in residential zoning districts which allow home occupations. 
(2)  The dwelling unit must maintain a residential appearance and there shall be no outward evidence of the occupation or impacts in appearance, noise, light, odor, traffic and utilities that would be detectable beyond the dwelling unit. 
(3)  The use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and accessory structures with not more than 25 percent of a property's gross floor area devoted to the home occupation. 
(4)  Only persons living in the dwelling unit on a full-time basis shall be employed at the location of the home occupation. 
(5)  No more than one home occupation shall be authorized for any residential dwelling unit. 
(6)  No business materials or equipment shall be stored at the premises of the home occupation unless such material or equipment is stored in an area within the residence. No business vehicles used in the home occupation shall be stored on the premises where the home occupation is undertaken. 
(7)  The following businesses, uses, and activities shall be prohibited as home occupation uses: adult entertainment establishments; kennels; stables; veterinarian clinics; medical and dental clinics; restaurants, clubs, and drinking establishments; motor vehicle repair or small engine repair; funeral parlors; adult businesses; limousine service; taxi service; and wrecker service. 
(8)  No motor vehicle other than a passenger automobile, passenger van or passenger truck used by the resident as a personal vehicle shall be parked on the property. 
(9)  Nonconforming home occupation uses. Nonconforming uses permitted as of October 1, 2005, shall be allowed to continue to operate under the following conditions: 
a.  No nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use. 
b.  No nonconforming use shall be increased, extended or enlarged beyond the size or scope of the use as it existed on the date of issuance of the current occupation tax certificate. 
c.  The nonconforming use is specially designated to the current property and business owner. (The home occupational use is not transferable.) 
d.  Violation of these conditions will result in an immediate and permanent revocation of the right to continue the nonconforming use. 
ARTICLE IV. - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 4.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The R-1 district is composed of certain areas having a single-family residential character and undeveloped land where it is desirable and likely that similar development will occur. This district will be characterized by medium density residential development. The specific purpose of this district is to: 
(1)  Encourage the construction and continued use of the land for single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Prohibit business, commercial or industrial use of the land, and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with development or maintenance of single-family dwellings in the district; 
(3)  Encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of these regulations; 
(4)  Discourage any land use that would generate traffic on minor or local streets, other than normal traffic to serve residences on those streets; 
(5)  Discourage any use which, because of its size or character would create requirements and costs for public services such as fire and police protection, water supply and sewerage substantially in excess of such requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for residential purposes. 
Sec. 4.02. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R-1 district are as follows: 
(a)  Single-family, detached dwellings, except for manufactured or mobile homes. 
(b)  Zero lot-line housing if shown on an approved subdivision plat. 
(c)  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, when located on the same lot as the primary dwelling and not involving any business, profession, trade or occupation, provided that all accessory buildings shall conform and be located as required in section 3.10 of this ordinance. 
(d)  Places of worship. 
(e)  Home occupations. 
(f)  Gardens. 
Sec. 4.03. - Conditional uses. 
Conditional uses in the R-1 district are as follows: 
(a)  Public cemeteries, provided that a complete site development sketch is submitted with the application. The proposed site must be at least five acres and have an adequate buffer. 
(b)  Nursery schools, kindergartens or day care facilities provided that all state licensing requirements are met. 
(c)  Social or fraternal clubs, lodges, union halls and other similar uses. 
(d)  Bed and breakfast inn. 
(e)  Temporary emergency construction and repair residences. 
(f)  Group homes. 
(g)  Halfway houses. 
(h)  The keeping of horses for home use and enjoyment; provided that the lot is not less than five acres total and only three such animals shall be permitted for each 50,000 square feet of land area not to include the front or side yard of the principal dwelling and all horses shall be adequately fenced within the property and maintained 25 feet from all property lines in the rear yard. 
(1)  The keeping, breeding or training of any animals for monetary gain or profit shall be deemed a commercial business and is expressly prohibited in all residential districts except where such operations may qualify as a nonconforming use as defined in this ordinance. 
(2)  No keeping of horses shall become a nuisance as defined in the city nuisance ordinance. 
(3)  No horses shall be kept on a lot in this zoning district when there is no principal dwelling on the lot. 
Sec. 4.04. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
Area, height, bulk and placement requirements in the R-1 district are as follows: 

 
* Each lot shall have, at a minimum, a 30-foot-wide access to a public road. 
** Refers to minimum lot size versus dwelling units per acre 
(1)  Lot length shall not be more than four times the lot width. 
(2)  This height limitation shall not apply to grain elevators, silos, windmills, elevator legs, cooling towers, water towers, chimneys and smokestacks, or spires on places of worship. 
(3)  With the exception of well and septic tank developments, all new roads in this district shall be curb and gutter roads as specified in the land development regulations. 
(4)  All new roads in this district shall directly connect to existing, paved, public roads. 
(5)  All final lot sizes shall be approved by the county health department. 
ARTICLE V. - R-2 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 5.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The R-2 Multi-Family Residential District is designed to permit residential use of land with various types of multiple dwellings and related uses. For good accessibility, this district shall be located adjacent to arterial and/or collector roads as described in the land development regulations. Public water and sewer shall be required. Any developments in this district shall be designed to complement adjacent, existing or planned, single-family developments. Various types and sizes of residential accommodations, for ownership or rental, would thereby be provided to meet the needs of the different age and family groups in the community without overtaxing existing community facilities, utilities or services. 
It is also the intention of this section to provide areas of sufficient size and allowing reasonable flexibility in design and orientation for the establishment of a structure or group of structures which include multiple dwellings designed in a planned unit development of more than one building on a given site. The requirements of area, height, bulk, and placement regulations, as they are usually applicable to individual buildings and individual lots of record would in certain cases of large scale development have results affording less protection to the public health, safety and welfare than if a measure of flexibility were permitted. The permitting of these planned unit developments as special and particular land uses can, in certain cases, increase the desirability and convenience to the residents or occupants of the planned unit development without causing adverse effects on adjoining properties. This type of development will permit a creative approach to residential development. A planned unit development will provide for an efficient use of land potentially resulting in more economical networks of streets and utilities thereby lowering housing and other land development costs as well as enhancing the appearance of neighborhoods through the preservation of natural features and the provision of recreation areas and open space. 
In creating this zoning district the city intends to encourage home ownership; increase the variety of dwelling types in the housing market; and allow for innovative uses of real property which may not be suitable for development for other kinds of residential uses. 
Sec. 5.02. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R-2 district are as follows: 
(a)  Single-family, detached dwellings, except manufactured or mobile homes. 
(b)  Duplexes. 
(c)  Apartments (multi-family dwellings). 
(d)  Townhouses. 
(e)  Condominiums. 
(f)  Patio houses. 
(g)  Zero-lot-line houses. 
(h)  Other high-density residential developments. 
(i)  Residential planned unit development. 
(j)  Temporary emergency construction and repair residences. 
(k)  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, when located on the same lot and not involving any business, profession, trade or occupation, provided that all accessory buildings shall conform and be located as required in section 3.10 of this ordinance. 
(l)  Places of worship. 
(m)  Home occupations. 
(n)  Gardens. 
(o)  Recreational facilities. 
(p)  Community clubs. 
(q)  Accessory commercial uses permitted. The following commercial establishments may be permitted as customary accessory uses in a planned residential development in this district provided such uses do not occupy a total of more than ten percent of the area of the development; are located a minimum distance of 100 feet from any adjoining property line, street, or highway right-of-way; and are intended for the convenience of, and for service to the occupants of the development. 
(1)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments or pick up stations for dry cleaning and laundry concerns; beauty shops; barber shops; and similar personal service businesses. 
(2)  Retail store intended for the convenience of, and for service to the occupants of the development. 
(3)  Coin-operated vending machines provided such are located within a building and are not visible from the street or adjoining property lines. 
(4)  The planning commission may allow other uses when in its judgment the proposed use will not conflict with the intent of this article or other city ordinances and is appropriate to a residential development. 
Sec. 5.03. - Conditional uses. 
Conditional uses in the R-2 district are as follows: 
(a)  Public cemeteries provided that a complete site development sketch is submitted with the application. The proposed site must be at least five acres and have an adequate buffer. 
(b)  Nursery schools, kindergartens or day care facilities provided that all state licensing requirements are met. 
(c)  Privately owned outdoor recreational facilities such as golf and country clubs, swimming or tennis clubs and similar uses. 
Sec. 5.04. - Single-family and duplex developments. 
Regulations for single-family and duplex developments in the R-2 district are as follows: 

 
* Each lot shall have, at a minimum, a 30-foot-wide access to a public road. 
(1)  Lot length shall not be more than four times the lot width. 
(2)  This height limitation shall not apply to grain elevators, silos, windmills, elevator legs, cooling towers, water towers, chimneys and smokestacks, or spires on places of worship. 
(3)  The minimum distance between buildings on separate lots shall be 20 feet. 
(4)  All new roads in this district shall be curb and gutter roads as specified in the land development regulations. 
(5)  All new roads in this district shall directly connect to existing, paved, public roads. 
(6)  Developments in this district shall only access arterial and/or major collector streets as defined in the land development regulations. 
Sec. 5.05. - Townhouse, condominium, and apartment complexes. 
Regulations for townhouse, condominium and apartment complexes in the R-2 district are as follows: 

 
* Each lot shall have, at a minimum, a 30-foot-wide access to a public road. 
(1)  The rezoning of any property for a townhouse, condominium or apartment development shall follow rezoning procedures established in this ordinance. No rezoning of property for townhouses, condominiums or apartments will be effected until preliminary development plans have been reviewed and approved for the proposed site. 
(2)  An accessory building may abut an accessory building located on an adjacent lot along interior lot lines in developments in this district subject to all city building and fire codes. 
(3)  Each individual dwelling unit in this district shall contain at least 900 square feet of floor area within outside walls exclusive of basements, unfinished attics, garages, porches or other such areas not normally used for human habitation. 
(4)  No more than four individual dwelling units shall be built in a row having the same building line. In setting forth this requirement, the city intends to discourage that creation of long unbroken lines of dwelling units. In complexes having more than four dwelling units, the required minimum offset in the building line shall be three feet. A row or grouping of dwelling units shall not exceed 250 feet in length. 
(5)  Any dwelling unit in this district on a subdivided lot shall have the required minimum frontage on a public street. 
(6)  Parking: 
a.  A minimum of two paved off-street parking spaces constructed in compliance with the land development regulations, shall be provided for each individual dwelling unit. 
b.  Each dwelling unit in this district on a subdivided lot shall have its own parking spaces with direct access to a city street. Parking spaces and driveways are permitted in the front yard of a lot if a setback of 35 feet from the right-of-way is maintained and the front yard is properly landscaped. 
c.  All parking facilities shall be constructed according to the requirements of the land development regulations. 
(7)  All buildings shall be constructed in accordance with the building and fire codes adopted by the council. 
(8)  All new roads in this district shall be curb and gutter roads as specified in the land development regulations and shall directly connect to existing, paved, public roads. 
Sec. 5.06. - Planned unit development. 
Planned unit development regulations in the R-2 district are as follows: 

 
** Refers to minimum lot size versus dwelling units per acre 
(1)  Ownership. There shall be unified control of the entire site. Prior to final approval of the development plan, evidence of unified control of the entire site shall be submitted to the planning commission. In addition, an agreement shall be submitted to the planning commission by all owners of the planned unit development, which includes their commitment to: 
a.  Proceed with the proposed development in accordance with the planned unit development plans as submitted, and such conditions and safeguards as may be set by the city council granting the rezoning; and, 
b.  Provide agreements and deed restrictions acceptable to the city council for completion of such development according to plans approved and for the maintenance of such areas, functions, and facilities as are not to be provided, operated or maintained by the city, pursuant to written agreement; and, 
c.  To notify and bind their successors in title to any commitments made in their petitions of PUD approval. 
d.  All plans approved shall be reviewed as a form of commitment to execute the development precisely, and only as submitted to and ultimately accepted and approved by the city council. No variations, changes, departures or exceptions to the approved plans shall be permitted except through the formal amendment process. 
e.  After rezoning for a PUD in this district has been given formal approval no use shall be made of a PUD site except that which had been approved as a result of the application or the continuation of uses that existed at the time of the application. 
f.  All new roads in this district shall be curb and gutter as specified in the land development regulations and shall directly connect to existing paved public roads. 
Sec. 5.07. - Open space requirements. 
Open space, as defined in section 1.07 of this ordinance, shall be required. In addition: 
(1)  The common open space shall be situated such that it will best serve residents and be totally integrated within the various uses of the development. 
(2)  The development schedule must coordinate the improvement of the common open spaces, the construction of the buildings, structures and improvements in the common open space, and the construction of residential dwellings in the development. 
(3)  The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways shall be separated as completely as possible from the street or vehicular circulation system. All walks shall be of permanent nature and material and shall be constructed in accordance with the land development regulations. 
Sec. 5.08. - Access. 
Private vehicular access drives not maintained by the city throughout the development shall meet all city street requirements. 
Sec. 5.09. - Off-street parking. 
All parking and loading in developments in this district shall meet all off-street parking and loading requirements of this ordinance and be constructed in accordance with the land development regulations. 
Sec. 5.10. - Procedures for rezoning this district only. 
(a)  A petition for rezoning land in this district shall be submitted to the city planning office the same as with any zoning request. 
(b)  A written statement to accompany the zoning application must contain the following: 
(1)  An explanation of the character of the development. 
(2)  A statement of present ownership of all land included within the development. 
(3)  A general indication of the expected schedule of development. 
(c)  Preliminary development plan. Following the official rezoning of the proposed property, the applicant shall submit a preliminary development site plan. The preliminary development plan shall include all of the following information: 
(1)  A preliminary site plan at a scale not less than one inch equals 200 feet, depicting all existing masses of trees and other natural features including the topography of the land. A preliminary solution of all storm drainage needs shall be included. 
(2)  The location and grouping of all uses and the amount of area for each, plus preliminary utility service plans. 
(3)  The tentative location of each residential density district, the number of residential units proposed for each density district, their general location, proposed lot designs and district lines. Tentative floor plans and exterior elevations, which need not be the result of final architectural decisions but which shall adequately describe the development, shall also be included. 
(4)  A preliminary vehicular and pedestrian circulation system including driveways, walkways, loading areas, parking areas including the number of parking spaces, and streets to be dedicated. 
(5)  A system of open space and recreational uses in residential projects with estimates of acreage to be dedicated for public use and that to be retained in common ownership. 
(6)  A draft of the declaration by which the use, maintenance and continued protection of the development and any of its common open space areas shall be submitted. 
(7)  A development schedule indicating the stages in which the project will be built and the approximate date when construction of each stage can be expected to begin, the anticipated rate of development, the approximate dates when the stages in the development will be completed and the area and location of common space that will be provided at each stage. 
(d)  The planning commission shall review and approve the preliminary development plan. In reviewing a development site plan in this district, the planning commission shall consider the following criteria, to the extent relevant in each case, in evaluating the merits and purpose of a multi-family development. Individual lots, buildings, streets and parking areas should be designed and situated to: 
(1)  Minimize alteration of the natural features and topography. 
(2)  Minimize the adverse effects of noise and traffic on off-site residents. 
(3)  Allow for proper and adequate access for firefighting purposes and access to service areas to provide garbage and waste collection and for other emergency and accessory services. 
(4)  Achieve a compatible relationship between development and the land as well as with adjacent developments and land. 
(5)  The proposed development should not adversely affect the orderly development of the city. 
(6)  The proposed development shall accomplish the objectives and shall meet the standards and performance criteria as outlined in this article. 
(e)  Final development plan. Following the approval of the preliminary development plan, the applicant shall, within six months, submit to the planning commission a final development plan containing in final form the information required in the preliminary development plan. The planning commission shall review and approve the final development plan to see that it is in compliance with the preliminary development plan. The planning commission may approve changes in the final development plan which comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  The revised plan contains the same or a fewer number of dwelling units or structures and/or floor area; or 
(2)  The open space is in the same general location and in the same general amount, or a greater amount; or 
(3)  The buildings have the same or less number of stories and/or floor area; or 
(4)  The roads and drives follow approximately the same course. 
(f)  Final approval. No building permits shall be issued until the approval process is complete and all necessary plans, drawings, specifications and other required data have been submitted and approved. No construction may commence until the entire approval process is completed and appropriate permits issued. 
ARTICLE VI. - R-3 MIXED USE, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 6.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The R-3 district is composed of certain areas where a mixture of site built and manufactured, single-family residential structures is desirable or necessary. This district will be characterized by medium density residential development. 
Sec. 6.02. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R-3 district are as follows: 
(a)  Single-family, detached dwelling, including manufactured homes. 
(b)  Zero-lot-line housing if shown on an approved subdivision plat. 
(c)  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, when located on the same lot as the primary dwelling and not involving any business, profession, trade or occupation, provided that all accessory buildings shall conform and be located as required in section 3.10 of this ordinance. 
(d)  Places of worship. 
(e)  Home occupations. 
(f)  Gardens. 
Sec. 6.03. - Conditional uses. 
Conditional uses in the R-3 district are as follows: 
(a)  Public cemeteries provided that a complete site development plan is submitted with the application. The proposed site must be at least five acres and have an adequate buffer. 
(b)  Nursery schools, kindergartens or day care facilities provided that all state licensing requirements are met. 
(c)  Social or fraternal clubs, lodges, union halls and other similar uses. 
(d)  Bed and breakfast inn. 
(e)  Temporary emergency construction and repair residences. 
(f)  Group homes. 
(g)  Halfway houses. 
(h)  The keeping of horses for home use and enjoyment; provided that the lot is not less than five acres total and only three such animals shall be permitted for each 50,000 square feet of land area not to include the front or side yard of the principal dwelling and all horses shall be adequately fenced within the property and maintained 25 feet from all property lines in the rear yard. 
(1)  The keeping, breeding or training of any animals for monetary gain or profit shall be deemed a commercial business and is expressly prohibited in all residential districts except where such operations may qualify as a nonconforming use as defined in this ordinance. 
(2)  No keeping of horses shall become a nuisance as defined in the city nuisance ordinance. 
(3)  No horses shall be kept on a lot in this zoning district when there is no principal dwelling on the lot. 
Sec. 6.04. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
Area, height, bulk and placement requirements in the R-3 district are as follows: 

 
* Each lot shall have, at a minimum, a 30-foot-wide access to a public road. 
** Refers to minimum lot size versus dwelling units per acre 
(1)  Lot length shall not be more than four times the lot width. 
(2)  This height limitation shall not apply to grain elevators, silos, windmills, elevator legs, cooling towers, water towers, chimneys and smokestacks, or spires on places of worship. 
(3)  Side and rear setbacks may be less if indicated on approved subdivision plans. 
(4)  With the exception of well and septic tank developments, all new roads in this district shall be curb and gutter roads as specified in the land development regulations. 
(5)  All new roads in this district shall directly connect to existing, paved, public roads. 
(6)  All final lot sizes shall be approved by the county health department. 
ARTICLE VII. - MHP MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT 

Sec. 7.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The MHP district is for areas suitable for manufactured home or recreational vehicle parks. For good accessibility, this district shall be located adjacent to arterial and/or collector roads as described in the land development regulations. All new developments and roads in the development shall directly connect to existing, paved, public roads. Public water and sewer shall be required. The minimum development size for this district shall be five acres. In promoting the general purpose of these regulations, the specific intent of this district is: 
(1)  To require adequate space and facilities for healthful living conditions for occupants of such manufactured home parks. 
(2)  To require all such districts to have access to a major arterial public road for easy accessibility. 
(3)  To ensure suitable water and sewer facilities are provided according to health regulations and state statutes and the city council. 
(4)  To encourage the development of manufactured home parks for long term residential use rather than transient travel trailer use. 
Sec. 7.02. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the MHP district are as follows: 
(a)  Manufactured home parks. 
(b)  Recreational vehicle parks. 
(c)  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, when located on the same lot and not involving any business, profession, trade or occupation, provided that all accessory buildings shall conform and be located as required in section 3.10 of this ordinance. 
(d)  Home occupations. 
(e)  Gardens. 
(f)  Accessory commercial uses. The following commercial establishments may be permitted as customary accessory uses provided such uses do not occupy a total of more than ten percent of the area of the park; are located a minimum distance of 100 feet from any adjoining property line, street, or highway right-of-way; and are intended for the convenience of, and for service to the occupants of the park. 
(1)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments or pick up stations for dry cleaning and laundry concerns; beauty shops; barbershops; and similar personal service businesses. 
(2)  Retail stores intended for the convenience of, and for service to the occupants of the park. 
(3)  Coin operated vending machines provided such are located within a building and are not visible from the street or adjoining property lines. 
(4)  The planning commission may allow other uses when, in its judgment, the proposed use will not conflict with the intent of this or other city ordinance and is appropriate to a residential development. 
Sec. 7.03. - Conditional uses. 
Conditional uses in the MHP district are as follows: 
(a)  Nursery schools, kindergartens or day care facilities provided that all state licensing requirements are met. 
(b)  Temporary emergency construction and repair residences. 
Sec. 7.04. - Manufactured home park and recreational vehicle development standards. 
Development standards for manufactured home parks and recreational vehicles must be in accordance with standards set out in chapter 20 of the Leesburg City Code. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AG-1 ACTIVE AGRICULTURE DISTRICT 

Sec. 8.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The AG-1 Active Agriculture District was established for the purpose of preserving, promoting, maintaining, and enhancing the use of land for commercial agricultural purposes, to prevent scattered and leap-frog non-farm growth, to protect and preserve natural resource areas and to stabilize increases in public expenditures for such public services as roads and road maintenance, police and fire protection, and schools. 
This district is designed to protect and preserve prime agricultural areas for continued agricultural and agriculturally oriented uses. Their loss cannot be readily compensated, since these prime agricultural areas are relatively scarce, particularly on the national level and other areas require more capital energy and nutrients to provide equal productivity. For these reasons, land should not be converted from the AG-1 district to another zoning classification unless and until there is no other land available in the city to accommodate the nonagricultural uses. 
The standards and densities prescribed for this district are intended to preserve the open character of the area and thereby to protect the business of agriculture. This district is intended not to regulate agricultural uses, but to regulate those uses which threaten agriculture. The intent of these regulations for this district is to discourage subdivision of land for typical residential type lots requiring public services such as fire and police protection, paved roads, water, sewer, etc. 
This district is generally intended to apply to lands in productive farm operations including: 
(1)  Lands historically producing good crop yields or capable of such yields; 
(2)  Lands productive for dairying, livestock raising and grazing; 
(3)  Other lands which are integral parts of such farm operations; 
(4)  Land used to produce specialty crops such as cranberries, mint, sod, fruits and vegetables; and 
(5)  Lands capable of productive use through economically feasible improvements such as irrigation. 
Sec. 8.02. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the AG-1 district are as follows: 
(a)  Beekeeping. 
(b)  Dairying. 
(c)  Floriculture (cultivation of ornamental flowering plants). 
(d)  Grazing. 
(e)  Livestock raising. 
(f)  Feedlots. 
(g)  Poultry raising. 
(h)  Plant nurseries and orchards. 
(i)  Raising of grain, grass, mint and seed crops. 
(j)  Raising of tree fruit, nuts, and berries. 
(k)  Sod farming. 
(l)  Vegetable raising. 
(m)  Viticulture (grape growing). 
(n)  Forest and game management. 
(o)  Nature trails and walks. 
(p)  Greenhouses. 
(q)  One roadside stand per farm, of not, more than 250 square feet, used solely for the sale of products produced on the premises or adjoining premises. 
(r)  Single-family residences or manufactured home subject to the requirements of section 3.04 of this ordinance. 
(s)  Farm dwellings and related structures that remain after farm consolidation may be subdivided from the farm lot subject to the county health department requirements. 
(t)  Essential services—telephone, power, etc. 
(u)  Public recreation areas. 
(v)  Historic sites and areas. 
(w)  Agricultural products and livestock processing plants. 
(x)  Commercial grain storage and drying. 
(y)  Hatcheries. 
(z)  Temporary housing for migratory or other farm workers, provided it meets all applicable city regulations. 
(aa)  Equestrian trails. 
(bb)  Fish farms. 
(cc)  Dams and flowages. 
(dd)  Governmental or institutional uses such as police and fire stations, highway storage garages, solid waste disposal and sewage treatment plants, gravel pits and quarries, schools, parks and campgrounds, airports and landing strips. 
(ee)  Places of worship, schools, and cemeteries. 
(ff)  Nursery schools, kindergartens, or day care facilities provided that all state licensing requirements are met. 
(gg)  Customary home occupations and professional offices conducted within and accessory to a permitted agricultural residence. Subject to all other applicable city regulations pertaining to home occupations. 
(hh)  Fur farms. 
(ii)  Stables and paddocks. 
(jj)  The storage and sale of seed, feed, fertilizer and other products essential to agricultural production. 
Sec. 8.03. - Conditional uses. 
Conditional uses in the AG-1 district are as follows: 
(a)  Sawmills. 
(b)  Bed and breakfast inns. 
(c)  The sale and service of machinery used in agricultural production. 
(d)  Facilities for the centralized bulk collection, storage, and distribution of agricultural products to wholesale and retail markets. 
(e)  Facilities used to provide veterinarian services for livestock. 
(f)  Facilities used in processing agricultural products. 
(g)  Other agricultural-related, religious, utility, institutional or governmental uses to those listed in section 8.03 which are compatible with the purposes of this district, which do not conflict with agricultural use and which are found necessary in light of alternative locations available for such uses. 
(h)  Any structure over 100 feet tall. 
Sec. 8.04. - Area, height and placement requirements. 
Area, height and placement requirements in the AG-1 district are as follows: 

 
The minimum distance between buildings on separate lots shall be 20 feet. 
ARTICLE IX. - C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 9.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The C-1 Neighborhood Business District established in this article is intended to permit retail business, office, and service uses that are needed to serve adjacent residential areas. In order to promote such business development so far as is possible and appropriate in each area, uses are prohibited which would create hazards, offensive and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare, heavy truck traffic, or late hours of operation. The intent of this district is also to encourage the concentration of local business areas in locations proposed in the future land use plan to the mutual advantage of both consumers and merchants and thereby promote the best use of land at certain strategic locations and avoid the continuance of encouraging marginal, strip business development along city/county roads. 
Sec. 9.02. - Permitted uses. 
All permitted uses in the C-1 district are subject to the restrictions set forth in section 9.05 of this ordinance. 
(1)  Barber or beauty shops and similar uses. 
(2)  Custom dress making and tailoring establishments and similar uses. 
(3)  Personal service establishment. 
(4)  Eating or drinking places. 
(5)  Laundry, dry cleaning, coin laundry. 
(6)  Business, professional, or governmental office designed to attract and serve customers or client on premises. 
(7)  Household appliance repair shop without outdoor storage, display, or business operations of any type. 
(8)  Retail store for food, drugs, clothing, etc., with no outdoor storage, display, or business operations of any type. 
(9)  Contractor's office with no outdoor storage, display, or business operations of any type. 
(10)  Veterinarian offices provided there are no outdoor kennels. Runs designed for animal exercise are allowed as long as the animals are kept inside at night. 
(11)  Post office. 
(12)  Medical and/or dental clinics. 
(13)  Other uses similar to the above, subject to the restrictions set forth in section 9.05 of this ordinance. 
(14)  Temporary trailer for emergency construction and repair of buildings. 
(15)  Nursery schools, kindergartens or day care facilities provided all state licensing requirements are met. 
(16)  Places of worship 
Sec. 9.03. - Conditional uses. 
All conditional uses in the C-1 district are subject to the restrictions set forth in section 9.05 of this ordinance. 
(1)  Bed and breakfast inn. 
(2)  Horticulture sales with outdoor display. 
Sec. 9.04. - Protective screening. 
Protective screening for C-1 districts adjacent to or across the street (with the exception of arterial or collector roads) from residential zoning districts shall be in compliance with section 3.12 of this ordinance. 
Sec. 9.05. - Restrictions. 
The following restrictions shall apply to all permitted and conditional business covered by this article: 
(1)  All outdoor business operations shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  There shall be no outdoor storage or display of any kind. 
b.  Eating and drinking establishments are allowed to have tables outside. There shall be no more than ten tables, or up to 25 percent of the number of indoor tables, whichever number is less. 
c.  Convenience stores may have up to two fuel pumps and as many as eight propane tanks stored in a cage outside. 
d.  No business or activity, indoor or outdoor, shall be conducted in a manner which violates section 16-19 of the Leesburg City Code, nor shall any business activities, indoor or outdoor, cause decibel levels as taken in nearby residential neighborhoods to be such that they violate the restrictions set forth for that neighborhood in the nuisance ordinance, set forth in chapter 16, article III, of the Leesburg City Code. 
(2)  Retail businesses shall have no more than 7,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(3)  No business operations shall be conducted between the hours or 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. with the exception of normal business opening and closing activities (i.e., cleaning, restocking, etc.). Nor shall any establishment be open to the public during those hours. 
(4)  Unless specifically covered by this article, all other sections of this ordinance shall apply to all establishments. 
(5)  Manufactured or mobile homes are not to be used as retail, office, etc. 
(6)  Buildings constructed under this article shall not have a metal facade fronting any public road. 
Sec. 9.06. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
Area, height, bulk and placement requirements in the C-1 district are as follows: 

 
* Each lot shall have, at a minimum, a 30-foot-wide access to a public road. 
This height limitation shall not apply to grain elevators, silos, windmills, elevator legs, cooling towers, water towers, chimneys and smokestacks, or spires on places of worship. 
Sec. 9.07. - Commercial design standards. 
See Article XVIII for commercial design standards. 
ARTICLE X. - C-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 10.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of the C-2 General Business District is to provide areas for development that permit a wider range of business and entertainment activities than that permitted in the neighborhood business district. The permitted uses would serve not only nearby residential areas, but also people further away. This district is intended for types of businesses and services usually found in major shopping centers and central business districts at the juncture of principal streets. These uses would generate larger volumes of vehicular traffic, would need more off-street parking and loading, and would require more planning to integrate such districts with adjacent residential areas. 
Sec. 10.02. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the C-2 district are as follows: 
(a)  Any retail or service establishment. 
(b)  Wholesale stores, storage buildings, warehouses, distributing plants, freezers and lockers. 
(c)  Commercial greenhouses and nurseries. 
(d)  Adult entertainment establishments provided all requirements of the city's adult entertainment ordinance are met. 
(e)  Indoor shooting ranges provided all applicable federal, state and local government requirements are met. 
(f)  Place of worship. 
(g)  Clubs and fraternal organizations operating not for profit. 
(h)  Hospitals, clinics, sanitariums, nursing homes, rest homes, residences for aged persons and orphanages, group homes and halfway houses. 
(i)  Nursery schools, kindergartens or day care facilities provided all state licensing requirements are met. 
(j)  Mortuaries. 
Sec. 10.03. - Conditional uses. 
Conditional uses in the C-2 district are as follows: 
(a)  Mini-warehouses. 
Sec. 10.04. - Restrictions. 
The following restrictions shall apply to all businesses covered by this article: 
(1)  No manufactured or mobile homes shall be used for commercial purposes except for manufactured home sales offices. 
(2)  No buildings constructed under this article shall have a metal facade fronting any public road. 
Sec. 10.05. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
Area, height, bulk and placement requirements in the C-2 district are as follows: 

 
* Each lot shall have, at a minimum, a 30-foot-wide access to a public road. 
This height limitation shall not apply to grain elevators, silos, windmills, elevator legs, cooling towers, water towers, chimneys and smokestacks, or spires on places of worship. 
Sec. 10.06. - Protective screening. 
Protective screening for C-2 districts adjacent to or across the street (with the exception of arterial or collector roads) from residential zoning districts shall be in compliance with section 3.12 of this ordinance. 
Sec. 10.07. - Commercial design standards. 
See Article XVIII of this ordinance for commercial design standards. 
ARTICLE XI. - C-3 COMMERCIAL RECREATION DISTRICT 

Sec. 11.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The C-3 Commercial Recreation District as established in this article is intended to provide areas for the development of recreation facilities as a commercial venture. 
Sec. 11.02. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the C-3 district are as follows: 
(a)  Archery ranges. 
(b)  Amusement parks. 
(c)  Country clubs. 
(d)  Campgrounds. 
(e)  Commercial fish ponds. 
(f)  Camps, day or overnight. 
(g)  Educational facilities such as: 
(1)  Zoos. 
(2)  Botanical gardens. 
(h)  Fairgrounds. 
(i)  Golf courses of all types and all accessory uses such as driving ranges and practice putting greens. 
(j)  Gun clubs, outdoor (shooting ranges must meet all applicable federal, state and local government requirements). 
(k)  Marinas. 
(l)  Reservoirs. 
(m)  Commercial swimming pools and tennis courts. 
(n)  Race tracks and drag strips. 
(o)  Places of worship 
(p)  Similar uses to the above subject to all other applicable ordinances. 
Sec. 11.03. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
Area, height, bulk and placement requirements in the C-3 district are as follows: 

 
* Each lot shall have, at a minimum, a 30-foot-wide access to a public road. 
Sec. 11.04. - Protective screening. 
Protective screening for C-3 districts adjacent to or across the street (with the exception of major arterial or major collector roads) from residential zoning districts shall be in compliance with section 3.12 of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE XII. - C-4 TRANSITIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT 

Sec. 12.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The C-4 Transitional Office District established in this article is intended to permit those offices and restricted business uses which will provide opportunities for local employment close to residential areas, thus reducing travel to and from work and which will provide clean, modern office buildings in a landscaped setting or the appropriate re-use of existing residential dwellings; which will provide, adjacent to residential areas, appropriate districts for uses which do not generate large volumes of traffic, traffic congestion and parking problems; and which will promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with the future land use plan. The zones are intended for those corridors in transition where residential uses are adjacent and also are still located along the corridor. 
Sec. 12.02. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the C-4 district are as follows: 
(a)  All permitted uses are subject to the restrictions set forth in section 12.05 of this article. 
(b)  Single-family dwellings, except manufactured homes. 
(c)  Family day care, group day care, adult day care and related uses. 
(d)  Nursery schools, kindergartens, or day care facilities provided all state licensing requirements are met. 
(e)  Temporary emergency construction and repair residences. 
(f)  Offices of any type; clinical, research and services not primarily related to goods of merchandise. 
(g)  Operations designed to attract and serve customer or client on the premises such as office of attorney, physicians and other professions. 
(h)  Other uses similar to the above, subject to the restrictions set forth in section 12.05 of this article. 
Sec. 12.03. - Conditional uses. 
All conditional uses in the C-4 district are subject to the restrictions set forth in section 12.05 of this article. 
(1)  Bed and breakfast inn. 
(2)  Banks with drive-in windows. 
(3)  Hospitals or nursing homes. 
(4)  Personal care homes for groups or families. 
(5)  Group homes or halfway houses. 
(6)  Places of worship. 
Sec. 12.04. - Protective screening. 
Protective screening for C-4 districts adjacent to or across the street (with the exception of arterial or collector roads) from residential zoning districts shall be in compliance with section 3.12 of this ordinance. 
Sec. 12.05. - Restrictions. 
The following restrictions shall apply to all permitted and conditional businesses covered by this article: 
(1)  All outdoor business operations shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  There shall be no outdoor storage or display of any kind. 
b.  No business or activity, indoor or outdoor, shall be conducted in a manner which violates the noise ordinance of the City of Leesburg, nor shall any business activities, indoor or outdoor, cause decibel levels as taken in nearby residential neighborhoods to be such that they violate the restrictions set forth for that neighborhood in the noise ordinance of the City of Leesburg. 
(2)  Retail businesses shall have no more than 7,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(3)  No business operations shall be conducted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. with the exception of normal business opening and closing activities (i.e., cleaning, restocking, etc.). Nor shall any establishment be open to the public during those hours. 
(4)  Unless specifically covered by this article, all other sections of this article shall apply to all establishments. 
(5)  Manufactured or mobile homes are not to be used as retail, office, etc. 
(6)  Buildings constructed under this article shall not have a metal facade fronting any public road. 
Sec. 12.06. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
Area, height, bulk and placement requirements in the C-4 district are as follows: 

 
* Each lot shall have, at a minimum, a 30-foot-wide access to a public road. 
This height limitation shall not apply to grain elevators, silos, windmills, elevator legs, cooling towers, water towers, chimneys and smokestacks, or spires on places of worship. 
ARTICLE XIII. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 13.01. - Statement of purpose. 
The I-1 Light Industrial District is intended to permit certain firms, which are of a light manufacturing character to locate in planned areas of the city. Firms that utilize substantial quantities of water in manufacturing are not permitted in this district. Industrial firms in this district do not necessarily require rail frontage. 
Sec. 13.02. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the I-1 district are as follows: 
(a)  Wholesale bakeries, baking plants, etc. 
(b)  Bottling or packaging of cleaning compounds, polishes, etc. 
(c)  Building equipment, building materials, lumber, sand, gravel storage yards and yards for contracting equipment, maintenance or operating equipment of public agencies or public utilities, or materials or equipment of similar nature. 
(d)  Carpet manufacturing. 
(e)  Carpenter and cabinet making shops. 
(f)  Cold storage plants. 
(g)  Dental, surgical and optical goods manufacturing. 
(h)  Electronic manufacturing and assembly plants. 
(i)  Electric motors and generators manufacturing. 
(j)  Research and testing laboratories. 
(k)  Pharmaceutical products manufacturing. 
(l)  Printing, engraving and bookbinding shops. 
(m)  Soft drink bottling establishments. 
(n)  Tool, die, gauge and machine shops. 
(o)  Processed agricultural products other than meat, poultry or animal products. 
(p)  Textile and clothing manufacturing. 
(q)  Natural gas and petroleum products storage and sales. 
(r)  Plastic product manufacturing, but not including the processing of the raw materials (no actual plastic making). 
(s)  Warehouse, storage and transfer, electric and gas service buildings and yards, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings and substations, gas regulator stations. 
(t)  Electrical, glazing, heating, painting, paper hanging, plumbing, roofing or ventilation contractor's establishments including outside storage yards. 
(u)  Moving or storage offices and warehouse. 
(v)  Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings and service yards including storage yards. 
Sec. 13.03. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
Area, height, bulk and placement requirements in the I-1 district are as follows: 

 
* Each lot shall have, at a minimum, a 30-foot-wide access to a public road. 
Sec. 13.04. - Protective screening. 
Protective screening for I-1 districts adjacent to or across the street (with the exception of arterial or collector roads) from residential zoning districts shall be in compliance with section 3.12 of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE XIV. - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 

Sec. 14.01. - Compliance with article required. 
Any lawful use of land or buildings existing at the date of adoption of this ordinance or amendments thereto and located in a district in which it would not be permitted as a use under the regulations of this ordinance including amendments thereto is hereby declared to be a "nonconforming use" and not in violation of this ordinance; provided, however, that a nonconforming use shall be subject to, and the owner shall comply with, the following regulations. 
Sec. 14.02. - Nonconforming buildings and uses. 
A nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming building which existed as of the date of adoption of this ordinance or amendments thereto, may be continued provided that: 
(1)  No such use of nonconforming land or buildings shall in any way be expanded or extended; and 
(2)  If such use of nonconforming land or buildings or any portion thereof is discontinued or changed, any future use of such land shall be in conformity with provisions of this ordinance and all amendments thereto. 
Sec. 14.03. - Discontinuance or abandonment. 
Any nonconforming use of land or building which has become unused, vacant or remains unoccupied due to abandonment or discontinuance of use for a period of 180 days shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this ordinance and all amendments thereto. 
Sec. 14.04. - Alterations. 
Any nonconforming building or nonconforming use which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or by public enemy may be restored to the same nonconformity or nonconforming use as existed before such damage, provided that the building or use shall not be expanded. Due to critical public health and safety considerations, this section 14.04 shall not apply to mobile homes which, of so damaged or destroyed, shall not be replaced or restored but shall instead be replaced by either a manufactured home, or, a use and structure complying with the zoning district regulations. 
Sec. 14.05. - Change of tenancy or ownership. 
There may be a change in tenancy, ownership, or management of an existing nonconforming use of land provided the nonconformity is not abandoned or discontinued for more than 180 days. 
ARTICLE XV. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 15.01. - Scope of provisions. 
Except as provided in this article, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvements, or use, a plot showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. 
Sec. 15.02. - Parking spaces may not be reduced. 
Off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum required number for the use or facility to which they are assigned unless approved by the planning director. 
Sec. 15.03. - Drainage, construction and maintenance. 
All off-street parking, loading and service areas shall be constructed according to the land development regulations. 
Sec. 15.04. - Parking area design. 
Parking areas shall be constructed according to the land development regulations. 
Sec. 15.05. - Joint parking facilities. 
Two or more neighboring uses, of the same or different types may provide joint facilities provided the number of off-street parking spaces are not less than the sum of the individual requirements. 
Sec. 15.06. - Pavement markings. 
Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked according to the land development regulations. 
Sec. 15.07. - Location of parking space for other land uses. 
The off-street parking facilities required for all other uses shall be located on the lot or within 1,000 feet of the permitted use requiring such off-street parking, such distance to be measured along lines of public access to the property between the nearest point of the parking facility to the building to be served. 
Sec. 15.08. - Off-street parking requirements. 
In all zoning districts off-street parking spaces for the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, or enlarged after the effective date of the zoning ordinance shall be provided as herein prescribed. 
Required parking spaces shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon so long as said main building or structure remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this article. The owner or owners of a building structure or other land use requiring off-street parking spaces must show, to the satisfaction of the planning director, or his designee, that he is the record title holder of the property devoted to said principal land use and of the property proposed for off-street parking use, or that he is the lessee of such property. 
Sec. 15.09. - Number of parking spaces. 
In order to assure a proper and uniform development of public parking areas throughout the area of jurisdiction of this ordinance, to relieve traffic congestion on the streets, and to minimize any detrimental effects on adjacent properties, off-street parking space shall be provided and maintained as called for in the following schedule. For any use or class of use not mentioned in this schedule, the requirements shall be the same as a similar use as mentioned herein. Parking requirements for additions to existing uses shall be based only upon the new addition even if the existing use is deficient. 
Sec. 15.10. - Off-street parking standards. 

 
Sec. 15.11. - Number of handicapped parking spaces. 
In order to assure a proper and uniform development of public handicapped parking areas throughout the area of jurisdiction of this ordinance, handicapped parking space shall be provided and maintained as called for in the following schedule. Handicapped parking requirements for additions for existing uses shall be based only upon the new addition, even if the existing use is deficient. 

 
Sec. 15.12. - Off-street loading requirements. 
On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, goods display, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials, or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot of adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets and alleys. Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be an area ten feet by 50 feet, with 15-foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the following schedule: 

 
Sec. 15.13. - Minimum number of loading spaces required. 
Industrial, wholesale and retail operations shall provide space as follows: 
(1)  Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as appropriate to the functions and scope of operation of individual or groups of buildings and uses. 
(2)  Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering to park and unpark vehicles for loading and unloading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces shall be provided so as not to interfere with the free, normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Ingress and egress to off-street loading spaces shall conform to driveway entrance regulations of the city. 
ARTICLE XVI. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 16.01. - Statement of purpose. 
In adopting these sign regulations, it is the intent and purpose of the city council of the City of Leesburg not to impose an outright ban on signs, but instead to: 
a.  Balance the right of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; and 
b.  Further the objectives of the city's comprehensive land use planning; and 
c.  Protect the public health, safety and welfare; and 
d.  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; and 
e.  Maintain the historical and cultural heritage and image of the city; and 
f.  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; and 
g.  Avoid the harmful aspects of the unrestricted proliferation of signs; and 
h.  Promote economic development and tourism; and 
i.  Protect private property values; and 
j.  Ensure the fair consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
In accessing how to go about the above described task, the Leesburg City Council have given considerable weight and find the following to be relevant and useful to the Leesburg City Council concerning how the size, location and quantity of sign structures within the city must be regulated in order to achieve the above-stated intents and purposes: University of Georgia Land Use Clinic (2003, June 26), Sign Control on Rural Corridors: Model Provisions and Guidance; Wisconsin Department of Transportation (1994, December), Milwaukee County Stadium Variable Message Sign Study: Impacts of an Advertising Variable Message Sign on Freeway Traffic; Scenic America (2007), Billboards in the Digital Age: Unsafe (and Unsightly) at Any Speed. Scenic America Issue Alert; Nasar, Jack L. and Hong, Xiadong (1999, September), Visual Preferences in Urban Signscapes, Journal of Environment and Behavior, 31(5), 671-691; Office of Safety Research and Development, Federal Highway Administration (2001, September 11), Research Review of Potential Safety Effects of Electronic Billboards on Driver Attention and distraction, U.S. Department of Transportation; New York State Department of State, Division of Local Government Services (2006, January), Municipal Control of Signs, James A. Coon; Local Advertising in 268 U.S. Jurisdictions, Outdoor Advertising Association of America, Inc.; City Club of Portland (1996, September 6), Billboard Regulation in Portland; City Club of Portland Bulletin, 78(13), 1-40; Smiley, Alison and Persaud, Bhagwant, et al. (2205), Traffic Safety Evaluations of Video Advertising Signs, Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 1937, 105-112. 
In adopting these sign regulations, the Leesburg City Council have carefully considered and especially recognize the case law coming from Georgia courts, the federal courts, and courts throughout the United States, which recognize that the regulation of the size, location and quantity of sign structures is a valid and lawful means of achieving the above-stated intents and purposes, and that such intents and purposes are valid and lawful governmental interests, which include the following: Granite State Outdoor Advertising, Inc. v. Cobb County, Ga., 193 Fed. Appx. 900 (C.A.11th 2006) (finding that the stated goals within a sign ordinance of protecting against traffic hazards and the adverse impact on the count's aesthetic qualities are substantial government interests); Gregory v. Clive, 2007 WL 2914515 (Ga. S.Ct. 2007) (recognizing as within a local government's police power to enact legislation governing billboards and signs, as such legislation clearly addresses the public health, safety, or general welfare of the community); H & H Operations, Inc. v. City of Peachtree City, Ga., 248 Ga. 500 (1981)(holding that, under its police power, a municipality can enact and enforce reasonable regulations governing the erection and maintenance of signs within its jurisdiction); Harnish v. Manatee County, Florida, 783 F.2d 1535 (C.A. 11th 1986)(finding that aesthetics is a substantial governmental goal which is entitled to and should be according weighty respect, and that the governmental entity charged with the responsibility of protecting the environment must be given discretion in determining how much protection is necessary and the best method of achieving that protection); Lamar Advertising Company v. City of Douglasville, Ga., 254 F.Supp.2d 1321 (N.D.Ga. 2003) (finding that where a sign ordinance asserts the goals of public safety, traffic safety, health, welfare and aesthetics, a municipality has shown an important or substantial governmental interest unrelated to the suppression of free speech); Metromedia, Inc. v. City of San Diego, 453 U.S. 490 (1981) (holding that the goals of traffic safety and aesthetics advanced by a municipality as justification for regulating signs is a substantial governmental interest); St. Louis Poster Advertising Co. v. City of St. Louis, 249 U.S. 269 (1919) (finding that billboards may be prohibited in the residential districts of a city in the interest of the safety, morality, health and decency of the community); Members of the City Council of the City of Los Angeles v. Taxpayers for Vincent, 466 U.S. 789 (1984) (finding that a government entity can regulate signs and billboards when necessary to advance a significant and legitimate state interest, such as the protection of the aesthetics and quality of life within its jurisdiction); City of Doraville v. Turner Communications, Corp., 236 Ga. 385 (1976) (finding that under its police power authority, a municipality can regulate the location and maintenance of outdoor advertising signs within their territorial jurisdiction); Spratlin Outdoor Media, Inc. v. City of Douglasville, 2006 WL 826077 (N.D.Ga. 2006) (upholding sign ordinance where the ordinance's height and setback restrictions were rationally related to its stated goals of promoting the health, safety, morality and general welfare of the community, promoting the orderly and beneficial development of the city, promoting adequate access to natural light and air, improving the aesthetic appearance of the city, and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and buildings in accordance with the city's comprehensive plan). 
Sec. 16.02. - General provisions and definitions. 
1.  No sign structure shall be placed and/or maintained within the city except in conformity with this article. Violations of this article may be punished in the same manner as other violations of this ordinance. The city reserves the right to take legal action to remove signs erected in violation of this article, or to otherwise enforce the provisions of this article. All signs existing prior to the adoption of this ordinance (with the exception of those falling under the requirements of section 16.08) that were legal at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall be considered "grandfathered in" as existing nonconforming signs and may stay in place until one of the following conditions occurs: 
a.  The business advertised ceases at the location; 
b.  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard; or 
c.  The sign has been damaged to such extent that more than minor repairs are required to restore the sign. No structural repairs, change in shape, or size shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with all requirements of this article. 
2.  Notwithstanding any other restrictions in this article, any sign display or device allowed under this article may contain any commercial or non-commercial message, or any political or non-political message; except that such messages cannot depict obscenity, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, nor can they depict sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3, nor advertise any activity illegal under the laws of Georgia or the United States. 
3.  Definitions: As used in this article, the following words have the following meanings. The general definitions and interpretative rules of the zoning ordinance shall also be used. To the extent those general rules or definitions conflict with these specific definitions, these definitions control. 
Billboard: A type of ground sign which is greater than 100 square feet in sign face area, a maximum 250 square feet per sign face area, and which shall be a maximum of 30 feet in height for arterial roadways and 20 feet for all other roadways if permitted. Due to spacing requirements, particularly from residentially zoned districts, billboards are not permitted in Leesburg under the current zoning. 
Ground sign: A sign that is anchored to the ground and is wholly independent of a building for support. Freestanding signs are included in the definition, as are signs on poles, frames, or other mounting structures other than buildings. (Does not include vending machines, newspaper stands, propane gas etc.) 
Hanging sign: Any non-fabric sign hanging or suspended from the exterior walls of a building structure, or an awning attached to the building structure, which is directed so as to be plainly visible from a public right-of-way. For the purposes of this article, such hanging signs shall be regulated as wall signs, shall only be permissible in zoning districts where wall signs are permissible, and shall be included in and count towards the amount of wall signage allowed under this article. 
Multiple-message sign: A sign which changes the message or copy on the sign face mechanically or electronically by movement or rotation of panels or slats, or by changing electronic display on the sign face. 
Sign: Any display of words, shapes or images designed to convey a message to the viewer, located on the exterior of any dwelling, building or structure, or located anywhere on a lot upon a dedicated supporting structure or device, including poles, banners, windows and similar devices. 
Sign face: The actual message-carrying portion of the sign that can be used to display content, including any area that can display or does display words, pictures or other communicative elements of the sign, including the background color. 
Sign structure: This includes all the elements of the sign, including its supporting structure, sign face, base, lights and every portion of the sign. 
Streamer: Narrow strips of material used for decoration. 
Temporary signs: A sign of a non-permanent nature, including, but not limited to, banners as herein defined, to be used for a limited period of time solely for the purpose of advertising an upcoming event or occurrence. Any temporary signs shall be displayed for no more than 14 days, and shall be removed within three days after the event or occurrence advertised on the sign has occurred. Temporary signs shall require a permit and may be located in any commercial district. The fee is not to exceed $10.00. A political sign shall not be deemed to be a temporary sign for the purposes of this article. 
Wall sign: A sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior of a building, with the sign face parallel to the wall, and extending from the surface of the exterior no more than 24 inches. 
Window sign: A sign mounted inside of a structure, and designed to be seen from the outside of the structure through a window. 
4.  Except as provided herein, the provisions of this article shall be administered by the director of planning and engineering. Whenever this article places a duty, obligation, power or authority in the director of planning and engineering, it shall be construed to include that official's authorized designee. 
Sec. 16.03. - Permits, inspections, etc. 
1.  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, or convert any sign in the city or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a sign permit from the director of planning and engineering, chief building inspector, or their designees. These directive shall not be construed to require any permit for change of copy on any sign, replacement of the sign face, nor for the repainting, cleaning, or other normal maintenance or repair of a sign structure for which a permit has previously been issued, so long as the sign or sign structure is not modified or enlarged in any way. 
2.  Application. Sign permits may be applied for by the owner of the property upon which the sign will be located, or by that person or entity's authorized agent. In order to obtain a permit to erect, alter or relocate any sign under the provisions of this article, an applicant therefore shall submit to the director of planning and engineering a sign permit application which shall set forth in writing a complete description of the proposed sign including: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of persons entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor or erector. 
b.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee of the lot on which the sign is located if different from those designated above. 
c.  The location by street address of the proposed sign structure. 
d.  A drawing of the proposed sign showing dimensions and construction specifications. There may be circumstances such that in order to protect public health, safety and welfare the drawing must be prepared and signed by an architect or engineer licensed by the State of Georgia. This will be determined by the director of planning and engineering. 
e.  Where the sign construction requires an electrical connection, the electrical contractor shall obtain an electrical permit. 
f.  Each applicant shall present to the director of planning and engineering on request a certificate of liability insurance or current occupation tax certificate prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
g.  Where the application is for a multiple-message sign using electronic lighting as part of the display on the sign face, a copy of the sign manufacturer's specifications for luminosity shall be attached to the application. 
3.  Issuance of permit if application in order. It shall be the duty of the director of planning and engineering, upon receipt of a completed application for a sign permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data and, if the proposed structure is in compliance with the requirements of this section and all other applicable provisions of this ordinance to issue, within five working days from date of filing, to the applicant a written permit evidencing the applicant's compliance therewith. Sign permits shall be issued in the name of the property owner upon which the sign is to be located. Issuance of the permit shall in no way prevent the director of planning and engineering from later declaring said sign to be nonconforming if the permit is obtained based on false information submitted by the applicant. 
4.  Permit duration. A sign shall become null and void if the construction of the sign for which the permit was issued has not begun within a period of six months after the date of issuance and completed within 12 months after date of issuance. 
5.  Work on illegal signs. No person shall erect or assist in the erection, construction, maintenance, alteration, relocation, repair or painting of, or do any work upon any sign for which a permit has not been obtained. Any such sign shall be illegal and the director of planning and engineering shall order the owner to remove the sign immediately. If the owner fails to remove the sign within 30 days, the director of planning and engineering shall proceed in accordance with this article. 
6.  Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required by this article are subject to inspection by the director of planning and engineering, chief building inspector, or their designees. 
7.  Revocation. The director of planning and engineering is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by him upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days after notification in writing. 
8.  Permit fees. 
a.  Before any permit is issued under the provisions of this section, the applicant shall pay a fee. The fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city manager. 
b.  A 150 percent permit fee shall be paid in addition to any other penalties levied for violation of this section. 
9.  When permit not required. No permit should be required for signs having no electrical connection and a sign face less than 32 square feet in area; however, even signs not requiring a permit under this section shall be required to comply with the other provisions of this article. 
Sec. 16.04. - Permitted signs by zoning district. 
1.  If not otherwise stated, any sign not specifically permitted in a zoning district as provided under this section shall be prohibited. These regulations apply to sign located on any lot or development, except that any sign not visible from the outside of a structure or to passing members of the public is not restricted or regulated by this article. 
a.  Sign height. Sign height is measured from centerline of street grade upon which the sign fronts to the highest portion of the sign structure. 
b.  Sign face area. The area of a sign is calculated by determining the area of the smallest square or rectangle which encloses the sign face and the structure surrounding the sign face. For example, the pole or base would not be included, but any frame holding the sign face in place would be counted. See examples below. However, this example is not substantive regulation as to permissible types of signs: 

2.  Signs permitted in residential zoning and C-4 districts: 
a.  Ground signs. 
i.  Total sign face area may not exceed 32 square feet. Height is limited to six feet. 
ii.  For C-4 zoning districts, one double-faced sign is permitted that has a maximum of 32 square feet per side. 
iii.  Subdivision signs. One permanent subdivision sign may be located at each entrance to a subdivision provided the following requirements are met. Such sign shall contain only the name of the subdivision and motto, if any, and shall not contain promotional or sales material. 
(a)  The sign shall not create a physical or visual hazard for motorists entering or leaving the subdivision. 
(b)  No part of the sign shall exceed seven feet in height. This height requirement shall include capstones and any other item placed for the embellishment of the sign. 
(c)  The sign surface area shall not exceed 25 square feet in area and the sign face area is calculated separate from the sign structure. 
(d)  The sign shall not be located in or overhang any public right-of-way or easement including, but not limited to, islands, utility or drainage easements and shall be located on private property, unless approved by the city council. In no case shall the sign obstruct the free and clear vision of any vehicle entering or exiting the subdivision or travelling by the entrance. 
(e)  Multiple-family residential development and manufactured home park signs: One wall or ground sign may be located on the site of a multiple-family residential development or manufactured home park provided that it shall not have a sign area larger than 25 square feet. Such sign shall not exceed seven feet in height and shall be located on private property. Where a multiple-family residential development or manufactured home park is located on more than one street, one sign may be displayed on each street. 
(f)  One additional sign is allowed during the construction phase of a subdivision not to exceed 32 square feet. This additional sign must be maintained according to the requirements of section 16.09 and must be removed once the subdivision is built out. 
b.  Window signs. Window signs are not permitted. 
c.  Wall signs. Wall signs are not permitted. 
3.  Signs permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3, AG and I Zoning Districts: 
a.  Ground signs. One double-faced ground sign is permitted per street frontage. Maximum square footage for each sign face shall be two square feet for each linear foot of building frontage facing the public right-of-way, or one square foot for each linear foot of street frontage on the public right-of-way, whichever is larger, provided that no sign face may exceed 100 square feet. Maximum height for each sign structure shall be 30 feet for arterial roadways and 20 feet for all other street classifications. 
b.  Window signs. Window signs are permitted, but total signage shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of windows facing road frontage. 
c.  Wall signs. 
i.  Maximum square footage for wall signs shall be two square feet for each linear foot of building frontage on the public right-of-way, or one square foot for each linear foot of street frontage on the public right-of-way, whichever is larger, provided that no sign face my exceed 100 square feet, except as provided in subsection 3.c.ii of this section. 
ii.  Where the structure upon which a wall sign is located is greater than 50 feet from the right-of-way of the nearest public street, the maximum square footage shall be as follows: 
Distance from wall sign to maximum surface area, as determined in subsection 3.c.i of this section abutting street frontage above, may be multiplied by a factor of: 

 
iii.  Wall signs may be located on multiple walls provided each sign faces a street or parking lot and the total square footage of the signs does not exceed what is set forth above. 
d.  Signs on multi-tenant lots. 
i.  On all multi-tenant lots having less than 25,000 square feet of gross leasable area, each individual establishment shall be permitted wall signage as though each individual establishment was an individual building with individual street frontage. Where such multi-tenant premises has a frontage of 200 lineal feet or more on either an arterial or collector street, an additional double-faced ground sign shall be permitted, not to exceed 32 square feet per sign face, and no greater than 25 feet in height. Such additional ground sign shall be no closer than 120 feet from the primary ground sign on the lot. 
ii.  On multi-tenant lots having 25,000 or more square feet of gross leasable area, one ground sign for the first 500 lineal feet of frontage adjacent to a street and one additional ground sign for each additional 500 lineal feet of street frontage shall be permitted, provided that such ground signs on the lot shall be no closer than 250 feet. Maximum surface area for each such ground sign shall be as follows: for multi-tenant lots having between 25,000 and 100,000 square feet of gross leasable area, the maximum area of sign faces shall be 175 square feet; for multi-tenant lots having between 100,000 and 300,000 square feet of gross leasable area, the maximum area of ground sign faces shall be 200 square feet; for multi-tenant lots having greater than 300,000 square feet of gross leasable area, the maximum square footage for ground sign faces shall be 300 square feet. 
Sec. 16.05. - Regulations for signs. 
1.  Location and setback. 
a.  The property owner must give permission for all sign structures erected on the owner's property. Sign structures are not permitted in the public right-of-way. 
b.  No portion of a sign or sign structure erected on private property shall encroach on or overhang the public right-of-way or any other person's property. 
c.  Distances are measured from the closest portion of the sign (whether that be the base, sign face, or the sign structure) to the right-of-way, curb or pavement. 
2.  Illumination. 
a.  Signs cannot be illuminated in the residential zoning districts with the exception of subdivision entry signs, subject to this section. Signs may be illuminated in all other districts, subject to the following provisions. 
b.  Flashing or blinking illumination is not permitted. Except as expressly provided in this article, no sign may use images changing more frequently than once every 20 seconds; except as otherwise provided, no sign may display picture changing more frequently than once per minute. No external or internal illumination that causes confusion with or distraction from any traffic signal or safety device shall be permitted. 
c.  All externally illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries, mounted in fixtures designed to direct the light and eliminate light trespass, such as light shining into residences or other neighboring structures. 
d.  All internally illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries designed to reduce light glow. 
e.  No sign shall give off light, which glares, blinds, or has any other adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. This shall be determined by measuring the footcandles (lumens per square foot) that fall on adjacent properties. No sign shall exceed one-half footcandle at any adjacent property line in a residential district and two footcandles at any public right-of-way. 
3.  Flags. For the purposes of this article, flags are fabric signs displayed by being attached to a flagpole. Flags are permitted in all zoning districts. Flags in C-1, C-2, C-3, and I zoning districts are subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Only three flags permitted per lot; 
b.  Such flagpole shall not exceed the height of the tallest structure on the lot by ten feet; and shall in no case be greater than 60 feet in height; 
c.  The longest side of the flag shall not be greater than one-fourth the height of the flagpole to which the flag is mounted; 
d.  No flag shall exceed 150 square feet in area. 
4.  Banners. 
a.  For the purposes of this article, banners are paper, plastic or fabric signs, which are not attached to any rigid frame. Banners are limited to 48 square feet; only one banner per property or road frontage; and only permitted in C-1, C-2, C-3, and I zoning classifications, and it must be mounted or attached to a building or attached to a pole, mast, arm or other structure. Banners may only be exhibited 6 times each calendar year for a period of not more than 14 consecutive days during each period. Banners shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be maintained free of defects such as holes, tears, fading, cracks, breaks or missing portions. Upon written notice of any such defects the banner must be repaired or removed. Fabric windsocks driven by air pressure are included as banners. 
b.  Streamers and balloons may also be exhibited and are not subject to the six times per calendar year/14 consecutive days set forth above. Flags, streamers and balloons shall be maintained free of defects such as holes, tears, fading, cracks, breaks or missing portions. Upon written notice of any such defects the flags, streamers or balloons must be repaired or removed. 
c.  Permits are required for banners. A written application shall be made to the director of planning and engineering ("the director"). The director shall establish an application form and the permit fees. 
5.  Portable signs. Portable signs (defined as sign structures which are attached to vehicles, trailers, movable structures, or any sign which may be transported or is designed to be transported) are prohibited in all zoning classifications. Such signs include, but are not limited to, printed banners or billboards attached to vehicles and trailers. 
Sec. 16.06. - Safety and construction standards. 
1.  Official confusion. Signs which contain or are an imitation of an official traffic sign or signal, or can be confused with an official traffic sign, are prohibited. 
2.  Fire safety. No sign or sign structure may be erected or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, ventilation, or door; nor shall any sign or sign structure be attached to a fire escape. 
3.  Corner visibility. No sign or sign structure above a height of three feet shall be maintained within 25 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. 
4.  Traffic visibility and safety. No sign or sign structure shall obstruct the traffic sight line, or the view of vehicles entering the roadway (i.e., the view of oncoming traffic by vehicles attempting to enter the road, or vice versa). No sign shall be erected on any traffic island. 
Sec. 16.07. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited in every zoning district: 
a.  Moving signs, or signs with moving parts. This includes, but is not limited to, animated signs involving motion or sound; signs with moving words; signs with waiving elements, whether motorized or wind-powered; or similar moving signs. 
b.  Multiple-message signs. 
c.  Portable signs (sign structures which are attached to vehicles, trailers, movable structures, or any sign which may be transported or is designed to be transported. 
d.  Roof signs (which means signs mounted above a roof or projecting above the roofline of a structure). 
e.  Rotating signs (excluding barber poles). 
Sec. 16.08. - Amortization of excess ground signs. 
1.  It is the intent of this article to bring into conformity the permitted/allowed number of ground signs per property in the commercial and industrial zoned areas of Leesburg. It is the intent of the city council to protect the investment-backed expectations of property and sign structure owners, and to accomplish conformity while allowing property and sign structure owners a reasonable return on their investment. 
2.  The provisions of this section shall have no application to any sign which is subject to a valid and current permit issued by the Georgia Department of Transportation under O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. Nor shall this provision have any effect on any billboard which is existing legally at the time of the adoption of this article. A list of such billboards known to the city is identified as "Billboards existing in Lee County, Georgia, as of May 2010," and included as part of this chapter as Exhibit A, and in the future shall be maintained by the director of planning and engineering. 
Sec. 16.09. - Sign and sign structure maintenance. 
1.  The sign and sign structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound, with proper anchorage capable of supporting the imposed loads, so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
2.  All exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surface repainted. When required, all exposed surface of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. Sign faces shall be maintained in good repair, and shall have neatly painted, posted or otherwise maintained display surfaces, free of defects such as holes, tears, crack, breaks or missing portions, which are plainly visible from the public right-of-way. 
3.  When a sign or sign structure is found to be in need of maintenance, the code enforcement officer shall issue a notice of violation to the property owner, which shall describe the maintenance issue, and provide a reasonable amount of time to repair the violation. 
4.  If, after receiving the notice of violation, the property owner fails to remedy the maintenance issue within the time provided, it shall be a violation of this article, subject to citation. The code enforcement officer may also institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal of the sign or sign structure. The reasonable cost of any action taken by the city or its agents to remedy the maintenance issue shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall constitute a lien upon such real estate. 
Sec. 16.10. - Appeals. 
Except for those appeals pertaining to the amortization of signs, appeals of the decisions of the director of planning and engineering under this ordinance shall be to the city council. The aggrieved party shall file such appeal in writing within 30 days of the date of the appealed decision. The city council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting conducted within 35 days of the filing of the appeal. The aggrieved party or its agent and the director of planning and engineering shall be allowed to present testimony and evidence as to whether the decision should be affirmed, reversed or modified. Such testimony and evidence shall constitute the record. The city council shall consider this record in light of the requirements and intent of this ordinance, and shall vote to affirm, reverse or modify the decision at such public meeting. In the event that the city council fails to render a decision on the appeal within 60 days of the filing of the notice of appeal, the decision of the director of planning and engineering shall stand affirmed. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal to the municipal court within 30 days of the city council's decision. 
Sec. 16.11. - Legal provision. 
1.  Any person or entity violating or refusing to comply with any provision of this ordinance shall be subject to citation to the municipal court, and, upon conviction, may be sentenced to imprisonment for up to 180 days, to pay a fine of up to $1,000.00, or both. Each day a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation for purposes of citation and sentencing. The city may also seek civil remedies including injunctive, declaratory or equitable relief for violations of this ordinance. 
2.  Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
3.  This article replaces the city's prior sign ordinance existing and in effect immediately prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In the event all of this article is struck down as void, unconstitutional or invalid, including therefore this provision, that prior sign ordinance shall be considered to not have been repealed, and shall therefore still be in effect. 
4.  This ordinance shall take effect and be in force as of the date of its adoption, the public welfare of Leesburg demanding. 
ARTICLE XVII. - POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 17.01. - General conditions. 
These regulations, including the official zoning maps, may be amended by the city council: 
(1)  On its own motion; 
(2)  On petition; or 
(3)  On recommendation of the planning commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. 
The following policies and procedures are herein established to provide guidelines for the following activities. 
(1)  The adoption of a new zoning ordinance; 
(2)  The adoption of an amendment to the zoning ordinance which changes the text of the ordinance; 
(3)  The adoption of an amendment to the zoning ordinance which rezones property from one zoning classification to another (map amendment); 
(4)  The adoption of an amendment to the zoning ordinance which zones property to be annexed into the City of Leesburg; and 
(5)  The grant of a permit relating to a conditional use. 
Applications for amendment of this ordinance may be made in the form of proposals for amendments of the text of this ordinance, or proposals for amendment of the zoning map, or proposals for conditional uses. Applications for amendment shall be on forms provided by the planning director or his designee, shall be submitted to the planning director or his designee, and shall include a fee as established by Lee County and applicable to the City of Leesburg through an intergovernmental agreement. 
Applications shall be submitted by the last Friday of each month, as an established submittal deadline in order for the application to be reviewed by the planning commission the following month. Only completed applications will be accepted by the established submittal deadline. 
No application for a zoning change affecting the same parcel of property or part thereof previously defeated shall be accepted by the planning director or his designee until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning request by the city council. 
Application forms shall be obtained from the planning director or his designee. All applications shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The street address and location of the subject property. 
(2)  A legal survey plat of the property in question including a locator map. Plat must include signature of registered surveyor and registration number. 
(3)  The present zoning classification and the proposed zoning classification for the subject property. 
(4)  All applications shall be signed by the owners or authorized agent (authorization must be on file) and include the name and address, and daytime phone number of the owner or authorized agent. 
(5)  The area of land proposed to be rezoned shall be stated in acres to the nearest hundredth of an acre. 
(6)  The application file number, date of application, and action taken on all prior rezoning for all or a part of the subject property. 
(7)  In the case of a proposed official zoning map amendment or proposed text amendment, the application shall include a written analysis of the impact of the proposed rezoning or text amendment with respect to each of the zoning criteria set forth in section 17.05. 
(8)  In the case of a proposed text amendment, the application also shall set forth the new text to be added and the existing text to be deleted. 
(9)  In the case of a proposed conditional use, the application shall set forth the existing and proposed use, and shall include a written analysis demonstrating compliance of the proposed use with the conditional use criteria set forth in section 3.14(c.), as well as details of operations regarding such proposed use. 
Sec. 17.02. - Referral of the planning commission. 
The planning commission shall hold a properly advertised public hearing pursuant to the procedures herein and review each application in light of the comprehensive plan, the future land use plan, the zoning criteria, and other facts presented at their meeting and issue a finding which recommends "approval," "approval with conditions," or "denial" of the application. The planning commission may recommend that conditions be attached to the proposal, such as specific site plans or written requirements for a particular use and its development, when appropriate to mitigate impacts of the proposal on surrounding properties consistent with the purposes of the zoning code and the comprehensive plan. The planning director, or his designee, will prepare a report on each application to assist the planning commission in their decision making process. The report shall address the application, other materials of record, the criteria applicable to the type of application requested, and the comprehensive plan and future land use plan. The planning commission finding shall be forwarded as a recommendation to the city council. If a quorum of the planning commission is present and fails to take action at the advertised public hearing, it will be forwarded to the city council with no recommendation. The minutes of the planning commission meeting, as well as the staff report and other documents of record, will be given to the city council so that they may take into account all issues that were raised. 
Sec. 17.03. - Notice of public hearing. 
(a)  Posting of property. Not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days prior to the date set for the public hearings before the planning commission and the city council on any application for a map amendment initiated by anyone other than the local government, the planning director shall have erected at least one sign for every public road frontage the subject property has. If no public road abuts thereon, then such sign shall be erected along the nearest opened, public right-of-way. Signs shall be erected in such a manner as may be most readily seen by the public. Each sign shall show the application file number, the present zoning classification, the proposed zoning classification, the scheduled date, time, and place of public hearings, and the telephone number and contact to call for further information. Each notification sign shall be maintained at all times by the planning director or his designee until a decision has been made by the city council, then removed. 
(b)  Newspaper advertisement. Not less than 15 nor more than 45 days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearings before the planning commission and city council, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Leesburg for map amendments, text amendments, and conditional uses. The notice shall include the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. If the zoning action for a map amendment is initiated by a party other than the local government, said notice shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning classification, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
(c)  Annexation procedures. If the proposed zoning is for a map amendment for property to be annexed into the City of Leesburg, the procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4(d), as amended, shall be followed. 
(d)  Rehabilitation centers. 
1.  When a map amendment, conditional use, or text amendment relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, a public hearing shall be held by the planning commission on the proposed action. Such public hearing shall be held at least six months but not more than nine months prior to the date of final action on such matter by the city council. The hearing required by this section shall be in addition to the hearings otherwise required herein for such action. 
2.  Notice of this hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation and signs shall be posted on the property in the manner required under subsection (a) of this section. Notice as required under this subsection (d), both posted and published, shall include a prominent statement that the proposed zoning action relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency. The published notice shall be at least six column inches in size and shall not be located in the classified advertising section of the newspaper. 
Sec. 17.04. - Public hearing process. 
(a)  Notice to interested parties. A notice shall be delivered to the applicant, of the date, time, and place of hearings. All application files shall be placed in the custody of the planning department and shall be open to public inspection during regular office hours. 
(b)  Hearing procedure. 
Upon the completion of a rezoning application, conditional use permit or the draft of a text amendment, public hearings will be scheduled by the planning director or designee before the planning commission and the city council respectively. Notice of said hearings shall be as provided herein. Printed copies of the policies and procedures governing calling and conducting of these public hearings shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
All public hearings on zoning matters shall be placed on the planning commission/city council's agenda under a section entitled "Public Hearings." After an initial presentation of a specific zoning request to the planning commission/city council by the designated planning staff, citizen comments will be heard in an orderly fashion. The planning commission/city council's chairman or designated representative will ask for those citizens speaking in favor of the request first, including the applicant, followed by those opposed to the issue. 
Citizens shall be allowed a minimum time period to be no less than ten minutes per side for presentation of data, evidence, and opinions by proponents of each zoning decision and for the presentation by opponents of each proposed zoning decision. When there is a large number of citizens wishing to testify at a given hearing, the presiding officer may invoke time limitations on individual speakers; however, the time limitation is not to be less than ten minutes per side. In such cases, these time limits shall apply to all speakers. 
Citizens shall address their comments to the presiding commission as a whole. Individual attacks or cross examination of commission/council members, city employees, or other citizens will be ruled out of order. 
After all citizen comments have been received, further discussion of the specific application is reserved for the planning commission/city council. The commission/council has the privilege to ask any questions of staff or any citizen present for clarification. 
If the planning commission is presiding over the hearing they may then vote on the application for a map, conditional use or text amendment and forward their recommendation to the city council. Failure of the planning commission to take action will result in no recommendation being forwarded to the city council. 
(c)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-3, as amended, all speakers shall be required to provide names and addresses for the public record and sign a "campaign disclosure form." This form requires all those speaking in favor of, or in opposition to a rezoning disclose whether they have made campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to any member of the city council within the past two years. Such disclosure shall include the name of the councilmember, the dollar amount, description, and date of each such campaign contribution. 
(d)  Public hearings records standards. The planning commission secretary and city clerk shall mechanically record the proceedings of their respective public hearings. If requested by any party, verbatim transcripts of the public hearing can be prepared, but only if requested and purchased in advance by the requesting party. Recorded tapes of public hearings shall be kept secure and not erased for one year from the date of the public hearing. A summary of the proceedings of each meeting will be made available to the public within two working days after the meeting. The record of the public hearing and all evidence (e.g., maps, drawings, traffic studies, etc.) submitted at the public hearing shall be noted as such and shall become a permanent part of the particular zoning amendment's file. 
Sec. 17.05. - Standards for exercise of zoning powers. 
In order to provide for the public health, safety, morality, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, the following zoning criteria are established for all map amendments and text amendments. The criteria for conditional use permits are set forth in section 3.14. Copies of these standards and those in section 3.14 shall be printed and made available for distribution to the general public. The following criteria, the staff report, the recommendation of the planning commission, the record presented and any other factors relevant to balancing the above stated public interest, shall be considered by the city council in making any zoning decision for map amendments and text amendments. In addition, the city council may require that conditions be attached to the proposal, such as specific site plans or written requirements for a particular use and its development, when appropriate to mitigate impacts of the proposal on surrounding properties consistent with the purposes of the zoning code and the comprehensive plan. 
(1)  Zoning criteria. 
a.  Will the zoning proposal permit a use that is suitable in view of the use, development and zoning of adjacent and nearby property? 
b.  What is the effect on the property value of the subject property should the existing zoning be retained? 
c.  If denied, will the effect on the applicant's property value under the existing zoning be offset by the gain to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public? 
d.  Has the property been undeveloped an unusual length of time as currently zoned, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property? 
e.  Will the zoning proposal result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, police protection, fire protection, public health facilities, or emergency medical services? 
f.  Is the zoning proposal in conformity with the policy and intent of the future land use plan for the physical development of the area? 
g.  Is the subject property well suited for the proposed zoning purpose? 
h.  Will the zoning proposal adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
i.  Does the subject property have a reasonable economic use as currently zoned? 
j.  Are there other existing or changing conditions affecting the use or development of the subject property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal? 
k.  Would the change create an isolated district unrelated to the surrounding districts, such as "spot zoning"? 
l.  Are the present zoning district boundaries illogically drawn in relation to existing conditions in the area? 
m.  Is the change requested out of scale with the needs of the city as a whole or the immediate neighborhood? 
n.  Is it impossible to find adequate sites for the proposed use in districts permitting such use and already appropriately zoned? 
o.  Would there by an ecological or pollution impact resulting from the proposed zoning if it is granted? 
ARTICLE XVIII. - COMMERCIAL DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 18.01. - Statement of purpose. 
Design standards for commercial development established in this article are intended to visually indicate proximity to downtown by implementing design criteria that are related to the historic commercial and industrial styles present in town, to maintain the character of the rural highway experience with informal architecture, to require building setbacks and landscaping while allowing for flexibility in design, and to re-establish, promote, and preserve important elements of the rural landscape. 
Sec. 18.02. - Applicability of standards. 
The design standards for commercial development shall be applicable to commercial zones C-1 and C-2. 
Sec. 18.03. - Procedural requirements for approval of permit. 
At the time of submission of building plans for plan review for building permit approval, the applicant shall submit detailed architectural drawings demonstrating compliance with these design standards. No plans shall be accepted without drawings in sufficient detail to allow community development and planning staff to assess compliance. Within ten business days, the planning and development director, or his/her designee shall review the architectural drawings and determine if the proposed design complies with the standards of this section and section 16.05. 
If the proposed design does not meet the standards set forth herein, the planning and development director or designee shall submit to the applicant in writing via certified mail with return receipt the standards with which the proposed design does not comply. The applicant shall have ten business days from receipt of the notification to resubmit architectural drawings demonstrating compliance with the standards. Failure to resubmit architectural drawings within the specified time period will result in denial of the application for a building permit. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision of the planning and development director, or his/her designee, to the planning commission only after the applicant has resubmitted architectural drawings in accordance with the process above and the planning and development director, or his/her designee, has determined the revised drawings do not comply with the design standards. 
Sec. 18.04. - Permitted uses. 
All permitted and conditional uses in the C-1 and C-2 districts are subject to the standards of this article and shall be permitted in compliance with the standards of this article. 
Sec. 18.05. - Design standards. 
The goals of the design standards are to encourage an informal character of the rural highway experience in corridors of the City of Leesburg, to preserve the context and character of the City of Leesburg, and to encourage creativity and high quality design and construction. In order to implement the above design concepts, new commercial development shall meet the following design standards as applicable: 
(a)  Building orientation. 
1.  Buildings shall be oriented towards the commercial corridor it abuts. 
2.  Buildings shall be oriented in a manner that clearly demarcates and allows pedestrian entry and access into the building. 
(b)  Massing. 
1.  Buildings over 8,000 gross square feet shall be "broken up" so as to visually resemble multiple buildings rather than one large "box." Figure 18.01(A) illustrates a possible arrangement for buildings over 8,000 square feet. This figure and others contained in this section are for illustrative purposes only provided to assist the applicant in achieving compliance with these regulations. They are not intended to constitute actual required configurations or regulations. 
2.  The massing of buildings shall be varied to add interest to the structure. This shall be achieved by varying the horizontal and vertical planes of the exterior walls and varying the height of distinct elements. Figure 18.01(B) illustrates desirable versus undesirable massing elements. 

Figure 18.01(B) Desirable versus Undesirable Massing Elements 

(c)  Rhythm. 
1.  Openings, such as windows and doors, materials and textures, and architectural features shall be used to visually "break up" the walls. 
2.  No blank facades are permitted for facades facing a public right-of-way. Buildings shall be designed such that similar façade materials and detailing is used on all facades visible from a public right-of-way. All building facades facing a public right of way shall have glazed areas or areas of glazed appearance and openings constituting at least 20 percent and no more than 75 percent of the facade area. The planning department is authorized to allow a variance up to five percent of the required glazed, glazed appearing, and opening façade area upon a finding that: 
(i)  Strict compliance with this section is not feasible due to technical or architectural details associated with the particular project: and 
(ii)  An alternative plan has been presented which will provide equivalent protection of the public interests set forth in this section. 
(d)  Materials. 
1.  External materials shall consist of one or two primary materials and textures. Required external wall materials shall consist of brick, wood siding (weatherboard or board and batten), cementitious fiberboard siding, cast concrete block with texture, or non-synthetic stucco. 
2.  Metal buildings are not authorized unless all sides facing the public right-of-way are covered in a masonry type veneer. Buildings shall be designed such that similar façade materials and detailing is used on all facades visible from the public right-of-way. 
(e)  Other architectural features. 
1.  The incorporation of other architectural features to assure compatibility and to maintain the character of an area shall be required. Other architectural features shall include porches, transoms, and awnings. 
EXHIBIT A. - BILLBOARDS EXISTING IN LEE COUNTY, GEORGIA, AS OF MAY 2010 

 

Appendix B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's subdivision ordinance, as adopted by the mayor and council on October 3, 2017. Amendments to the subdivision ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. For stylistic purposes, the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in The Code of Leesburg, Georgia, has been used. 
State Law reference— Approval by planning commission or governing authority on plat of subdivision required for filing or recording in superior court clerk's office, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d); Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1.01. - Authority. 
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the city council under Ga. Const. art. IX, § 2, ¶ 4 and O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq., and other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state. 
Sec. 1.02. - Purpose and intent. 
The public health, safety, morals and general welfare requires the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land within the city. In furtherance of this goal, this article is adopted for the following purposes among others: 
(1)  To encourage the development of economically sound and stable communities. 
(2)  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land development. 
(3)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments. 
(4)  To assure the provisions of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments for recreational, educational or other public purposes. 
(5)  To assure, in general, the wise development of new areas, in harmony with the comprehensive plan and land development regulations of the city and adjacent county. 
Sec. 1.03. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The provisions in this ordinance shall be applicable in the incorporated area of the city. This ordinance shall govern any subdivision of land within the jurisdiction of the city council. 
(b)  Any owner of land within the limits of the subdivision jurisdiction of the city wishing to subdivide land shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in this ordinance. 
(c)  No documentation effectively creating a subdivision in the incorporated areas of the city shall be filed or recorded, and no person shall proceed with the improvement or sale of land until approval as provided herein is entered in writing on an approved final plat of the subdivision by the planning director as prescribed in this ordinance. 
Sec. 1.04. - Administration, interpretations. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the planning commission to administer the provisions of this ordinance by managing the subdivision application review process. 
(b)  The planning commission, upon written request, shall provide interpretations concerning the provisions of this ordinance that are unclear or in dispute. 
Sec. 1.05. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the planning director to enforce this ordinance and to bring to the attention of the city attorney any violations or lack of compliance with this ordinance. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable as provided by law with each day such violations continue constituting a separate offense. Any person who fails to comply with or violates any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for up to 180 days, or both, for each offense and in addition shall pay all cost and expenses involved in the prosecution of the violation. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to: 
(1)  Prevent any violations of this ordinance; 
(2)  Prevent unlawful construction; 
(3)  Recover damages; 
(4)  Restrain, correct or abate a violation; 
(5)  Prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises: and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described in this subsection. 
Sec. 1.06. - Conflict and separability. 
If the provisions of this ordinance are found to be in conflict with any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulations that impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
This ordinance and the various articles, sections, paragraphs and clauses thereof, are hereby declared to be severable. If any article, section, paragraph or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of the ordinance shall retain full force and effect. 
Sec. 1.07. - Amendments. 
When necessary to further its purposes, this ordinance may be amended by the city council. 
Sec. 1.08. - Definitions, usage. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not defined in this section shall be considered to have a definition consistent with generally accepted planning and engineering principles. 
Appeal means the process by which an aggrieved party may petition for review of a decision made by an official or department of city government. 
Applicant means any person submitting an application for development. 
Block means a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, drainage ways, or boundary lines of municipalities or counties. 
Buffer means that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established as landscaped open space for the purposes of screening and separating properties with incompatible land uses, the width of which is measured from the common property line and extending the developed portion of the common property line. A buffer consists of trees, shrubs and other natural vegetation undisturbed by grading or site development and replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access, utility crossings and other approved purposes. 
Building means any structure having a roof, supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal or goods. Where roofed structures are separated from each other by party walls having no opening for passage, each portion so separated shall be considered a building. 
Building line means a line established, in general, parallel to the front right-of-way line between which line and the front right-of-way line no part of a building shall project. Minimum building lines are established in the zoning ordinance. 
Building permit means a written permit issued by the building official authorizing construction, renovation or repairs to a structure. 
Concept plan means a preliminary presentation and accompanying documentation of a proposed subdivision of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification. 
Construction plans means those maps, drawings and documents accompanying a subdivision plat used to guide construction and to depict the specific location of and provide the computations and specifications for the design of the improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements and standards of this ordinance. 
Developer means the legal or beneficial owner of a tract of land included in a proposed development; also the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or any other person having enforceable proprietary interest in such land. 
Development means a planning or construction project involving substantial property improvement and, usually, a change of land use character within the site; the act of using land for building or extractive purposes. 
Development regulations means zoning, subdivision, site plan and floodplain regulations or other governmental regulation pertaining to the use and development of land. 
Drainage means the removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means. 
Drainage systems means the system through which water flows from the land, including all watercourses, water bodies and wetlands. 
Driveway means a paved or unpaved area used for the ingress or egress of vehicles and allowing access from a street or alley to a building or other structure or facility. 
Easement means a right of property granted for limited use of private land for a public, quasi-public or private property. 
Engineer means a registered, professional engineer, licensed by the state, competent in civil design. 
Final approval means the official action of the city council or designated staff taken on any application, plats, or site plans after all conditions have been fulfilled. 
Full staff means the departments of the city including but not limited to planning, development services, public works and E911. 
General development plan means a plan that allows a developer to submit general development intentions to receive approval for the development of major subdivision phases. It allows the planning commission and staff to evaluate the major features of the proposal while allowing the cost of detailed engineering and construction work to be incurred by the developer on a phase-by-phase basis. 
Health department means the county health department, which is duly authorized to perform health services in the county. 
Improvement means any manmade item that becomes part of, placed upon, or affixed to, real estate. 
Improvements guarantee means a guarantee in the form of a letter of credit, bond or certified check or similar method of guarantee approved by the city to ensure the quality of required subdivision improvements. 
Inspection department means the building and inspection department, which is authorized to perform inspections and issue building permits for the city. 
Landscape architect means a currently registered landscape architect licensed to practice in the state. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or use and any accessory building and uses customarily incident to it, and including open spaces not less in extent than those required in connection therewith by this ordinance or other city regulations pertaining to land development. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting on two streets at their intersection. 
Lot frontage means that portion of a lot extending along a street right-of-way line. 
Lot lines means the property lines bounding a lot. 
(1)  Front lot line. In the case of a lot abutting upon a public street, the front lot line means the line separating such lot from such street right-of-way. 
(2)  Rear lot line ordinarily means that lot line opposite and most distant from the front line of the lot. In the case of an irregularly shaped lot, the planning director shall designate the rear lot line. 
(3)  Side lot line means any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line. 
Main means, in any system of continuous piping, the principal artery of the system to which branches may be connected. 
Manager of development services means the employee designated by the city to administer and enforce the land development ordinance. 
Open space means any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space. 
Owner means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having or controlling over 50 percent proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided. 
Parcel means any and all plots of land separately identified on the basis of ownership. 
Parking space means an area provided for the parking of a motor vehicle. 
Phased development means a tract of land that is subdivided and developed in a series of planned phases. A general development plan (GDP) review is required to perform phased development. 
Planned unit development means an area of a minimum size, as specified by the zoning ordinance, to be planned, developed, operated and maintained as a single entity containing one or more structures to accommodate appurtenant common areas. 
Planning commission means the duly designated joint planning board of the county and the City of Leesburg, and the City of Smithville. 
Planning director means the department head of the planning and development department. 
Planning staff means the professional planning staff of the city. 
Plat means the drawings, (paper and digital with digital format of DXF as the preferred though DRG and DWG will be accepted) sketches, details, specifications, etc., which define the real property, subdivision, or site plan. 
Preapplication conference means an initial meeting in the subdivision process, prior to application submittal, between developers and appropriate city staff members. 
Preliminary plat means the preliminary drawing or drawings, described in this ordinance, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning commission for approval. 
Preliminary plat approval means the conferral of certain rights prior to final approval after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the planning commission, planning staff and the applicant. 
Public improvement means any structure, drainageway, utility line, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. 
Public open space means open space conveyed or otherwise dedicated to a public agency. 
Public utilities means water, gas, sanitary and storm sewer, electrical, cable, and communications lines and facilities. 
Resubdivision means a change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any lot line. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land owned and used by the general public, railroads or utility companies for transportation or other special use. For land platting purposes, every right-of-way established and shown on an approved final plat is to be separate and distinct from adjoining lots or parcels and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
Roadway means the actual road surface area between the inside edges of the curbs, which may include travel lanes, parking lanes, and deceleration and acceleration lanes. Where there are no curbs, the roadway is that portion between the edges of the paved (or hard surface) width. 
Setback means the distance between the street right-of-way line and the front line of a building or any projection. 
Sewer means any pipe used to collect and carry away sewage or stormwater runoff from generating source to treatment plants and receiving streams. 
Sidewalk means a paved path provided for pedestrian use and usually located at the side of a road within the right-of-way. 
Staff review means a review of development plats by the appropriate staff of the city. 
Street means a roadway, as distinguished from an alley, that affords traffic circulation and principal means of access to abutting property; commonly designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, expressway, freeway, road, avenue, drive, boulevard, lane, place, circle, court or otherwise. 
Subdivider means any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, estate, trust, or any other combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision, including an authorized agent of the subdivider. 
Subdivision means the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this ordinance: 
(1)  Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to judgments of foreclosure. 
(2)  Divisions of property where all parcels created and remaining are larger than 250 acres and are located in an agricultural zoning district. 
(3)  As otherwise provided by state law. 
Subdivision, exempt, means any division of land not classified as subdivision. 
Subdivision, major, means any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision. 
Subdivision, minor, means the following: 
(1)  Any subdivision or resubdivision of three or fewer lots that will not involve the construction of any new street, publicly developed drainageways, or the extension of public utilities, and is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan, this ordinance, zoning ordinance, or other applicable regulations as officially adopted. 
(2)  Where a building exists on each proposed lot, tract, parcel, site or plot of land in the subdivision, provided that the owner certifies on the plat that all such existing buildings were constructed prior to June 23, 1995, that such plat is submitted to the planning commission for full staff review, which shall be noted on the plat, and that the proposed lots meet all city land development regulations. 
(3)  Where the combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots, tracts, parcels, sites or plots of land is not increased and the resultant lots, tracts, parcels, sites or plots of land are equal to the standards of this ordinance, or other applicable regulations or ordinances as officially adopted by the city council. 
Surveyor means a registered, practicing surveyor, licensed by the state. 
Variance means a waiver from compliance with a specific provision of this ordinance granted because of particular difficulties of unnecessary hardship that would be imposed by the strict application of that provision of this ordinance. 
Wetlands means land designated as wetlands by the United States Corps of Engineers, the Environmental Protection Agency, or a certified soil scientist qualified to identify wetlands. 
Sec. 1.09. - Recordation of plats. 
The clerk of superior court shall not file or record any documentation, including plats or deeds, that effectively creates a subdivision of land within the incorporated areas of the city until a final plat of the subdivision has been approved in accordance with this ordinance and has been signed by the mayor or his duly appointed representative. An approved plat must be recorded within six months of final approval or the approval will be considered null and void and the developer will have to resubmit this subdivision for final approval. The responsibility for recording the plat and paying the recording fees rests with the subdivision developer. Building permits shall not be issued by the city for development on land that has been subdivided in violation with this ordinance. 
Sec. 1.10. - Acceptance of dedications to the city. 
Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets and rights-of-way, public areas or easements shall be by resolution of the city council. Approval of a final plat in accordance with this ordinance shall not be deemed to constitute, imply or effect acceptance by the city of any street, right-of-way, public area or easement shown on a final plat. 
Sec. 1.11. - Conformity with city plans. 
All plans and plats shall conform to the highest degree possible to the officially adopted land use, major thoroughfare, or utility plans for land development in the city. 
Sec. 1.12. - Conformity with standards. 
Roads, streets and/or alleys that are to be used by the general public and are to be dedicated to the city shall be constructed in accordance with the standards fixed by the land development regulations. 
Sec. 1.13. - Plats required. 
(a)  A person shall subdivide land within the incorporated areas of the city or commence construction of any public improvements on such proposed subdivision only after the approval of the preliminary plat and the required construction plans for such land in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(b)  Any property within the city shall be subdivided and offered for sale only after a final plat is approved by the city council or their duly appointed representative and recorded in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(c)  Building permits shall be issued for structures to be located in a subdivision only after a final plat of such subdivision has been approved and recorded as provided in this ordinance. 
Sec. 1.14. - Changes to plans. 
(a)  No change, erasure or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat after approval in accordance with this ordinance unless the planning director has granted authorization for such change in writing. 
(b)  Minimum changes required by land conditions, such as topography, may be made without resubmittal to the planning commission upon approval of such changes by the planning director and if the amended plat still meets all city ordinances. 
Sec. 1.15. - Erection of buildings. 
A building permit shall be issued and a building shall be erected on any lot in the incorporated portions of the city only after the lot has been subdivided according to this ordinance, all other city requirements relating to the use of land have been met, and the street giving access thereto is: 
(1)  Included on an approved, recorded, final plat and has been accepted through resolution by the city council; or 
(2)  Has attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of that resolution. 
Sec. 1.16. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall authorize in specific cases such variances after review and comments of the planning commission from the terms of this ordinance as will not, in its opinion, be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship. Such variances may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon a finding that: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography. 
(2)  The application of this ordinance to this particular piece of property would create unnecessary hardship; 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
(4)  Release if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public interest or impair the purposes and intent of this ordinance. 
(b)  In exercising the powers granted in subsection (a) of this section, the city council shall not consider any other subdivision in the vicinity of the subdivision in question as grounds for the issuance of variances. 
(c)  If the city council grants a variance, the reason for such variance shall be put forth clearly in the minutes of the meeting at which the variance was granted. 
Sec. 1.17. - Manufactured homes and manufactured home park regulations. 
Manufactured home developments shall be submitted to the planning commission whether such lots are to be recorded as a subdivision or as a rental park. All proposed manufactured home parks and courts shall meet the minimum requirements of the Leesburg manufactured home and recreational vehicles regulations and the zoning ordinance. Subdivisions designed for manufactured homes shall comply with the procedures set forth in this ordinance, the Leesburg manufactured home and recreational vehicles regulations and the zoning ordinance. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2.01. - Preapplication. 
(a)  Conference required. For the purpose of expediting applications and reducing subdivision development cost, a preapplication conference shall be required in accordance with the procedures specified in this section. No application shall be placed on the agenda for preliminary approval until the predevelopment review process has been completed. 
(b)  Preapplication conference (mandatory). The purpose of the preapplication conference is to allow the applicant to meet with the appropriate city officials and discuss the proposed subdivision before beginning the formal subdivision process. This meeting is intended to reduce delays once the formal subdivision process has begun. 
(c)  Concept plan (optional). 
(1)  The applicant may request an informal review of a concept plan for a proposed development. This review will be performed by the full planning staff and is designed to provide input in the formative stages of subdivision design. 
(2)  Applicants seeking concept plan review shall submit a plat containing the following: 
a.  Name, signature, address and phone number of the owner and applicant. 
b.  Name, signature, license number, seal, address and phone number of the engineer/land surveyor, landscape architect. 
c.  Title denoting the type of application, land lot and land district, and street location. 
d.  A locator map showing the location of the tract with reference to surrounding properties, streets, city/county boundaries, etc., with ties to an identified land lot line. 
e.  North arrow, numerical and graphic scales. 
f.  General location and dimensions of any existing or proposed streets (schematic). 
g.  General location of any existing or proposed easement or land reserved or dedicated to public use, and the purposes of such areas (schematic). 
h.  General location of all phases of development (schematic). 
i.  General location of all watercourses, floodplains, wetlands, or other visible or known environmentally sensitive areas on site. 
j.  General location of existing rights-of-way and/or easements on the tract or that affect the tract. 
k.  General representation of vehicular and pedestrian circulation (general). 
l.  Names of adjoining subdivisions and/or property owners. 
m.  General location and size (in acres) of all proposed lots. 
n.  Total size, in acres, of the proposed development. 
(3)  The plat shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than 200 feet to the inch. 
(4)  The plat shall be drawn, in ink or by computer, printed on sheets no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches. 
(5)  Within seven working days of concept plat submittal, a meeting will be held between the developer and appropriate members of the full staff to discuss the proposal. 
(6)  A brief written summary of the concept plan review shall be provided to the applicant by the city planner within 14 days of the concept plan review meeting. 
Sec. 2.02. - Applications. 
(a)  Type of applications. The following types of applications may be filed by the applicant: 
(1)  Minor subdivision. 
(2)  Major subdivision. 
(3)  Phased development. 
(4)  Private subdivision. 
(Note: Certain developments may involve a combination of applications.) 
(b)  Complete application. 
(1)  A subdivision application shall be deemed complete for purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action when it is certified as complete by the planning director. In all cases, however, the application shall be deemed complete unless the planning director has notified the applicant in writing of any deficiencies in the application within a 14-day period from the date of submission. 
(2)  In cases where an application is deemed incomplete and the applicant has been notified in writing of application deficiencies, the application will not be processed until the deficiencies are corrected. The resubmission of an application or submission of information needed to correct application deficiencies will be considered acceptable unless the planning director has notified the applicant in writing of additional deficiencies in the application within a seven-day period from the date of resubmission. 
(3)  Though an application has been deemed complete by the action or inaction of the planning director, the planning commission may subsequently require correction of any information required in this ordinance as is necessary to make an informed decision. 
ARTICLE III. - MINOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 3.01. - Approval of minor subdivisions. 
(a)  An applicant requesting approval of a proposed minor subdivision shall submit to the planning department ten copies of the plat and legal description, or such other number as the planning director deems necessary, together with a completed application form and the stipulated fee. The plat shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  All minor subdivision plats shall meet the land development and road and drainage standards of the city as outlined in the zoning ordinance, the land development regulations, and this ordinance. 
(2)  The minor subdivision plat shall be at a scale no smaller than 200 feet to the inch, unless otherwise approved by the city planner, and prepared by a land surveyor registered in the state. 
(3)  The minor subdivision plat shall be drawn in ink or by computer printer on sheets no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches unless otherwise approved by the planning director. 
(4)  The minor subdivision plat and accompanying documentation shall show all existing conditions and shall show all proposals, including the following: 
a.  Proposed subdivision name or identifying title. 
b.  Name of owner of tract or his authorized agent, if any, and the signature and declaration of ownership of the owner. 
c.  The names of all owners of all adjacent unplatted land. 
d.  Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record names and date. 
e.  Vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch equals one mile showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to surrounding development. The scale of the vicinity map should be shown as well as the north arrow of the vicinity map. 
f.  Names and right-of-way width of all roads and other rights-of-way; and similar data for alleys, if any. 
g.  Location, dimensions and purpose of easements. 
h.  Lot lines, lot numbers (consecutively numbered), lot sizes (to the nearest thousandth of an acre), and the area in parks, etc. 
i.  If requested by the planning staff, topographic maps of all land subdivided the scale and contour interval to be determined by the planning staff (separate map from recording plat). 
j.  Minimum building setback lines of all residential lots and all other lots smaller than five acres. 
k.  Numerical scale, graphic scale, north arrow, and date of plat. 
l.  All elevations based on sea level datum. 
m.  Pertinent soil data, if required by the county health department, where the subdivision is not to be served by the community sewerage system. (Separate map from recording plat.) 
n.  Legal description of the platted area. 
o.  Primary control points and benchmarks with necessary descriptions and locations of such control points, including all dimensions, angles, bearing and similar data necessary for proper location. 
p.  Accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii and area and central angle of all curves of all lots, tracts, right-of-way lines of streets, easements or other right-of-way. 
q.  Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved. 
r.  Location and description of monuments. 
s.  Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record names, date and number. 
t.  Certification by a land surveyor registered in the state to the accuracy of the survey and minor subdivision plat. 
u.  The location of all areas within the 100-year floodplain as determined by the manager of development services. 
v.  Acreage of total area to be subdivided. 
(5)  The minor subdivision plat shall be submitted in paper and one copy to be in digital form with the DXF the preferred digital format though DRG and DWG will be accepted. 
(b)  Review and actions for a minor subdivision may be handled administratively by the planning director or his designee after review of the full staff. Within 14 days of certification that the application is complete, or within such further time as consented to by the developer, the planning director or his designee will either approve, deny, request changes in the plat that are necessary for approval, or request that the developer submit the subdivision application to the planning commission for review and action, either approval or denial, at their next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(c)  After the application has been approved through action or inaction by the planning director or his designee or the planning commission, the planning director or his designee shall affix an appropriate stamp and signature to such approved plat and inform the developer in writing that the plat is ready for recording. 
(d)  Actions of the planning director may be appealed to the city council at their next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(e)  If a minor subdivision involves the conveyance of a property or easements to the city, the following items shall be required: 
(1)  Title opinion. 
(2)  Warranty deed conveying the property. 
(3)  Quitclaim deed (if applicable). 
ARTICLE IV. - MAJOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 4.01. - Preliminary approval. 
(a)  An applicant requesting preliminary approval of a major subdivision shall submit to the planning department 25 copies, or such other number as determined necessary by the planning director, of a preliminary plat and legal description of the subdivision that conform to section 4.02, together with a completed application form and required fee. Fifty percent of the subdivision fee is to be paid at application for preliminary approval and the remainder at application for final subdivision approval. 
(b)  The application shall be reviewed and commented on by the full staff. Copies of the application and related information shall be furnished to the full staff by the planning director within seven days of the date of certification of a complete application. Written review comments shall be returned to the planning director within 14 days of the date of certification of a complete application. Failure of a member of the full staff to respond to the application within 14 days will mean approval of the application by that member of the full staff. 
(c)  Review for preliminary approval of a major subdivision on a complete application shall be the responsibility of the planning director. A decision, either approval or denial, shall be made on the application within 45 days of certification that it is a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Failure of the planning director to act within the period of time prescribed shall constitute preliminary subdivision approval, and a certificate of preliminary approval shall be issued by the planning director on the request of the applicant. If the application is denied, the applicant shall be notified of the reasons for denial in writing. 
(d)  Denial of the preliminary approval of a major subdivision by the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission. Such appeal shall be filed no later than ten days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission. Any appeal filed less than ten days prior to the next regularly scheduled planning commission shall be heard at the next ensuing planning commission meeting. The planning commission shall review the application and receive comments from planning staff, including the planning director, the applicant, and other interested persons. A decision, either affirming or reversing the planning director's decision, shall be made on the application at this meeting, unless the matter is tabled or postponed as authorized under the procedural rules of the planning commission. A written copy of the decision of the planning commission shall be provided to the applicant within five days of the meeting. 
(e)  Denial of the preliminary approval of a major subdivision by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. Such appeal shall be filed no later than ten days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. Any appeal filed less than ten days prior to the next regularly scheduled city council shall be heard at the next ensuing city council meeting. The city council shall review the application and receive comments from planning staff, including the planning director, the applicant, and other interested persons. A decision, either affirming or reversing the planning commission's decision, shall be made on the application at this meeting, unless the matter is tabled or postponed as authorized under the procedural rules of the city council. A written copy of the decision of the city council shall be provided to the applicant within five days of the meeting. 
(f)  Exemptions. Any subdivision or resubdivision that will not involve the construction of any new street, publicly developed drainageways, or the extension of public utilities, and is not in conflict with the land development regulations, comprehensive plan, this ordinance, the zoning ordinance, or other applicable regulations as officially adopted shall be treated as minor subdivisions for subdivision approval purposes; provided, however, that any such subdivision or resubdivision shall conform to all requirements of article VIII of the land development regulations, pertaining to storm drainage systems. 
Sec. 4.02. - Preliminary plat requirements. 
(a)  At the time a preliminary plat is submitted for review by the planning director, the developer shall complete the preliminary plat checklist, which will guarantee that all the requirements and conditions set forth in subsection (e) of this section have been met or complied with to the best of the applicant's knowledge. If the developer is unable to meet or comply with any of the requirements and conditions set forth on the checklist, all requirements or conditions not met or complied with must be fully explained in writing at the time the plat is submitted. If the developer fails to complete the checklist, or fails to offer justifiable reasons in writing (as determined by the planning director) for not meeting or complying with all the requirements or conditions set forth on the checklist, the preliminary plat will not be considered for review by the planning director. 
(b)  All preliminary plats shall conform as close as possible to the land development regulations of the city as defined in this ordinance, the zoning ordinance and the land development regulations. 
(c)  The preliminary plat shall be at a scale no smaller than 200 feet to the inch unless otherwise approved by the planning director and prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
(d)  The preliminary plat shall be drawn in ink or by computer on sheets no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches unless special conditions exist that require a larger plat and these conditions have been approved by the planning director. 
(e)  The preliminary plat and accompanying documentation shall show all existing conditions and shall show all proposals, including the following: 
(1)  Proposed subdivision name or identifying title. 
a.  The E911 coordinator shall approve subdivision name. 
b.  Once preliminary subdivision approval has been granted the subdivision name shall not be changed until the preliminary approval has expired or has been withdrawn and a new preliminary application has been submitted. 
(2)  Name of the owner of the tract or his authorized agent, if any. 
(3)  The names of all adjoining property owners. 
(4)  The names of all adjacent subdivisions. 
(5)  A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to surrounding development. The scale of the vicinity map as well as the north arrow of the vicinity map shall be shown. 
(6)  Names and right-of-way width of all rights-of-way. 
a.  The E911 coordinator shall approve road names. 
b.  Once preliminary subdivision approval has been granted and road names approved by the E911 coordinator road names shall not be changed until the preliminary approval has expired or has been withdrawn and a new preliminary application has been submitted. 
(7)  Location of utility and other types of easements. 
(8)  Lot lines, lot numbers (consecutively numbered), lot sizes (to the nearest tenth of an acre) and the area in parks or jointly owned public space. 
(9)  If requested by the planning director, topographic maps of all land subdivided, the scale and contour level to be determined by the planning director (separate maps from recording plat). 
(10)  Minimum building setback lines on all residential lots and all other tracts smaller than five acres, front, rear and sides. 
(11)  Numerical scale, graphic scale, north arrow, date. 
(12)  Pertinent soil data shall be shown, if required by the city sanitarian, where the subdivision is not to be served by a public sewerage system (separate maps from recording plat). 
(13)  All elevations based on a sea level datum. 
(14)  A showing of compliance with the flood damage control ordinance, land development regulations, article XI. 
(15)  Acreage (to the nearest tenth of an acre) of total area to be subdivided. 
Sec. 4.03. - Effect of preliminary approval. 
Preliminary approval of a major subdivision shall confer the following rights upon the applicant for a period of one year: 
(1)  The applicant may begin construction upon compliance with the land development regulations, as administered by the manager of development services. 
(2)  The planning commission may grant the rights referred to in subsections (1) and (2) of this section for such a period of time longer than one year that is determined reasonable under the circumstances. 
Sec. 4.04. - Final approval. 
(a)  An applicant requesting final approval of a major subdivision shall submit to the planning department ten copies of the final plat, all deeds, real estate transfer tax forms, required bonds and any other documents necessary for final approval together with the stipulated fee as adopted by the city council. 
(b)  Review and actions for final approval shall be handled administratively by the planning director after review by the full staff. Action shall be taken on the application within seven working days of certification that it is a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Failure of the full staff to act within the period prescribed shall constitute major subdivision approval and approval shall be issued by the planning director. 
(c)  No streets shall be accepted and maintained by the city, nor shall any permit be issued by any administrative agent or department of the city for the construction of any building or other improvement requiring a permit upon land where a plat is required to be approved unless the final plat has been approved by the planning director after review of the full staff, the requirements for a maintenance bonds have been met, and the approved final plat has been recorded. 
(d)  Before final approval of a subdivision will be granted, all improvements shown on the preliminary plat and construction plans must be completed in compliance with the land development regulations, the zoning ordinance and this ordinance. 
(e)  At the time of application for approval of the final plat, the developer shall pay fees in accordance with the schedule adopted by Lee County and applicable to the City of Leesburg through an intergovernmental agreement. 
(f)  Following the completion of all improvements shown on the preliminary plat and construction plans and the payment of all required fees, the developer shall file an application for final subdivision approval with the planning department. The request for final subdivision approval shall consist of the following: 
(1)  An application form, which is available at the office of the planning department. 
(2)  At least ten copies of the final plat or such other number as determined necessary by the planning director. 
(3)  A letter to the planning director from the manager of development services indicating that the city is in receipt of as-built plans showing all streets and water, sewer, and storm drainage with locations and elevations, identifying those portions already installed and those to be installed, and an acceptable improvements guarantee bond in the amount requested by the manager of development services to ensure satisfactory completion of required improvements. 
(4)  If the proposed water or sewerage system for a subdivision requires the approval of the state department of natural resources, this approval shall be obtained prior to making application to the planning department for approval of the final plat. The approval shall be in writing to the planning director. 
(5)  The final plat shall be submitted in paper and one copy to be in digital form with the DXF the preferred digital format though DRG and DWG will be accepted. 
(g)  The final plat shall be at a scale no smaller than 200 feet to the inch, unless otherwise approved by the planning director, and be prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
(h)  The final plat shall be drawn in ink or by computer printer on sheets no larger than 16 inches by 22 inches unless otherwise approved by the planning director. 
(i)  The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved, except where conditions such as topography and other similar issues make compliance to the preliminary plat impossible. The changes may be made without resubmittal to the planning commission upon approval of such changes by the planning director as long as the amended plat meets city ordinances. 
(j)  The final plat and accompanying documentation shall show the following: 
(1)  Primary control points and benchmarks with necessary descriptions and locations of such control points, including all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data necessary for proper location. 
(2)  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of street, easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites, with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii and area and central angle of all curves. 
(3)  Name and right-of-way of each street or other rights-of-way of all roads resulting from the subdivision development. 
(4)  Location, dimensions and purpose of easements. 
(5)  Lot lines, lot numbers (consecutive), lot sizes (to the nearest 1/10 00 of an acre) and the area in parks or jointly owned public space. 
(6)  Purpose for which lots, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved. 
(7)  Minimum building setback lines (front, rear and side) on all residential lots and all other tracts smaller than five acres. Front must be shown on plats, side and rear setbacks can be plat notes. 
(8)  Location and descriptions of monuments. 
(9)  Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land. 
(10)  Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record names, date and number. 
(11)  Certification by a surveyor or engineer registered in the state to the accuracy of the survey and plat. 
(12)  Declaration of land ownership. 
(13)  Title, numerical scale, graphic scale, north arrow, and date of plat. 
(14)  Acreage (to the nearest thousandth of an acre) of the total development. 
(k)  The planning director shall certify the application for final approval as complete upon receipt of the following: 
(1)  Certification from the county health department that all local, state and federal health regulations have been met and all required fees paid. 
(2)  A report from the manager of development services that all site improvements have been constructed in accordance with approved plans and the city is in possession of as built drawings for all site improvements. 
(3)  An improvements guarantee, posted by the developer or the general contractor for the site improvements and construction. This improvements guarantee shall provide for and secure to the city a guarantee that the actual construction and installation requirements of the city have been met and that a two-year maintenance and performance period shall be met. The improvements guarantee shall be with a surety company or bank licensed to do business in the state and acceptable to the city. It shall contain a provision indemnifying the city for the maintenance of installations and improvements required by this ordinance, the zoning ordinance, and the land development regulations in the subdivision for two years following the date for final approval by the planning director. The improvements guarantee amount shall be determined by the manager of development services following the guidelines of the land development regulations. The procedure for releasing the guarantee is outlined in the land development regulations. 
(4)  Title opinion, which is required for any conveyance of property or easement to the city on the property to be conveyed. 
(5)  A legal description of the property being dedicated to the city. 
(6)  The appropriate deeds for conveyance of right-of-way or easement to the city. 
(7)  Real estate transfer tax form. 
(l)  The planning director shall either approve or deny final subdivision approval within seven days after the date the application is certified as complete. The developer may waive this requirement and consent in writing to the extension of such period. 
(m)  The applicant may appeal the decision of the planning director to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing, clearly setting forth the reason for the appeal. An applicant wishing to appeal the planning director's decision shall submit the appeal to the planning department with 30 days of the planning director's final decision. Once the appeal is received the planning director shall place the appeal on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled city council's meeting for their consideration. 
(n)  The approved final plat shall be filed for recording in the office of the clerk of superior court by the planning department. The fee for recording the plat and all associated deeds shall be paid for by the developer. The clerk of superior court shall not file or record a plat or a deed of a major subdivision until a final plat of the subdivision has been approved as provided for in this ordinance. 
(o)  The recording of a plat of a subdivision of land shall not operate to transfer, in fee simple, to the city those portions of such plat set apart for streets, alleys or other public uses or for future street widening; nor shall the recording operate to transfer to the city any easement indicated on such plat to create a public right of passage over the easement. The approval of a plat by the planning director shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the city of any street, easement or other ground shown on the plan. Acceptance by the city shall only occur upon passage of a resolution by the city council indicating such acceptance. 
(p)  Deeds transferring title of all rights-of-way, easements and other designated areas shall be submitted to the city council for their acceptance by resolution. These deeds may be submitted upon preliminary approval for legal review. Final approval shall not be granted by the planning director prior to approval of the legal work by the city attorney. Once final approval is granted the planning director shall place the acceptance of deeds on the agenda for the next regular scheduled city council meeting. 
ARTICLE V. - PHASED DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 5.01. - Authorized. 
Where large-scale developments are proposed, the developer may choose to complete the project in phases. This can only be done after the submission and approval of a general development plan (GDP), which encourages the developer to perform comprehensive land planning while allowing the cost of detailed site engineering and construction to be incurred on a phase-by-phase basis. 
Sec. 5.02. - Application procedures. 
(a)  An applicant requesting approval of a general development plan shall submit to the planning director ten copies of the plat and one copy of the legal description of the development or such number deemed necessary by the planning director, together with a completed application form and the stipulated fee. 
(b)  The application shall be reviewed and commented on by the planning staff. Copies of the application and related information shall be furnished to the planning staff by the planning director upon certification of a complete application. Written review and comments from the planning staff shall be returned to the planning director within seven working days of the date of certification of a complete application. Not returning comments to the planning director within the specified time period shall be considered a planning staff recommendation for approval of the application. The planning director shall consider the planning staff's recommendation and then make a recommendation of either approval or denial, along with the reasons for the recommendation, to the planning commission at the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. 
(c)  Final review and a decision on either approval or denial of an application for approval of a general development plan shall be made by the planning commission. The planning commission shall review the application and receive comments from planning staff, including the planning director, the applicant, and other interested persons. A decision, either affirming or reversing the recommendation of the planning director regarding the general development plan, shall be made on the application by the planning commission at the meeting where the application is presented, unless the matter is tabled or postponed as authorized under the procedural rules of the planning commission. A written copy of the decision of the planning commission shall be provided to the applicant within five days of the meeting. 
(d)  Denial of the general development plan of a major subdivision by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. Such appeal shall be filed no later than ten days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. Any appeal filed less than ten days prior to the next regularly scheduled city council shall be heard at the next ensuing city council meeting. The city council shall review the application and receive comments from planning staff, including the planning director, the applicant, and other interested persons. A decision, either affirming or reversing the planning commission's decision, shall be made on the application at this meeting, unless the matter is tabled or postponed as authorized under the procedural rules of the city council. A written copy of the decision of the city council shall be provided to the applicant within five days of the meeting. 
Sec. 5.03. - General development plan plat requirements. 
(a)  The general development plan plat shall be drawn at a scale of one-inch equals 200 feet unless otherwise approved by the planning director. 
(b)  The general development plan plat and accompanying application documentation shall include the following: 
(1)  Name, signature, address, and phone number of the owner and the applicant. 
(2)  Name, signature, license number, seal, address and phone number of the engineer/land surveyor, landscape architect. 
(3)  Title denoting type of application, name of development land lot and land district and the surveying/engineering company's name, and address. 
(4)  A vicinity map showing the location of the tract with reference to surrounding properties, streets, city/county boundaries, etc., with ties to the land lot. 
(5)  North arrow, numerical scale and graphic scale. 
(6)  Certification that the applicant is the owner, or the owner's agent, of the property to be developed and signature by the owner on the plat. 
(7)  Acreage of tract. 
(8)  Date of the original plat and all revisions. 
(9)  Location and width of any existing or proposed streets (schematic). 
(10)  Delineation of lot lines and area in acreage of all lots and other tracts that are proposed (schematic). 
(11)  Any existing or proposed easement or land reserved for or dedicated to public use, and the purpose of such areas. 
(12)  Proposed phases of development. 
(13)  All watercourses, floodplains, wetlands or other visible or known environmentally sensitive areas on site (schematic). 
(14)  Location and width of existing rights-of-way and/or easements on the tract or that affect the tract. 
(15)  Existing contours: these may be required to extend beyond the subject property if required by the manager of development services. 
(16)  Schematic drainage plan. 
(17)  Names of adjoining subdivisions and/or property owners. 
Sec. 5.04. - Effect of approval of general development plan. 
(a)  An approved general development plan is designed to serve as a guide for the applicant's preparation of the subdivision and the city council, planning commission and the planning department's review of future preliminary and final plats. Approval of a general development plan grants the developer the authority for five years, subject to engineering and environmental considerations, to submit the planned development phases for subdivision approval provided that the phases submitted are consistent with the approved general development plan. 
(b)  Each phase of the development shall be separately granted preliminary and final approval pursuant to major subdivision review procedures. Each section of a phased development must be planned and constructed in such a way that adheres to the approved general development plan concept and which meets all applicable design standards. Each phase of the development must be able to exist independently and effectively if no further phases are completed. 
(c)  The planning director may approve preliminary plats of phases with slight deviations from the approved general development plan but may require the submission of a revised general development plan if the changes are determined to significantly affect the character or performance of the development. 
(d)  The planning commission may grant the rights referred to in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section for such period of time longer than five years that it determines to be reasonable in light of either the anticipated period of time required to complete construction under the approved general development plan or such other circumstances peculiar to the particular development plan that the planning commission may find applicable. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 6.01. - Preliminary approval. 
(a)  An applicant requesting preliminary approval of a private subdivision shall submit to the planning department 25 copies, or such other number as determined necessary by the planning director, of a preliminary plat and legal description of the subdivision that conform to section 6.02, together with a completed applicant form and required fee. Fifty percent of the subdivision fee is to be paid at application for preliminary approval and the remainder at application for final subdivision approval. 
(b)  The application shall be reviewed and commented on by the full staff. Copies of the application and related information shall be furnished by the full staff by the planning director within seven days of the date of certification of a complete application. Written review comments shall be returned to the planning director within 14 days of the date of certification of a complete application. Failure of a member of the full staff to respond to the application within 14 days will mean approval of the application by that member of the full staff. 
(c)  Review for preliminary approval of a private subdivision on a complete application shall be handled by the planning commission. Action, either approval or denial, shall be taken on the application within 45 days of certification of a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Failure of the planning commission to act within the period of time prescribed shall constitute preliminary subdivision approval, and a certificate of preliminary approval shall be issued by the planning director on the request of the applicant. 
Sec. 6.02. - Preliminary plat requirements. 
(a)  At the time a preliminary plat is submitted for review by the planning commission, the developer shall complete the private preliminary plat checklist, which will guarantee that all the requirements and conditions set forth in subsection (e) of this section have been met or complied with to the best of the applicant's knowledge. If the developer is unable to meet or comply with any of the requirements and conditions set forth on the checklist, all requirements or conditions not met or complied with must be fully explained in writing at the time the plat is submitted. If the developer fails to complete the checklist, or fails to offer justifiable reasons in writing (as determined by the planning director) for not meeting or complying with all the requirements or conditions set forth on the checklist, the preliminary plat will not be considered for review by the planning commission. 
(b)  All private preliminary plats shall conform as close as possible to the land development regulations of the city as defined in this ordinance, the zoning ordinance and land development regulations. 
(c)  The private preliminary plat shall be at a scale no smaller than 200 feet to the inch unless otherwise approved by the planning director and prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
(d)  The private preliminary plat shall be drawn in ink or by computer on sheets no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches unless special conditions exist that require a larger plat and these conditions have been approved by the planning director. 
(e)  The private preliminary plat and accompanying documentation shall show all existing conditions and shall show all proposals, include the following: 
(1)  Proposed subdivision name or identifying title. 
a.  The E911 coordinator shall approve subdivision name. 
b.  Once preliminary subdivision approval has been granted the subdivision name shall not be changed until the preliminary approval has expired or has been withdrawn and a new preliminary application has been submitted. 
(2)  Name of the owner of the tract or his authorized agent, if any. 
(3)  The names of all adjoining property owners. 
(4)  The names of all adjacent subdivisions. 
(5)  A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to surrounding development. The scale on the vicinity map as well as the north arrow of the vicinity map shall be shown. 
(6)  Names and right-of-way width of all rights-of-way. 
a.  The E911 coordinator shall approve road names. 
b.  Once preliminary subdivision approval had been granted and road names approved by the E911 coordinator road names shall not be changed until the preliminary approval has expired or has been withdrawn and a new preliminary application has been submitted. 
(7)  Location of utility and other types of easements. 
(8)  Lot lines, lot numbers (consecutively numbered), lot sizes (to the nearest tenth of an acre) and the area in parks or jointly owned public space. 
(9)  If requested by the planning director, topographic maps of all land subdivided, the scale and contour level to be determined by the planning director (separate map from recording plat). 
(10)  Minimum building setback lines on all residential lots and all other tracts smaller than five acres, front, rear and sides. 
(11)  Numerical scale, graphic scale, north arrow, and date. 
(12)  Pertinent soil data shall be shown, if required by the county sanitarian, where the subdivision is not to be served by a public sewerage system (separate maps from recording plat). 
(13)  All elevations based on a sea level datum. 
(14)  A showing of compliance with the flood damage control ordinance in chapter 18 of the Leesburg City Code. 
(15)  Acreage (to the nearest tenth) of total area to be subdivided. 
Sec. 6.03. - Conditions of private subdivisions. 
(a)  The following conditions shall be placed on any application for private subdivision approval. All of the following requirements shall be met before the application shall be considered for review by the planning commission: 
(1)  All streets shall be constructed to public street standards. 
(2)  Easements: 
a.  Easements for private streets shall be designated on final plats as general-purpose public access and utility easements, along with the name of said private street. 
b.  Easements shall at a minimum be of the same width as that required for a public street in accordance with the land development regulations. 
c.  Easements for private streets shall not be included in any calculation of minimum lot size or density limitations established by the zoning ordinance or the county health department. 
d.  Easements shall either: 
1.  Be shown on the final plat such that each lot fronting the private street extends to the centerline of the private street. No lot shall be permitted to be divided by the general purpose public access and utility easement required and established for a private street; or 
2.  Shall be drawn as its own discrete parcel to be dedicated to a private property owners association (not shown to be part of any lot). 
(3)  Private streets shall be named, subject to approval of the E911 coordinator. 
a.  The subdivider of land involving a private street shall install street signs with content containing the street name and the designation "private," as approved by the public works director. 
b.  The sign signifying the private street shall be blue, in order to distinguish maintenance responsibilities in the field. 
(4)  For building setback purposes, the setbacks shall be measured as if the streets were public streets. 
(5)  The developer shall establish a private maintenance covenant recorded with the clerk of the superior court, with bylaws which shall specifically include the following: 
a.  Clearly state that Leesburg shall not maintain, repair, resurface, rebuild, or otherwise improve streets, signs, drainage improvements or any other appurtenances within general purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. 
b.  Automatic mandatory membership of all purchasers of lots therein and their successors. 
c.  Responsibility for maintenance, insurance and taxes. 
d.  The covenant shall establish minimum annual assessments in an amount adequate to defray costs of ordinary maintenance and procedures for approval of additional needs assessments. The covenant shall also specify that a property owners association will hold the funds from such assessments. 
e.  The covenant shall establish a formula for assessing maintenance and repair costs equitably to property owners served by the private street. The public works director shall determine such formula. 
f.  The covenant shall include a periodic maintenance schedule. The public works director shall determine the maintenance schedule to be followed. 
g.  The covenant shall run with the land. 
h.  Authority to place liens on the real property of members who fail to pay their dues or assessments. 
(6)  The developer shall comply with the land development regulations for the installation of water and sanitary sewer mains within the private development. 
(7)  The developer shall comply with the emergency management director's general order for security gate access. 
(8)  Any guardhouse/gatehouse will have to meet the requirements of the land development regulations, the zoning ordinance, and chapter 8 of the Leesburg City Code. 
(9)  The drainage system shall be designed in accordance with the land development regulations. The bylaws of the property owners association shall specify that maintenance of the drainage system is the responsibility of the property owners' association. 
Sec. 6.04. - Effect of preliminary approval. 
Preliminary approval of a private subdivision shall confer the following rights upon the applicant for a period of one year: 
(1)  The applicant may begin construction upon compliance with the land development regulations, as administered by the manager of development services. 
(2)  The planning commission may grant the rights referred to in subsections (1) and (2) of this section for such a period of time longer than one year that is determined reasonable under the circumstances. 
Sec. 6.05. - Final approval. 
(a)  An applicant requesting final approval of a private subdivision shall submit to the planning department ten copies of the final plat, all deeds, real estate transfer tax forms, required bonds and any other documents necessary for final approval together with the stipulated fee as adopted by the city council. 
(b)  Review and actions for final approval shall be handled administratively by the planning director after review by the full staff. Action shall be taken on the application within seven working days of certification of a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Failure of the full staff to act within the period prescribed shall constitute private subdivision approval and approval shall be issued by the planning director. 
(c)  No permits shall be issued by any administrative agent or department of the city for the construction of any building or other improvement requiring a permit upon land where a plat is required to be approved unless the final plat has been approved by the planning director after review of the full staff, the requirements for a maintenance bonds have been met, and the approved final plat has been recorded. 
(d)  Before final approval of a subdivision will be granted, all improvements shown on the preliminary plat and construction plans must be completed in compliance with the land development regulations, the zoning ordinance, and this ordinance. 
(e)  At the time of application for approval of the final plat, the developer shall pay fees in accordance with the schedule adopted by Lee County and applicable to the City of Leesburg through an intergovernmental agreement. 
(f)  Following the completion of all improvements shown on the private preliminary plat and construction plans and the payment of all required fees, the developer shall file an application for final subdivision approval with the planning department. The request for final subdivision approval shall consist of the following: 
(1)  An application form, which is available at the office of the planning department. 
(2)  At least ten copies of the final plat or such other number as determined necessary by the planning director. 
(3)  A letter to the planning director from the manager of development services indicating that the city is in receipt of as-built plans showing all streets and water, sewer, and storm drainage with locations and elevations, identifying those portions already installed and those to be installed, and an acceptable improvements guarantee bond in the amount requested by the manager of development services to ensure satisfactory completion of required improvements. 
(4)  If the proposed water or sewerage system for a subdivision requires the approval of the state department of natural resources, this approval shall be obtained prior to making application to the planning department for approval of the final plat. The approval shall be in writing to the planning director. 
(5)  The final plat shall be submitted in paper and one copy to be in digital form with the DXF the preferred digital format though DRG and DWG will be accepted. 
(g)  The final plat shall be at a scale no smaller than 200 feet to the inch, unless otherwise approved by the planning director, and be prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
(h)  The final plat shall be drawn in ink or by computer on sheets no larger than 16 inches by 22 inches unless otherwise approved by the planning director. 
(i)  The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved, except where conditions such as topography and other similar issues make compliance to the preliminary plat impossible. The changes may be made without resubmittal to the planning commission upon approval of such changes by the planning director as long as the amended plat meets city ordinances. 
(j)  The final plat and accompanying documentation for all private subdivisions shall show the following: 
(1)  "WARNING, Leesburg has no responsibility to build, improve, maintain, or otherwise service the private streets, drainage improvements, and other appurtenances contained within the general public purpose access and utility easement or easements for private streets show on this plat." 
(2)  Grant of easement. The general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) is hereby granted and said grant of rights shall be liberally construed to provide all necessary authority to the city and to public or private utility companies serving the subdivision, for the installation and maintenance of utilities, including, but not limited to, electric lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, sewer lines, cable television lines, and fiber optic cables, together with the right to trim interfering trees and brush, together with a perpetual right of ingress and egress for installation, maintenance, and replacement of such lines. 

 
(3)  Certificate of dedication. All water and sewer lines installed within the general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) are hereby dedicated to the City of Leesburg Water and Sewer. 

 
(4)  Primary control points and benchmarks with necessary descriptions and locations of such control points, including all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data necessary for proper location. 
(5)  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of street, easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites, with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii and area and central angle of all curves. 
(6)  Name and right-of-way of each street and other rights-of-way of all private roads resulting from the subdivision development. 
(7)  Location, dimensions and purpose of easements. 
(8)  Lot lines, lot numbers (consecutive), lot sizes (to the nearest 1/10 00 of an acre) and the area in parks or jointly owned public space. 
(9)  Purpose for which lots, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved. 
(10)  Minimum building setback lines (front, rear and side) on all residential lots and all other tracts smaller than five acres. Front must be shown on plats, side and rear setbacks can be plat notes. 
(11)  Location and description of all monuments. 
(12)  Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land. 
(13)  Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record names, date and number. 
(14)  Certification by a surveyor or engineer registered in the state to the accuracy of the survey and plat. 
(15)  Declaration of land ownership. 
(16)  Title, numerical scale, graphic scale, north arrow, and date of plat. 
(17)  Acreage (to the nearest thousandth of an acre) of the total development. 
(k)  The planning director shall certify the application for final approval as complete upon receipt of the following: 
(1)  Certification from the county health department that all local, state, and federal health regulations have been met and all required fees paid. 
(2)  A report from the manager of development services that all site improvements have been constructed in accordance with approved plans and the city is in possession of as-built drawings for all site improvements. 
(3)  An improvements guarantee, posted by the developer or the general contractor for the site improvements and construction of water and sewerage system, where applicable. This improvements guarantee shall provide for and secure to the city a guarantee that the actual construction and installation requirements of the city have been met and that a two-year maintenance and performance period shall be met. The improvements guarantee shall be with a surety company or a bank licensed to do business in the state and acceptable to the city. It shall contain a provision indemnifying the city for the maintenance of installations and improvements required by this ordinance, the zoning ordinance and the land development regulations in the subdivision for two years following the date for final approval by the planning director. The improvements guarantee amount shall be determined by the manager of development services following the guidelines of the land development regulations. The procedure for releasing the guarantee is outlined in the land development regulations. 
(4)  Title opinion, which is required for any conveyance of property or easement to the city of property or easement to the city on the property to be conveyed. 
(5)  A legal description of the property being dedicated to the city. 
(6)  The appropriate deeds for conveyance of right-of-way or easement to the city. 
(7)  Real estate transfer tax form. 
(l)  The planning director shall either approve or deny final subdivision approval within seven days after the date the application is certified as complete. The developer may waive this requirement and consent in writing to the extension of such period. 
(m)  The applicant may appeal the decision of the planning director to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing, clearly setting forth the reason for the appeal. An applicant wishing to appeal the planning director's decision shall submit the appeal to the planning department within 30 days of the planning director's final decision. Once the appeal is received the planning director shall place the appeal on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled city council meeting for their consideration. 
(n)  The approved final plat shall be filed for recording in the office of the clerk of superior court by the planning department. The fee for recording the plat and all associated deeds shall be paid for by the developer. The clerk of superior court shall not file or record a plat or a deed of a private subdivision until a final plat of the subdivision has been approved as provided for in this ordinance. 
(o)  The recording of a plat of a subdivision of land shall not operate to transfer, in fee simple, to the city those portions of such plat set apart for public uses; nor shall the recording operate to transfer to the city any easement indicated on such plat to create a public right of passage over the easement. The approval of a plat by the planning director shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the city of any easement or other ground shown on the plan. Acceptance by the city shall only occur upon passage of a resolution by the city council indicating such acceptance. 
(p)  Deeds transferring title of all rights-of-way, easements and other designated areas shall be submitted to the city council for their acceptance by resolution. These deeds may be submitted upon preliminary approval for legal review. Final approval shall not be granted by the planning director prior to approval of the legal work by the city attorney. Once final approval is granted the planning director shall place the acceptance of deeds on the agenda for the next regular scheduled city council meeting. 
Sec. 6.06. - Requirement for purchaser's acknowledgement of private responsibilities. 
Prior to the sale or as a condition of the closing of a real estate transaction involving any lot served by a private street in Leesburg, the subdivider or seller of said lot shall execute a notarized purchaser's acknowledgement of private street construction and drainage maintenance responsibilities as set forth below. A copy of the purchaser's acknowledgement shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be required to be submitted as a condition of a building permit for a principal building on said lot: 
"Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Street and Drainage Maintenance Responsibility I/We have read the Declaration of Covenant which pertains to the lot that is the subject of the real estate transaction (insert address or attach legal description). I/We understand that the Declaration of Covenant applies to the lot that I am/we are purchasing and requires me/us to provide a specified percentage or amount of financing for the construction and maintenance of any private street and drainage facilities serving the lot which I am/we are purchasing, and that owners of other lots in this plat may sue for and recover those costs which this covenant requires me/us to pay, plus their damages resulting from my/our refusal to contribute, plus reasonable attorney fees. I/We further understand that Leesburg has no obligation to assist with the maintenance and improvement of the private street, drainage facilities, and other appurtenances within the general purpose public access and utility easement for the private road serving the lot in question. I/We understand that a copy of this purchaser's acknowledgement shall be required as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for a principal building on the lot I am/we are purchasing. 

 
ARTICLE VII. - ACCELERATED MAJOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 7.01. - Preliminary approval. 
(a)  An applicant requesting preliminary subdivision approval through the accelerated major subdivision procedure shall follow the procedure outlined in article IV of this ordinance. The procedure will be the same except for the additional items outlined in this article. 
(b)  An applicant wishing to develop a subdivision under the accelerated major subdivision procedure shall submit a letter to the planning director stating such intent when the subdivision application is submitted for preliminary approval. 
(c)  The developer of a subdivision under the accelerated major subdivision procedure shall provide, clear, and maintain temporary construction access easements located off the proposed rights-of-way of the subdivision's internal streets. These easements shall be shown on the preliminary plat. No vehicles (other than those directly involved in the roadway and primary utility construction plans) shall use subdivision roads under construction, but rather the construction easements as shown on the preliminary plat. When the manager of development services certifies the road construction as complete, the temporary construction easements can be terminated. 
(d)  Fifty percent of the subdivision fee shall be paid at application for preliminary approval and the remainder at application for final approval. 
Sec. 7.02. - Construction plans. 
After preliminary approval is granted to subdivision using the accelerated major subdivision procedure, the applicant may begin construction in compliance with the land development regulations, as administered by the manager of development services. The manager of development services shall halt construction and revoke all permits for construction of the subdivision upon a finding that the subdivision is not being constructed in compliance with the land development regulations. The building official, upon written request of the planning director, shall halt construction and revoke all building permits for any dwelling or building within the subdivision upon a finding by the manager of development services that the subdivision is not being constructed in compliance with the land development regulations. 
Sec. 7.03. - Accelerated final subdivision approval. 
(a)  After approval of construction plans by the manager of development services, an applicant developing a subdivision through the accelerated major subdivision procedure shall submit a final plat and accompanying legal documentation as outlined in article IV of this ordinance. The plat and legal documentation requirements will be the same except for the additional items required by this article. 
(b)  In addition to the final plat and accompanying legal documents, the following items shall also be submitted by an applicant developing a subdivision through the accelerated major subdivision procedure: 
(1)  The applicant shall submit a complete copy of the subdivision construction contract with a clearly defined date of completion, for review by the appropriate city staff to assure that all city development standards will be met. This contract shall contain a 100 percent completion cost. If the developer intends to perform some or all of the construction of the subdivision, an estimate from a contractor licensed to do business in the city of the total cost shall be provided in addition to the contracts applicable to the developer. 
(2)  The applicant shall submit an irrevocable letter of credit from a solvent bank of lending institution in good standing and otherwise acceptable to the city for 125 percent of construction cost as determined in the contract, referenced in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
a.  The expiration date on the irrevocable letter of credit shall be 180 days after the completion date enumerated on the construction contract. 
b.  If construction is not complete by the date contracted, the city shall notify the developer and exercise the irrevocable letter of credit and complete the construction. 
(c)  The planning director may request two additional itemized construction cost estimates from contractors licensed to do business in the city. This requirement serves to assure the city that the applicant's submitted construction contract is consistent with what is generally charged in the region for this type of construction. 
(d)  At the time an applicant submits for final plat approval under this article, all road rights-of-way shall be cleared. 
(e)  At the time an applicant submits for final plat approval under this article, all lots shall be staked and iron pins set. 
(f)  At the time an applicant submits for final plat approval under this article, all construction access easements shall be in a condition to carry construction traffic. 
(g)  At the time an applicant submits for final plat approval under this article, the developer must submit an affidavit in recordable form, executed by the owner of the property to be developed, containing the following information: 
(1)  A description of the property to be developed. 
(2)  A statement that the development is proceeding under the accelerated major subdivision procedures and that under such procedures the owner is allowed to sell lots in the subdivision before construction of the subdivision is complete. 
(3)  A statement providing all subsequent buyers of property notice that occupation permits will not be allowed until such time as construction of the subdivision is completed and approved by the city and the right-of-way and easements have been accepted by the city council by resolution. 
This affidavit shall be recorded with the final plat prior to beginning of construction and prior to the selling of any lots in the subdivision. 
Sec. 7.04. - Recording the final plat (this article only). 
(a)  The final plat shall be signed by the planning director and may be recorded by the developer once the following items are complete: 
(1)  Construction plans have been approved by the manager of development services. 
(2)  All final plat requirements and accompanying legal and other documentation required by this ordinance have been submitted and approved by the city planner. All legal documents and maintenance bonds must be approved by the city attorney. 
(3)  Construction access easements are in a condition to carry construction traffic. 
(4)  A complete copy of the construction contract and two additional construction cost estimates, if requested, have been submitted and approved by the city attorney and manager of development services and placed on file in the applicant's subdivision file. 
(5)  An irrevocable letter of credit for 125 percent of construction cost has been submitted and approved by the city attorney and the manager of development services. 
(6)  The owner's affidavit required in section 7.03 is provided and recorded. 
(b)  If approval under this section is denied, the applicant will be given the reasons for denial in writing. 
(c)  If the reasons for denial cannot be worked out to the city council satisfaction, the accelerated major subdivision procedure cannot be followed. In this event, the applicant may proceed with the subdivision under the normal major subdivision procedure outlined in article IV of this ordinance. 
Sec. 7.05. - City acceptance of road rights-of-way and easements (this article only). 
(a)  The city council shall accept all subdivision road rights-of-way and easements by resolution upon certification by the manager of development services that all subdivision construction is complete (including permanent lot stakes and pins) and in compliance with all city development standards. 
(b)  No occupancy of any building nor connection of permanent utilities in a subdivision shall be allowed until the city council accepts the road rights-of-way and easements by resolution and all associated deeds have recorded with the clerk of the superior court. 
(c)  Recording of the final plat does not mean that the city has accepted subdivision's road rights-of-way and easements. This shall only be done by resolution of the city council. 
Sec. 7.06. - Issuance of building permits (this article only). 
(a)  Under the accelerated major subdivision procedures, building permits may be applied for once all items addressed in section 4.04 are met; provided, however, that under the accelerated major subdivision procedures, building permits may be applied for and issued (assuming all requirements have been met by the applicant) prior to the subdivision water system and the subdivision wastewater system being connected to the water system and sewer system of the City of Leesburg Water and Sewer where the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The applicant has complied with the provisions of section 7.01, section 7.02, and section 7.03. 
(2)  The applicant has completed the installation of the water lines within the subdivision, and such installation has been tested and approved by the appropriate governing authority. 
(3)  The applicant has completed the installation of the sewer lines within the subdivision, and such installation has been tested and approved by the appropriate governing authority. 
(4)  The applicant, in the judgment of the manager of development services, has been unable to connect the subdivision's water system to the City of Leesburg Water and Sewer's main water system solely because the authority's water system line to which such connection must be made has not been completed. 
(5)  The applicant, in the judgment of the manager of development services, has been unable to connect the subdivision's sewer system to the City of Leesburg Water and Sewer's main sewer system solely because the authority's sewer system line to which such connection must be made has not been completed. 
(6)  The applicant agrees in writing that the applicant will connect the subdivision's water lines and the subdivision's sewer lines to the authority's water lines and sewer lines to which such connections must be made within 30 calendar days from the date that the applicant is notified by Leesburg or by the City of Leesburg Water and Sewer that such connections are available. 
(7)  The developer acknowledges in writing that no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any dwelling constructed in the subdivision until such time as the subdivision water lines and the subdivision sewer lines are connected to the authority's water lines and sewer lines to which such connections must be made and such connections have been tested and approved by the appropriate governing authority. 
Except as specifically provided in this subsection, no building permit shall be issued under this section without compliance with all of the items addressed in section 4.04. The provisions of this section are not intended to supersede or conflict with the provisions of any federal or state statutes or regulations regarding the installation, testing, approval, maintenance, or operation of water systems and sewer systems, and where any such conflict exists, the provisions of such federal or state statutes or regulations shall control. 
(b)  In subdivisions developed under this article, only the homeowner or the builder can apply for or be issued a building permit. Any such applicant must execute an affidavit that he is aware that an occupation permit is not guaranteed and will, in fact, be denied as will the connection of permanent utilities until such time as the subdivision is completed as required under this article and the city council has accepted all rights-of-way and easements by resolutions. 
(c)  All persons working on buildings in subdivisions developed under this article shall use the temporary construction easements and stay off any subdivision road rights-of-way, drainage systems, or other site improvements under construction. 
Sec. 7.07. - Occupancy. 
Occupancy for buildings constructed in subdivisions under this article shall not be allowed nor shall permanent utilities be connected until the city council has accepted the subdivision's road rights-of-way and easements through resolution and all associated deeds have been recorded. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STREET LIGHTING IN EXISTING SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 8.01. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Existing Subdivision Street Light Ordinance." 
Sec. 8.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, as follows: 
Lot owners means the owner or owners of record of each lot in a subdivision, whether or not there is constructed on such lot a dwelling house or other structure. 
Petition means a petition as more particularly described in section 8.03. 
Subdivision means all types of subdivisions as more particularly described in this ordinance. 
Sec. 8.03. - Petition. 
(a)  Whenever any lot owner or owners in a subdivision located in the incorporated areas of Leesburg desire to request the city to install street lights in such a subdivision, then such lot owner or owners shall notify the city manager, who shall provide the lot owner or owners with a pre-printed petition, which petition shall be for the purpose of ascertaining the level of support for the installation of such street lights in such subdivision. At the time of providing the petition to the lot owner(s), the city manager shall determine an estimated installation cost of the proposed street lighting system that will be equally assessed to each lot owner and such estimated cost shall be included for information purposes on the petition. 
(b)  Such petition shall have typed thereon a title, which shall be "Petition Requesting the City Council of Leesburg to Install Street Lights in ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Subdivision." There shall further be typed thereon the following statement at the top of each page of the petition: 
"The undersigned, by signing this petition, do hereby request the Leesburg City Council to install appropriate street lighting in ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Subdivision. The undersigned have been informed and do understand that if at least 75 percent of the record owners of lots in said subdivision sign this petition, the City Council may authorize the installation of such street lights, and each record owner of a lot or lots in said subdivision shall be billed the prorated per lot cost of installation of the street lights over a 36-month period or longer (which monthly cost is estimated to be $ ____________ ), plus a minimum fee of $3.00 per month for the operation and maintenance of said street lights upon the installation thereof." 
(c)  Such petition shall thereafter have spaces for the printed name and address, the subdivision lot number, if available, the legal signature, and the date of signing for each lot owner who signs such petition. Such signed petition shall be returned to the city manager within 90 days of the date that the petition form was delivered by the city manager to the lot owner or owners requesting such petition. No such petition shall be returned to or accepted by the city manager until at least 75 percent of the record lot owners in said subdivision have signed said petition. For purposes of ascertaining the 75 percent threshold, a lot owner may only be counted as signing the petition once, regardless of the number of lots such lot owner may own in said subdivision. 
(d)  Upon submission of said petition to the city manager, he shall cause the signatures thereon to be verified, such verification to consist of confirming that the persons signing the petition are record lot owners of property in the subject subdivision, and any persons who are not record owners of lots in said subdivision shall have their names stricken from the petition and shall not be counted for purposes of ascertaining the 75 percent threshold. 
(e)  If, after verification of the signatures as hereinbefore set out, the city manager determines that at least 75 percent of the lot owners in said subdivision have signed the petition, then said petition shall be presented to the city council at its next regular monthly meeting for consideration. In the event that the petition contains the properly verified signatures of at least 75 percent of the lot owners of record in the subject subdivision, the commission shall be authorized to approve the installation of street lighting, but the commission shall not be required to approve such installation. 
Sec. 8.04. - Installation. 
If the installation of such street lighting is approved by the city council, the city manager shall request that the electric service provider serving that particular subdivision of the city to design and install a street lighting system in accordance with the city's residential street lighting standards at the initial cost of the board. 
Sec. 8.05. - Monthly billing. 
(a)  Upon installation of the street lighting system in the subdivision, the city manager shall determine the actual total installation cost of the street lighting system incurred by the city. Upon complete installation of the street lighting system, the city's utility billing department shall add the following sums to each monthly city garbage collection fee bill for each lot owner of record in such subdivision, regardless of whether the lot owner signed the petition: 
(1)  A fixed fee per lot in the subdivision equal to the total cost to the city for installation of the street lighting system divided by the total number of lots in the subdivision, such fee to be payable by each lot owner in equal installments for 36 consecutive months or whenever the total cost is reached; 
(2)  A fixed fee of $3.00 for the electric usage and maintenance costs of the street lighting system. 
(b)  In the event that there is no monthly city garbage collection fee charged as to any particular lot or lots in such subdivision, then the city shall bill the lot owner such monthly fees computed on an annual basis beginning the first month after final installation of the subdivision lighting as contemplated herein. Except as otherwise provided herein, such fee shall be paid by each lot owner of record in the same manner as garbage collection fees are paid and shall be subject to collection in the same manner as garbage collection fees are collected by the city. 
Sec. 8.06. - Application to existing subdivisions. 
This article shall apply to subdivisions existing in the incorporated areas of Leesburg upon the adoption date of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE IX. - SIDEWALKS IN EXISTING SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 9.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, as follows: 
Lot owners means the owner or owners of record of each lot in a subdivision, whether or not there is constructed on such lot a dwelling house or other structure. 
Petition means a petition as more particularly described in section 9.02. 
Subdivision means all types of subdivisions as more particularly described in this ordinance. 
Sec. 9.02. - Petition. 
(a)  Whenever any lot owner or owners in a subdivision located in the incorporated areas of Leesburg desire to request that the city to install sidewalks in such subdivision, then such lot owner or owners shall notify the city manager, who shall provide the lot owner or owners with a pre-printed petition, which petition shall be for the purpose of ascertaining the level of support for the installation of such sidewalks in such subdivision. At the time of providing the petition to the lot owner(s), the city manager shall determine an estimated installation cost of the proposed sidewalk system that will be equally assessed to each lot owner and such estimated cost shall be included for information purposes on the petition. 
(b)  Such petition shall have typed thereon a title, which shall be "Petition Requesting the City Council of Leesburg to Install Sidewalks in ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Subdivision." There shall further be typed thereon the following statement at the top of each page of the petition: 
"The undersigned, by signing this petition, do hereby request the City Council of Leesburg to install appropriate sidewalks in ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Subdivision. The undersigned have been informed and do understand that if at least 75 percent of the record owners of lots in said subdivision sign this petition, the city council may authorize the installation of such sidewalk, and each record owner of a lot or lots in said subdivision shall be billed the prorated per lot cost of installation of the sidewalks over a 36-month period or longer (which monthly cost is estimated to be $ ____________ )." 
(c)  Such petition shall thereafter have spaces for the printed name and address, the subdivision lot number, if available, the legal signature, and the date of signing for each lot owner who signs such petition. Such signed petition shall be returned to the city manager within 90 days of the date that the petition form was delivered by the city manager to the lot owner or owners requesting such petition. No such petition shall be returned to or accepted by the assistant city administrator until at least 75 percent of the record lot owners in said subdivision have signed said petition. For purposes of ascertaining the 75 percent threshold, a lot owner may only be counted as signing the petition once, regardless of the number of lots such lot owner may own in said subdivision. 
(d)  Upon submission of said petition to the city manager, he shall cause the signatures thereon to be verified, such verification to consist of confirming that the persons signing the petition are record lot owners of property in the subject subdivision, and any persons who are not record owners of lots in said subdivision shall have their names stricken from the petition and shall not be counted for purposes of ascertaining the 75 percent threshold. 
(e)  If, after verification of the signatures as hereinbefore set out, the city manager determines that at least 75 percent of the lot owners in said subdivision have signed the petition, then said petition shall be presented to the city council at its next regular monthly meeting for consideration. In the event that the petition contains the properly verified signatures of at least 75 percent of the lot owners of record in the subject subdivision, the commission shall be authorized to approve the installation of sidewalks, but the commission shall not be required to approve such installation. 
Sec. 9.03. - Installation. 
If the city council approves the installation of such sidewalks, the city manager shall request solicitation and approval of bids from approved concrete business for the installation of said sidewalk system at the initial cost of the city council. Prior to commencement of construction of the sidewalks, if the land where the sidewalk is to be constructed is not owned by the city, then the city shall be required to acquire ownership of such land from the owner or owners thereof prior to commencement of such construction, but in no event shall the city be required to pay for such land or to acquire such land by eminent domain. 
Sec. 9.04. - Monthly billing. 
(a)  Upon installation of the sidewalk system in the subdivision, the city manager shall determine the actual total installation cost of the sidewalk system incurred by the city. Upon complete installation of the sidewalk system, the city's utility billing department shall add the sidewalk construction fee to each monthly city garbage collection fee bill for each lot owner of record in such subdivision, regardless of whether the lot owner signed the petition. The fee shall be calculated by calculating the total cost to the city for installation of the sidewalk system and dividing that total cost divided by the total number of lots in the subdivision. That amount shall constitute the cost of the sidewalk construction for each lot owner, and each lot owner shall pay such amount in 36 equal consecutive monthly installments in the same manner and at the same time as such lot owner pays his monthly garbage collection fee bill. In the event that a person or entity owns more than one lot, then he shall be obligated to pay the monthly fee for each lot he owns in the subdivision. 
(b)  In the event that there is no monthly city garbage collection fee charged as to any particular lot or lots in such subdivision, then the city shall bill the lot owner such monthly fees computed on an annual basis beginning the first month after final installation of the sidewalk system as contemplated herein. Except as otherwise provided herein, such fee shall be paid by each lot owner of record in the same manner as garbage collection fees are paid and shall be subject to collection in the same manner as garbage collection fees are collected by the city. 
(c)  All required repairs to the sidewalk constructed under this section shall be made by and at the expense of the city. 
Sec. 9.05. - Application to existing subdivisions. 
This article shall apply to all residential subdivisions existing in the incorporated areas of Leesburg upon the adoption date of this ordinance. 
Appendix C - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's land development ordinance, adopted by the mayor and council on October 3, 2017. Amendments to the land development ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. For stylistic purposes, the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in The Code of Leesburg, Georgia, has been used. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1.01. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of this ordinance that it will apply to and provide guidance for the development of lands within the incorporated limits of the city, whether the developments involve the subdivision of land or the construction of buildings and/or other improvements on single or multiple parcels of land. 
Sec. 1.02. - Authority. 
(a)  Ga. Const. Art. IX, § 2, ¶¶ 2 and 3 empowers the governing authority of each city and municipality to adopt ordinances designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council ordains the provisions of this ordinance. 
(b)  The regulations contained in this ordinance shall be known as the land development regulations. This ordinance shall establish additional requirements to ordinances, regulations, specifications and/or other laws of the city and the state. If this ordinance contains requirements which are duplicative, supplemental, or additional to those contained in other local, state or federal laws or regulations, the most restrictive shall apply. 
Sec. 1.03. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements; liberally construed in the favor of the city council, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled or roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled or roofed addition that is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
ADT means average daily trips or average daily traffic count. 
Appeal means the process by which an aggrieved party may petition for review of a decision made by an official or department of city government. 
Applicant means a person who has applied for a permit. 
Architect means a currently registered, professional architect, licensed by the state, competent in civil design. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways, streets or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines, drainageways or municipal/county boundary lines. 
Buffer means an area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
Building means any structure having a roof, supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal or goods. Where roofed structures are separated from each other by common walls having no opening for passage, each portion so separated shall be considered a building. 
Construction is used interchangeably with the term "work." 
Construction plans means those maps, drawings and documents used to guide construction and to depict the specific location of and provide the computations and specifications for the design of the improvements to be installed in the development in accordance with the requirements and standards of this ordinance and other city ordinances. 
City planner means the planner employed by the city. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated in the minimum right-of-way and paved turnaround. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below the original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Dedication means the act of granting a right of property to the public at no cost to local government often through the form of an easement or right-of-way. 
Developer means the legal or beneficial owner of a tract of land included in a proposed development; also, the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or any other person having enforceable proprietary interest in such land. 
Development means a planning or construction project involving substantial property improvement and, usually, a change of land use character within the site; the act of using land for building or extractive purposes. The term also means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Drainage means the removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means. 
Drainage easements means an area set aside for the purpose of transporting or storing surface or groundwater. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Drainage system means the system through which water flows from the land, including all watercourses, water bodies and wetlands. 
Driveway means a paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles and allowing access from a street or alley to a building or other structure or facility. 
Easement means a right-of-way granted for limited use of private land for a public, quasi-public or private purpose. 
Engineer means a currently registered, professional engineer, licensed by the state and competent in civil design. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has or will be added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting and/or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of the city, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surface to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any condition of such activities and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Improvements guarantee means a guarantee in the form of a letter of credit, bond, certified check or similar method of guarantee approved by the city to insure completion of required improvements. 
Individual means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, estate, trust or other recognized legal entity as defined by the laws of the state, whether in this state or not. 
Island means the property separating adjacent driveways extending back at least to the right-of-way line. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including but not limited to clearing, dredging, grading, excavation, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural processes as described in this ordinance. 
Landowner means any individual having or controlling over 50 percent proprietary interest in the land sought to be developed. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or use and any accessory building or uses customarily incident to it and including open spaces not less in extent than those required in connection with the lot by this ordinance or other city regulations pertaining to land development. 
Manager of development services means the person designated by the city council to administer this ordinance. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and development matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Mph means miles per hour. 
MUTCD means the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition and appendices. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
New construction means any structure or improvement for which construction commenced after the date of adoption (July 27, 1995) of the original flood damage prevention ordinance. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. Any walled or roofed addition that is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Off-street parking space means a parking space provided in a parking lot, parking structure or private driveway. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct any land disturbing activity under the provisions of this ordinance. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality, or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phased development means a tract of land that is subdivided and developed in a series of planned phases. 
Plan means the documents, drawings, (paper and digital with digital format of DXF as the preferred though DRG and DWG will be accepted) sketches, details, specifications, etc., which define the scope of construction and work to be performed. 
Planning commission means the duly designated planning board of the city. 
Planning director means the department head of the planning and development department. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed, as determined by the manager of development services. 
Public utilities means water, gas, sanitary sewer and storm drainage, electrical, cable and communications lines and facilities that regularly serve more than 25 individuals or have more than 15 service connections. 
Public water system means a water system, for the provision of piped water, from any source for residential, commercial, industrial and institutional consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves at least 25 individuals. Such term includes but is not limited to any water collection, treatment, storage, pumping or distribution facility used in connection with such system and any collection or pretreatment storage facility used in connection with such system. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  No more than 400 square feet when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Right-of-way (ROW) means a strip of land owned and used by the general public, railroads or utility companies for transportation or other special use. For land platting purposes, every right-of-way established and shown on an approved final plat is to be separate and distinct from adjoining lots or parcels and not included within the dimensions or area of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for transportation and utilities shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
Right-of-way line means the line between a right-of-way and adjacent property. 
Right-of-way miter means the right-of-way line at an intersection that is parallel to neither road but forms a triangle with the extension of right-of-way lines of adjacent sides of the intersection roads and provides for safer visibility for vehicles approaching the intersection by enlarging the right-of-way. 
Roadway means the actual road surface area between the inside edges of the curbs, which may include travel lanes, parking lanes, and deceleration and acceleration lanes. Where there are no curbs, the roadway is that portion between the edges of the paved surface (or hard surface) width. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from buildings together with small quantities of groundwaters, stormwaters and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Septic system means an underground system with a septic tank and drain field used for the disposal of sewage wastes. 
Service connection means any connection from a building or site to a public water or sanitary sewer system that provides water to or receives sewage from the building or site. 
Sewage means the same as "wastewater." 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater and/or sewage. 
Shoulder means that portion of a street or road from the outer edge of the paved surface to the inside edge of the ditch. 
Sidewalk means a paved path provided for pedestrian use and usually located at the side of a road within the right-of-way. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Start of construction , for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (PL 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any construction beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural and artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state that are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Street means a roadway, as distinguished from an alley, that affords traffic circulation and principal means of access to abutting property; commonly designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, expressway, freeway, road, avenue, drive, boulevard, lane, place, circle, court or otherwise. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on or in the ground. Among other things, the term includes buildings, manufactured homes, signs, swimming pools and emergency shelters but does not include landscaping walls or fences. 
Subdivision means as defined in the Leesburg Subdivision Regulations. 
Subdivision regulations mean the city subdivision regulations. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a building, taking place during the life of a building in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building. The market value of the building shall be: (1) the appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; (2) in the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair construction performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to assure the safe living conditions. 
Surveyor means a currently registered, practicing surveyor licensed by the state. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. 
Utilities authority means the city utilities authority. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
Wastewater means the liquid wastes collected in a sewerage system and conveyed to a treatment plant for processing. For this definition, a septic collection and disposal system is included. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed, banks and including any adjacent area subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Work means the same as "construction." 
Sec. 1.04. - Penalties. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for regulated activity. If a person commences any activity requiring a permit as prescribed in this ordinance without first obtaining such permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Monetary penalty. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of condition and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance, fails to comply with any of its requirements, violates a stop work order and/or permitting conditions shall, upon conviction, be liable for a monetary penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day or a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding 180 days in jail, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation, failure, or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate offense. Additionally, failure to comply shall result in denial or revocation of permits and the denial of acceptance of easements and right-of-ways by the city until compliance is achieved. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violations. 
(c)  Environmental protection division enforcement action against soil erosion and sedimentation control. Upon written request by the city, the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources may determine that public interest requires initiation of an enforcement action by the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. Such request shall be accompanied by documentation that demonstrates to the director's satisfaction that local remedies have been exhausted and that compliance with local ordinances or resolutions have not been achieved. Where such a determination is made and the city has failed to ensure compliance, the director may implement the board of natural resources' rules and seek compliance under provision of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-12—12-7-15. For purpose of this subsection, enforcement actions taken by the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-12—12-7-15 shall not require prior revocation of certification of the city. 
Sec. 1.05. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provision of this ordinance nor the compliance with provisions of this ordinance shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, nor shall such approval or compliance impose any liability upon the city or the Lower Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that an activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof or nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance of the terms of the permit. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, APPEAL, VIOLATIONS, AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 2.01. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  This ordinance shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by the manager of development services under the direction of the planning director. 
(b)  In any case in which activities are undertaken in violation of this ordinance, not in compliance with the provisions of a permit issued by the city, or without authorization of a permit that would otherwise be required, the manager of development services is authorized to order that all unauthorized or improper work be stopped, direct correction of deficiencies, or take any other legal or administrative action appropriate to the severity of the violation and degree of threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the manager of development services to maintain an accurate and up-to-date compilation of this ordinance, including appendices, and all amendments, and to publish such compilation and make it available to the public for a fee set by the city council. 
(d)  The manager of development services shall have the power to conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspection of the sites for which permits have been issued. 
(e)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the conservation committee, the local soil and water conservation district, or the environmental protection division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials; nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
Sec. 2.02. - Variance or appeal. 
(a)  The manager of development services under the direction of the planning director may approve variances to the design and construction elements of this ordinance if the procedure and requirements herein are followed. The elements of design and construction that the manager of development services under the direction of the planning director may grant are as follows: 
(1)  Design elements for streets; 
(2)  Design standards for streets; 
(3)  Sanitary sewer system; 
(4)  Public water distribution system; 
(5)  Driveway and right-of-way encroachment requirements; 
(6)  Construction specifications; and 
(7)  Construction details. 
(b)  In exercising the authority, the manager of development services shall, upon a finding that the requirements of section 2.04(2)a through e, if applicable, have been met. 
(c)  Any decision of the manager of development services may be appealed to the city council as outlined in this ordinance. 
(d)  Requests for variance to the section of this ordinance other than those outlined in section 2.02(a) or an appeal of a decision of the manager of development services that is a result of the variance process outlined in section 2.02(a) shall be submitted to the planning commission for their review and recommendation to the city council. The city council shall grant or deny the variance or appeal. 
(e)  Applications for variances or appeals shall be submitted with all required information along with any required fee to the planning and development department. Such submission shall be within 90 days of the questioned manager of development services decision. The manager of development services shall coordinate the review of each variance or appeal request by all other affected city departments and shall summarize such comments and/or recommendations as may be received for the planning commission's review and recommendation and city council for their review and action. 
(f)  Upon consideration of any of the variances or appeals and the purposes of this ordinance, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of the variances and appeals as they deem necessary to further the purpose of this ordinance and other ordinances and standards. 
Sec. 2.03. - Variance or appeal information. 
Each application for a variance or an appeal shall be filed, in writing, with the manager of development services; and the application shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  Identification of property concerned by street address or legal description; 
(2)  A statement identifying the legal interest of the applicant; 
(3)  A statement identifying the specific provision of this ordinance having the variance or appeal being sought; 
(4)  A statement identifying the special conditions and circumstances that should qualify for a variance or appeal; and 
(5)  A statement identifying any special conditions, methods, design procedures, and/or construction procedures being submitted as the proposed alternative to this ordinance. 
Sec. 2.04. - Powers and duties. 
The city council shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To hear and decide variances or appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the manager of development services in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(2)  To authorize in specific cases a variance or an appeal from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will in an individual case result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance or appeal may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon finding by the city council that: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
b.  The application of this ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this ordinance; however, no variance or appeal may be granted for a use of land, building or structure that is prohibited in a given district by the zoning and subdivision regulations. 
e.  Granting of the variance or appeal will achieve the same quality and integrity of construction as that standard contained in this ordinance; and 
(3)  To decide on other matters where a decision of the city council may be specifically required by the provisions of this ordinance. In exercising these powers, the city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the manager of development services and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The city council, in the execution of the duties for which appointed, may subpoena witnesses and in the case of contempt may certify such fact to the municipal court. 
Sec. 2.05. - Certiorari from decisions. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city council shall have the right of certiorari to the superior court within 90 days after the decision of the city council is rendered. 
Sec. 2.06. - Amendments. 
(a)  Authorized. This ordinance, including appendices, may be amended by the city council as specified in this section. 
(b)  Requirements for change. When the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good development practice justifies such action, and after review and report of the planning commission, the city council may undertake the necessary steps to amend this ordinance. 
(c)  Procedure for amendments. Requests to amend this ordinance shall be processed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Initiation of amendments. A proposed amendment to this ordinance may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, the planning director, the manager of development services or by application filed with the manager of development services by a developer or citizen. 
(2)  Application procedure. Each request for amendment of this ordinance shall be submitted in a form as prescribed by the manager of development services along with such fee as shall be established by the city council. Applications for amendments must be submitted in proper form by the last Friday of the month prior to the month of the planning commission hearing the applicant wishes to attend in order to be heard at that meeting. 
(3)  The application first shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation to the city council. For information, each member of the planning commission will be provided with a copy of each amendment. The planning commission shall conduct a hearing, consider all information and forward a recommendation on to the city council. If the planning commission fails to forward a recommendation it shall be deemed to have recommended approval on the proposed amendment. 
(4)  After the application has been approved, denied or amended by the planning commission, the application shall be submitted to the city council for review and action. For information, each member of the city council will be provided with a copy of each amendment. The city council shall follow its rules for review and processing. The amendment shall only become part of this ordinance if the city council votes for approval. 
ARTICLE III. - LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3.01. - Required permits. 
(a)  Prior to the beginning of construction of any development regulated in this ordinance, the person seeking to begin such construction shall apply for the applicable permit designated by the city for such construction. Any construction regulated in this ordinance must have an approved permit from the city prior to the start of any construction, including clearing of the land. 
(b)  In the event that a person seeking to begin construction for which a permit is required under this article fails to obtain a permit prior to commencement of construction, then the appropriate building officials of the city shall be authorized to require such construction to cease immediately. The cost of any permit applied for or obtained after commencement of construction shall include a penalty added to the cost of the permit equal to 50 percent of the cost of such permit. For purposes of this subsection, the phrase "commencement of construction" shall mean the construction of building foundation, or digging of footings, or foundations. 
Sec. 3.02. - Activities that do not automatically require permits. 
(a)  The following activities do not automatically require a permit; though if the intent of this ordinance is not followed, a permit may be required: 
(1)  Such minor activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work and other related activities that result in minor soil erosion or increase in overall runoff; 
(2)  The construction of single-family residences when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a larger project and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; however, construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in this ordinance and in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and such requirements shall be enforced by the city. 
(3)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, to include: 
a.  Raising, harvesting or storing or products of the field or orchard; 
b.  Feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; 
c.  Producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chicken, hens and turkeys. 
d.  Producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; 
e.  The production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; 
f.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting and farm buildings and farm ponds; 
which exemption applies only to agricultural operations not located near nonagricultural developments that may be affected by additional runoff or traffic. 
(4)  Any project involving one-fourth acre or less; however, this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, excluding channels and drainageways that have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; however, any person responsible for a project that involves one-fourth acre or less, that involves land disturbing activity, and that is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located; and nothing contained in this subsection shall prevent the city from regulating any such project not specifically exempted by subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (5) or (6) of this section. 
(5)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state toll-way authority; or any road construction or maintenance project or both, undertaken by any city or municipality; however, such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in this ordinance. 
(6)  Any activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, provided that any land disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in this ordinance. 
(b)  Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in section 3.01, the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued; and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
Sec. 3.03. - Activities that require permits. 
(a)  A land development permit shall be required prior to the commencement of any construction for the purpose of residential, commercial, industrial or institutional uses or for major subdivisions, as defined in section 1.08 of the subdivision regulations that have been granted preliminary approval by the planning commission. 
All persons proposing development and/or construction in the city for a major subdivision, as part of a larger plan of development or sale shall submit a stormwater plan to the city for approval. The stormwater plan may consist of a combination of storage and/or controlled release of stormwater runoff in accordance with article VII of this ordinance. On-site detention or retention shall be required when the proposed development will increase the peak rate of runoff by more than one cubic foot per second (CFS) for a ten-year frequency storm. A proposed development shall include any and all phases of a plan or general development plan under the same name or ownership. 
(b)  An individual site development permit shall be acquired prior to the beginning of any construction for the purpose of commercial, industrial, institutional or residential developments requiring site construction improvements on already subdivided parcels of property. 
(c)  An erosion and sedimentation control permit shall be acquired prior to the beginning of any land disturbing activities that are not exempt under this ordinance. This permit is included in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d)  A right-of-way/easement permit shall be required for the use [of] city rights-of-way or easements for the construction, installation, or maintenance of any public or private utility, any other facility approved by the city council, any structure, driveway, culvert, pavement or object in the right-of-way or easements other than those constructed or maintained by the city council. 
(1)  Exemptions. No right-of-way/easement permits shall be required for the following: 
a.  Construction of water, sewer, power, telephone or other utilities in subdivisions in accordance with plans approved by the planning and development department where such construction will be completed prior to the acceptance of the rights-of-way and easements by the city council and done as part of the permitted subdivision site improvement. 
b.  Repairs of previously permitted utilities in the right-of-way; provided, however, such repairs do not require cutting of any pavement, including curbs and sidewalks. 
Sec. 3.04. - Activities that may require a permit. 
The following developments are not required to apply for a permit under article VII of this ordinance but may be required to apply for a permit under other sections of this ordinance. The city shall determine if a permit is required. 
(1)  Surface mining, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; and 
(3)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
Sec. 3.05. - Documentation and/or conditions required for all land development permits. 
The following minimum document information (plan) may be combined on to the same sheet provided the plan shows all the minimal required information on that sheet for each plan and all information that would be necessary to present a clear unquestionable picture of the site when being reviewed. The information must not create an overly detailed plan making it illegible: 
(1)  Title area to contain the following: 
a.  Name of development; 
b.  Title of plan; 
c.  Engineering firm name; 
d.  Date drawn; 
e.  Numerical scale; 
f.  Sheet number in set of plans; 
g.  Revision block area; and 
h.  Seal and signature of the engineer or surveyor except where a stated exception occurs; 
(2)  Erosion and sedimentation control plan, the applicant may be exempted from this plan requirement if development is specifically exempted in this ordinance; 
(3)  Utility plan to include all public water and sewage systems; 
(4)  Plan and profile of roadways; 
(5)  Plan and profile of sanitary sewer; 
(6)  Construction details; 
(7)  Stormwater management plan; 
(8)  State DOT permit, if applicable; 
(9)  Overall watershed drainage; 
(10)  Approval from the city utilities authority for water and sewer, if applicable; and 
(11)  Any specifics required for design that are stated elsewhere in this ordinance. 
Sec. 3.06. - Additional documentation and/or conditions required for erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(a)  In conjunction with the city's review the manager of development services shall refer the application and sedimentation and erosion control plan to the Lower Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District for its review and approval or denial concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of this review shall be forwarded to the city. 
(b)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the applicant or his representative. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued by the city unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the Lower Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District and the manager of development services has affirmatively determined that the plan and any additional documentation are in compliance with this ordinance. 
(d)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be prepared to meet the minimum requirements contained in chapter 16, article IV. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through this ordinance and the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide, or through the use of alternate design criteria that conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is incorporated by reference into this ordinance. 
(e)  The plans for this activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures, including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(f)  The following information is to be included on soil sediment and erosion control plans: 
(1)  Narrative or notes, and other information: notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
(2)  Description of existing land use at the project site and description of the proposed project. 
(3)  Name, address and phone number of property owner. 
(4)  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
(5)  Size of project or phase under construction, in acres. 
(6)  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project, including the statement in bold letters, that "The escape of sediment from the site shall be prevented by the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities." 
(7)  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage area. 
(8)  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. This vegetative plan shall be site specific for appropriate time of the year seeding will take place and for the appropriate geographical region of the state. 
(9)  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications shall follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(10)  The following maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sedimentation control, additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall be implemented to control or treat the erosion and/or sediment source." 
(11)  Maps, drawings and supportive computations, which shall bear the signature and/or seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. 
(12)  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
(13)  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
(14)  Boundary line survey. 
(15)  Delineation of disturbed area within the project boundary. 
(16)  Existing contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
(17)  Planned contours, with contour lines drawn with a one-foot interval. 
(18)  Adjacent areas and features such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., that might be affected. 
(19)  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
(20)  Delineate the 100-year floodplain and reference the data used in the determination. 
(21)  Delineate the 25-foot undisturbed vegetative buffer adjacent to state waters and the 35-foot buffer in Metropolitan River Protection Act areas. 
(22)  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6. 
(23)  Limits of construction and clearing. 
Sec. 3.07. - Additional documentation and/or conditions required for utility work, potable water, sanitary sewer or other work in city rights-of-way or easements. 
(a)  Utility work permit. 
(1)  Information and plans for a utility work permit shall be limited to small drawings depicting location, scope, limits of work and time schedule for completion. 
(2)  Plans do not require an engineer's seal and signature. 
(b)  Potable water and sanitary sewer. 
(1)  Plans approved by the utilities authority; 
(2)  Erosion and sedimentation control plan; 
(3)  Stormwater management plan, if the project is more than main line construction; and 
(4)  Any specifics required for design stated elsewhere in this ordinance. 
Sec. 3.08. - Provisions of permits. 
(a)  A permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the manager of development services, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this ordinance. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan or the conditions contained in the permit. 
(b)  When reviewing any application for a permit, the manager of development services shall consider the past record of the permit applicant in complying with previous permits and this ordinance. If the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance and/or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act within three years prior to the date of the filing of the application under consideration, the manager of development services may deny the permit application. In lieu of application denial the manager of development services may require the applicant to post a bond up to, but not exceeding, 110 percent of the cost of the proposed activity or $3,000.00 per acre or fraction of an acre of the proposed activity prior to issuing the permit, whichever is less. If the applicant does not comply with this ordinance or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the city may call the bond or any part of the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to bring the activity into compliance or to stabilize the site. 
(c)  The applicant and/or his designee shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the city that affect the tract to be developed and the areas surrounding it. They shall review the zoning and subdivision regulations, this ordinance, and other ordinances that regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(d)  The provisions of any permit granted shall be construed as regulatory and not as contractual. No interest or right of an applicant shall be transferred to another except by written consent of the city. No inherent or retained right or privilege belonging to any abutting property owner is affected, interfered with or abridged by this ordinance or by any permit issued under this ordinance, nor is the city, its agents or assigns, responsible for any damage claim that may arise as a result of the issuance of a permit under this ordinance. 
Sec. 3.09. - Cost responsibility. 
(a)  The city council shall institute a fee schedule for permits. The applicant for a permit to perform work must pay for the plans required and all other engineering and construction costs, including labor and material, as well as all other costs associated with the permit process. 
(b)  When the complexity of the work requires continuous inspection, as determined by the manager of development services, the applicant shall be required to reimburse the city for actual inspection expenses. This determination and estimate of inspection costs will be made as part of the approved permit. 
Sec. 3.10. - Conditions placed on permits. 
The following restrictions shall apply to all permits issued under this ordinance: 
(1)  If all non-city approvals that are not required for issuance of the permit but are required before construction may commence are not received prior to the start of construction, the permit shall be considered to be in violation and procedures in section 3.15, may be started; 
(2)  Construction parking is prohibited on city controlled rights-of-way except in cases of residential home construction and in no case on arterial or collector roads; 
(3)  No construction shown on approved plans as part of the permit shall be relocated or its dimensions altered without the written permission of the manager of development services; 
(4)  New construction shall not be opened to public use until a satisfactory inspection has been completed by the manager of development services or his designee; 
(5)  The manager of development services may disapprove placing any project into service and decline final acceptance until the construction is inspected and approved; 
(6)  If the development is to be developed in phases, a permit shall be required for each phase unless more than one phase is approved and constructed concurrently; and 
(7)  A driveway pipe shall be installed, if applicable, prior to beginning construction on any driveway. 
Sec. 3.11. - Time limit of permits. 
(a)  Work authorized by the permit shall be initiated within 12 months after the approval date of the permit or the permit becomes null and void. 
(b)  If improvements are not completed within two years from the date of permit approval the permit is null and void. A reapplication for the permit shall be resubmitted and receive approval from the city prior to completing construction. The manager of development services may grant a one-time, one-year extension for extenuating conditions that prevent the two-year deadline from being met. 
Sec. 3.12. - Liability and responsibility of permit applicant. 
(a)  Applicants to whom permits have been granted shall at all times indemnify and save harmless the city and any political subdivision of the city from responsibility for any damages for liability arising from the maintenance, repair, operation or use of any installation, parts of installation, construction procedures or actual construction approved under the permit. When determined necessary by the manager of development services, the applicant shall exhibit satisfactory evidence of adequate liability insurance to cover all phases of work specified under the permit for the protection of the traveling public. Limits of such coverage shall be determined separately for each applicant and declared by the manager of development services at his discretion. 
(b)  The applicant shall relocate and/or remove any installations or construction placed on the city right-of-way when ordered in writing to do so by the city without cost to the city. 
Sec. 3.13. - Property interests. 
No property interest is created by the granting of a permit even if the applicant, his transferee or a subsequent transferee has incurred expenses or expended effort in reliance on such permit. 
Sec. 3.14. - Violation of permit. 
(a)  A permit is considered to be active if the permit time period is still in effect and the permit has not been violated. 
(b)  If it is determined that a person engaged in a permitted activity as defined in this ordinance has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions or with the provisions of this ordinance, a written notice to comply order shall be served upon that person. Stop work orders can be issued at this time. This section also applies to non-permitted work that still must follow the requirements of this ordinance. 
(1)  Notice to comply. The notice shall set forth the measures and conditions necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures shall be completed. 
(2)  If the person engaged in the activity fails to comply within the time allowed he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond if required to post one under the provisions of this ordinance. The city may call the bond or any part of the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to correct, remove or complete the construction. 
(c)  A permit is considered to be suspended if the permit holder has been issued a written notice to comply regarding a violation and has not completed the specified corrective measures in the allotted time. Stop work orders shall be issued at this time. 
(1)  Having a suspended permit shall be grounds for the city removing, correcting, barricading, displacing or otherwise closing such construction and/or development and collecting costs for such work. 
(2)  Upon a stop work order from the manager of development services, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provision of this ordinance and the approved permit shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the permit holder, his authorized agent, or the person in charge of activity on the property and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists as determined by the manager of development services, no written notice shall be required. 
(d)  The manager of development services shall revoke a permit where the permit holder has failed to comply with all suspended permit requirements. 
(1)  When a permit is revoked, the city may, at its option, complete or remove the unfinished work; and in such event, the applicant is responsible for the reimbursement of all expenses incurred by the city in completing or removing the work. 
(2)  To restart construction work from a revoked permit the applicant shall apply for a new permit and pay the application fee. The manager of development services may grant a one-time extension to this requirement and allow work to proceed under the previously revoked permit provided all conditions and requirements of the original permit are met or complied with. 
Sec. 3.15. - Public complaint against activity. 
(a)  Any person may register a complaint to the manager of development services against any permit holder or permit exempted property owner. 
(b)  The manager of development services shall investigate all legitimate complaints and take the appropriate required action as to the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(c)  The manager of development services shall investigate any complaint against any permit exempted property owner and at the manager of development services interpretation of this ordinance may require the property owner to obtain a permit. If it is deemed that a permit is required the property owner shall be in a violated permit condition until such time as an application has been submitted with all required documentation and a permit has been issued. 
Sec. 3.16. - Permit work inspections. 
(a)  The manager of development services or his designee will periodically inspect the sites for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
(b)  The manager of development services or his designee shall have access to any permitted work for inspections at any time. When inspection for approval is required, the permit holder shall notify the manager of development services 48 hours in advance. After notification to the manager of development services and expiration of the 48-hour period the work, may proceed with or without inspection. The city reserves the right to require modifications or corrections if the work does not meet the requirements of this ordinance. The following inspections are required: 
(1)  Any specific items additionally noted at the time the permit is issued; 
(2)  Potable water construction to include: 
a.  Flushing; 
b.  Waterline pressure testing; 
c.  Chlorination; and 
d.  Bacteriological water sampling. 
(3)  Sanitary sewer construction; 
(4)  Pavement base construction; 
(5)  Any storm drainage construction underneath a proposed city road; and/or proposed easements. 
(6)  Any construction in existing city rights-of-way or easements. 
(c)  The permit holder shall be fully responsible for any construction work. The manager of development services may require any uninspected work required to be inspected to be uncovered for inspection at the sole expense of the applicant. The manager of development services or city council shall in no way be liable for any cost or damages arising from or in any way associated with any delay or inconvenience associated with any work, delay or inconvenience caused by uncovering uninspected work that is required by this ordinance to be inspected. 
(d)  A request by phone call or letter may schedule a visit to the site by the manager of development services or his designee. The permit holder is responsible for contacting the manager of development services or his designee 48 hours in advance for all required inspections. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION PROCESS 

Sec. 3.17. - Qualifications for applicants. 
(a)  An applicant for a permit under this article shall be accepted only from: 
(1)  A person owning the property upon which the permit work will be constructed; 
(2)  The legal representative of the person owning the property upon which the permit work will be constructed, who shall provide documentation of complete responsibility over the scope of the permit applied for; and 
(3)  A utility owner of the material to be placed on or in an easement (such as utility cables, water lines, etc.), with documentation showing that the landowner had approved access. 
(b)  Any applicant under the jurisdiction of subsection (a)(3) of this section need not apply for any permit if exempted by this ordinance. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the official liable for collecting ad valorem taxes certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
Sec. 3.18. - Application forms and plan required. 
(a)  Application for permits will be made on the appropriate city form. Forms may be obtained from the manager of development shall [sic]. After all permit application items are submitted the permit application is considered complete. A complete application consists of: 
(1)  Completed application with appropriate signatures; 
(2)  Items required for each particular permit requested as outlined in this division; 
(3)  Proof of paid ad valorem taxes if the project requires an erosion control permit; 
(4)  The required fee; 
(5)  Five copies of engineering plans on sheets no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches; and 
(6)  Two copies of storm drainage calculations. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit with his application a plan that complies with this ordinance. Data relative to the requested permit will be furnished by the applicant without cost to the city. The manager of development services will be available for consultation and advice in these matters. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this ordinance to knowingly submit any application or plan containing false statements or information. 
Sec. 3.19. - Permit submission and approval process. 
(a)  The applicant shall submit the required number of copies of the application and all supporting plans and documentation to the manager of development services. The presence of an engineer's or surveyor's seal and signature on the plans shall certify that the submitted plans meet or exceed the standards and specifications of the city. 
(b)  Such permit and required documentation and plans will be distributed by the manager of development services to the reviewing departments. The reviewing departments and the manager of development services shall review all submitted documentation for compliance with this ordinance and other city ordinances and standards. 
(c)  If the plans conform to all requirements, and all payments for plan processing or any traffic control signage and/or any other required moneys or documentation has been received, the manager of development services shall issue a permit authorizing construction. 
(d)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practical but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the manager of development services of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(e)  If it is determined by the manager of development services during review that additional information is required, a new 45-day review period begins after the submittal of the requested information. 
(f)  If a permit is denied, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing to the applicant who may then take corrective action or submit additional information to meet city requirements. 
(g)  Subdivision development requirements are as follows: 
(1)  If the manager of development services through the permit review process requires changes in the construction plans which require a substantial material change in the approved preliminary plat or if between the approval of the preliminary plat and the land development permit application submittal, the developer makes a substantial material change in the approved preliminary plat, an amended preliminary plat shall be provided by the developer and submitted to the planning commission for their review and approval. If the amended preliminary plat is approved by the planning commission the manager of development services shall approve or deny the permit application. 
(2)  Substantial material change is considered to be on the order of: 
a.  Roadway alignment changed to outside the original right-of-way limits; 
b.  Addition of a new roadway; 
c.  Any expansion outside the boundaries of the original preliminary plat limits; and 
d.  Any change the planning director deems as a substantial material change. 
Sec. 3.20. - Changes in scope of permit. 
Any significant change in design or function shall be approved by the manager of development services. Submittals of appropriate information and plans shall be required. The manager of development services shall respond in writing approving or denying the change. The reasons for denial shall be listed in the denial letter. 
Sec. 3.21. - Closing out of permit. 
(a)  A permit shall be closed out when all the construction has been completed, such construction is approved by the manager of development services in respect to the approved construction plans, and improvement guarantee, if required, is received and approved. 
(b)  When construction has been completed, the applicant shall notify the manager of development services and request a final inspection. Such notification shall be made at least 48 hours prior to the date inspection is desired. 
(c)  Record or as-built drawings (full set of with one copy of all plan sheets to be in paper and one copy to be in digital form with the DXF the preferred digital format though DRG and DWG will be accepted) shall be submitted to the manager of development services. 
(d)  When all construction is satisfactory, the manager of development services shall close out the permit by signing the certificate of occupancy and enclosing a copy of said certificate with the permit file. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until a final inspection has been conducted as outlined in this ordinance and the manager of development services approves the construction and closes out the permit. 
(e)  If the utilities authority allows the installation of a water and/or sewer system, then only upon receipt of the utilities authority's final approval of the project shall the manager of development services close the permit or in the case of land subdivision shall he give a recommendation for approval to the planning director. 
Sec. 3.22. - Improvements guarantee. 
(a)  An improvements guarantee, as required by the subdivision regulations, shall provide for and secure to the city a guarantee that the actual construction, performance and installation requirements of the city have been met and that a two-year test period shall be met. The improvements guarantee shall be with a surety company or bank licensed to do business in the state and acceptable to the city. The improvements guarantee shall contain the following provisions: 
(1)  Indemnify the city for the maintenance and performance of the installations and improvements required by this ordinance and the zoning regulations in the development for two years following the date for final subdivision approval and acceptance of the improvements by the city council; 
(2)  Allow the city to acquire the guarantee prior to the end of the two-year test period of requested repairs have not been completed within the guidelines of this ordinance; and 
(3)  The surety company or bank securing the guarantee may release the guarantee only after the manager of development services has written stating his approval upon the completion of the two-year period. 
(b)  The improvements guarantee amount shall be ten percent of the total cost of all construction. Proof of the total cost of the project shall be submitted to the manager of development services prior to the request for final construction approval. 
(c)  After final construction approval and during the two-year improvements guarantee period if repairs are required, the manager of development services shall make written reports after each inspection and forward the reports to the planning director, the developer and the surety company or bank providing and insuring the guarantee. 
(d)  All repairs shall be completed within 30 days. If emergency repairs of deficiencies are determined to be required by the manager of development services in conjunction with the planning director, the repairs shall be completed within ten days. If improvements are not completed within the specified time limit, the manager of development services shall begin the process for acquiring the improvements guarantee. 
(e)  If any reported deficiencies have not been repaired by the specified time, the manager of development services shall make a written report to the planning director concerning the deficiencies, the required repair date, the failure to meet the repair date, and the guarantee expiration date. The planning director shall make such determinations as necessary about the deficiencies and whether or not to acquire the improvements guarantee in reference to the good of the public and the city. 
(f)  The procedures for administering the inspections for the guarantee is as follows: 
(1)  The manager of development services or his designee shall make three inspections of the guaranteed improvements on a six-month interval basis. If any deficiencies exist, a written report outlining the deficiencies shall be prepared by the manager of development services and given to the developer. The developer shall make any necessary repairs. 
(2)  Forty-five days prior to the expiration date of the guarantee the manager of development services shall make inspections for the approving of the release of the guarantee. If any deficiencies exist a written report outlining the deficiencies shall be made and given to the developer. The developer shall make any necessary repairs. 
(3)  Fifteen days prior to the expiration date a final inspection shall be made. If any new deficiencies exist a final written report shall be made by the manager of development services and presented to the developer and planning director. The planning director shall review said report and determine whether to seize the guarantee to fix the deficiencies. 
(g)  If at the expiration date inspection there are no deficiencies or all deficiencies have been corrected, the manager of development services shall make a final written report describing the satisfactory completion of the two-year test period and authorize the release of the guarantee. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION PLAN STANDARD AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 3.23. - General. 
(a)  All existing features shall be shown with dashed lines and all proposed features shall be shown with solid lines. The legend on the plans shall clearly identify this: 
(1)  North arrow; 
(2)  Graphical and numerical scales; 
(3)  Plan and profile sheets on a scale of one inch equals 50 feet horizontally and one inch equals five feet vertically. 
(b)  The scale on all plan sheets and on all construction detail sheets (excluding plan and profile sheets as they are specified called out in subsection (a)(3) of this section) shall be sufficient to make details clear and legible for review and construction proposed. 
(c)  Phrases such as "construct as per City of Leesburg standards" shall not be allowed without specific reference to the section the plans are referring to. 
Sec. 3.24. - Topography plan. 
The following shall be shown on the plan: 
(1)  Existing contour lines or elevations shall be provided to show the natural and proposed drainage features within the applicant's property to be developed. This shall include all of the adjacent right-of-way, easements and any elevations needed to show how it is being treated once it leaves the property; 
(2)  Location of property with respect to the intersecting named or numbered road or highway. This can normally be done by showing a clear, distinct, accurate distance from one corner of the property to the centerline of the next nearest street or highway; 
(3)  State route and U.S. highway numbers, if applicable, and names of all other roads which appear on the plans; 
(4)  The scale on all plan sheets and on all construction detail sheets (excluding plan and profile sheets as they are specified called out in section 3.23(a)(3) shall be sufficient to make details clear and legible for review and construction proposed; 
(5)  Existing location of property lines, rights-of-way and easements. This shall include the name of the owner of the property adjacent to the subject property; 
(6)  Contours and/or spot elevations to cover all land within the property limits; 
(7)  Existing structures, wetlands, ponds, streams, wet weather springs and creeks; 
(8)  The location and size of any existing storm drainage facilities and the direction of flow within these structures; 
(9)  The width of existing roadway pavements, show lane lines, lane widths and direction travel; 
(10)  Show any existing landfills or waste disposal sites; and 
(11)  Show any cemeteries. 
Sec. 3.25. - Layout plan. 
The following shall be shown on the plan: 
(1)  The scale on all plan sheets and on all construction detail sheets (excluding plan and profile sheets as they are specified called out in section 3.23(a)(3) shall be sufficient to make details clear and legible for review and construction proposed; 
(2)  Show centerline of the proposed road or driveway to the nearest roadway intersection; 
(3)  The width of existing roadway pavements, show lane lines, lane widths; 
(4)  State route and U.S. highway numbers (if applicable) and names of all highways and roads which appear on the plans; 
(5)  Show the proposed driveway or proposed road with existing road; 
(6)  Show the proposed accel/decel lanes and include the length of the accel/decel lanes; 
(7)  Show the proposed radii of all curves on the driveways/roadways and etc.; 
(8)  Layout information for parking lot, spaces, internal drives etc.; 
(9)  Layout information for location of buildings and other accessories; 
(10)  Show all proposed survey information regarding lot dimension, lot location, lot numbers, property lines, roadway horizontal layout, etc.; 
(11)  Show all existing and proposed easements; 
(12)  Show any additional information necessary to lay out the proposed construction at the site; 
(13)  Include any sight distance problems if this is a feature or the difference in elevation between the roadway/driveway and right-of-way line if the difference will result in a six percent or greater grade on the entrance roadway/driveway; 
(14)  Show the length of frontage of the property and the length of the frontage that is being developed under this particular permit; and 
(15)  Show the distance between the buildings, any other structures, signs or any foundations on the property and the rights-of-way lines. 
Sec. 3.26. - Grading plan. 
The following shall be shown on the plan: 
(1)  Proposed contour lines or elevations shall be provided to show the natural and proposed drainage features within the property to be developed. This shall include all of the adjacent right-of-way and any elevations needed to show how it is being treated once it leaves the subject property; 
(2)  Grade and slope information; 
(3)  Indicated side slopes for all ditches; 
(4)  Existing and proposed easements; and 
(5)  The location, size, length, direction of flow, inverts, grades, types of pipe and other information of all proposed pipes, culverts, structures, inlets, manholes, detention ponds, catch basins and the like. 
Sec. 3.27. - Composite utility plan. 
The following shall be shown on the plan: 
(1)  The scale on all plan sheets and on all construction detail sheets (excluding plan and profile sheets as they are specified called out in section 3.23(a)(3) shall be sufficient to make details clear and legible for review and construction proposed; 
(2)  Water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, power, telephone, and cable lines, poles, structures, etc.; 
(3)  Lot lines with lot numbers, easements and roadway, if applicable; and 
(4)  Details of locations where water, sewer and storm pipes lines conflict. Show elevations of pipes at these locations. 
Sec. 3.28. - Water line plan. 
The following shall be shown on the plan: 
(1)  The scale on all plan sheets and on all construction detail sheets (excluding plan and profile sheets as they are specified called out in section 3.23(a)(3) shall be sufficient to make details clear and legible for review and construction proposed; 
(2)  Lot lines with lot numbers, easements and rights-of-way; 
(3)  Water line construction information such as location and types of pipes, tees, valves, bends, fire hydrants, and blocking material, pipe sizes; and 
(4)  Show existing and proposed structures which are adjacent to the water lines and any structures which may be in conflict during construction. 
Sec. 3.29. - Plan and profile of roadways. 
(a)  Plan view shall show the following: 
(1)  Label and show all existing contours at a maximum two-foot interval; 
(2)  Label and show all proposed contours at a maximum one-foot interval; 
(3)  Show ditch contours as grade slope indicators with spot elevations; 
(4)  Grade work to be shown by contours or grade slope indicators; 
(5)  Road pavement and/or curb and gutter edges; 
(6)  Right-of-way limits; 
(7)  Easements and building setbacks; 
(8)  All storm system structures; 
(9)  Detail construction information about storm system such as inverts, pipe size, grade, type of pipe, number of inlets, amount of rip-rap (length and width dimensions); 
(10)  Water lines and associated structures; 
(11)  Sanitary sewer lines and associated structures; 
(12)  Station numbers on the roadway; 
(13)  Survey information about alignment and horizontal curves; and 
(14)  Stations display at least every 100-foot interval. 
(b)  Profile view shall show the following: 
(1)  Survey information about roadway grade and vertical curves; 
(2)  Existing centerline elevations; 
(3)  Proposed centerline elevations; 
(4)  Station numbers; 
(5)  Base elevations; 
(6)  Any pipe crossings; 
(7)  Stations display at least every 100-foot interval; and 
(8)  Transition locations such as end of pavement, beginning of curb, intersection with other roads, etc. 
Sec. 3.30. - Plan and profile of sanitary sewer. 
(a)  Plan view shall show the following: 
(1)  Label and show all existing contours at a maximum two-foot interval; 
(2)  Label and show all proposed contours at a maximum one-foot interval; 
(3)  All grade work to be shown by contours or grade slope indicators; 
(4)  Road pavement and/or curb and gutter edges; 
(5)  Right-of-way limits; 
(6)  Easements, minimum building front and rear setbacks, if applicable; 
(7)  If crossing is made with storm sewer system then show detail construction information about storm system such as inverts, pipe size, grade, type of pipe, number of inlets, amount of rip-rap (length and width dimensions); 
(8)  If crossing water lines and structures show elevations of such; 
(9)  Sewer lines, structures, alignment and related information such as elevations, grades, pipe size and type, inverts, stations of structures, etc.; 
(10)  Station numbers; and 
(11)  Stations display at least at 100-foot intervals. 
(b)  Profile view shall show the following: 
(1)  Existing contour elevations; 
(2)  Sewer line information; 
(3)  Station numbers; 
(4)  Base elevations; 
(5)  Any pipe crossings; 
(6)  Stations display at 100-foot intervals; and 
(7)  Transition locations. 
Sec. 3.31. - Overall watershed drainage plan. 
The following shall be shown on the plan: 
(1)  A topographic survey of all lands in the watershed which drains into the property and all the property itself; 
(2)  Drainage basins, flow calculation information such as acreage of basin, runoff coefficients, travel times, time of concentrations, etc., and directions of flow for each basin in the watershed; and 
(3)  The scale on all plan sheets and on all construction detail sheets (excluding plan and profile sheets as they are specified called out in subsection 3.23(a)(3) shall be sufficient to make details clear and legible for review and construction proposed. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN CONSIDERATION IN LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANNING AND LAYOUT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4.01. - General design standards. 
(a)  The design of every development shall be compatible with the existing topography, drainage pattern and other natural features on the site. 
(b)  The design of every development shall conserve, wherever possible, mature trees, wooded areas, watercourses, scenic views, ponds, floodplain areas, historic landmarks and other significant and distinct features of the property. 
Sec. 4.02. - Classification of streets. 
(a)  There are three broad classifications of streets within the city as listed below: 
(1)  Residential streets. 
a.  Residential streets represent the lowest traffic volume category. Their primary function is to serve abutting land use and provide access to residential uses. All residential streets are intended to accommodate relatively low traffic volumes at slow speeds in order to minimize the basic incompatibility of vehicles and the pedestrians and children that characterize residential neighborhoods. Depending upon the type and density of development served by these streets, they are more accurately subcategorized as follows: 
1.  A local street serves a maximum of 50 dwelling units or has average daily trips (ADT) of fewer than 500 vehicles. A local street may be culs-de-sac, loops or small cross streets. They do not function as a minor or major street, collector or arterial road. 
2.  A minor street collects traffic from local streets, as well as giving access to individual dwelling units. A minor street serves 51 to 115 dwelling units or has average daily trips fewer than 1,150 vehicles. 
3.  A major street provides access to minor and local streets and serves from 116 to 160 dwelling units or has average daily trips of 1,600 vehicles. 
b.  The following shall be applied to determine the number of dwelling units served by a street. This number shall then be used to determine the residential street subtype and therefore the standards that shall be applied. 
1.  A street segment is the length of a street between intersections or between points that define a change in street configuration. 
2.  The number of dwelling units served by a street segment includes all units having a frontage on that street segment and all units that have frontage on other segments of that street or other streets that contribute to the traffic volume of that segment. 
3.  When more than one route of access is available to a dwelling unit, that unit shall be counted as served by the street segments most likely to provide the access point for that unit as determined by the manager of development services. 
(2)  Collector streets. Collector streets intercept traffic from intersecting residential streets and deliver this traffic to arterial roads. A secondary function is service to abutting land use. Collector streets serve as barriers between neighborhoods and are designed for higher speeds and traffic volumes than residential streets. Collector streets are classified into two types as follows: 
a.  A minor collector may be residential, commercial, or industrial in character. Average daily traffic is between 1,600 and 3,200 vehicles and includes any street serving more than 160 dwelling units. 
b.  A major collector services major regional facilities and may carry non-local traffic. Average daily trips are between 3,200 and 7,000 vehicles and no parking on the street is permitted. 
(3)  Arterial streets. Arterial streets are intended to provide for high-speed travel between or within communities or to and from collectors and expressways. Access is controlled so that only regionally significant land uses may take direct access to these roads. Average daily trips are usually over 7,000 vehicles. 
Sec. 4.03. - Principles of system layout. 
Streets extending parallel or approximately parallel to a railroad right-of-way should be at a: 
(1)  Sufficient distance to ensure depth for commercial or industrial sites; and 
(2)  Distance at least 50 feet from the railroad right-of-way when intersecting a street that crosses the railroad at grade, or be at such other distance as shall be necessary when intersecting a street that will be grade separated when crossing the railroad. 
Streets designed in new subdivisions or new phases of existing subdivisions within 500 feet of an existing roadway, the proposed roadway must be designed to connect to the existing roadway. 
Sec. 4.04. - Phased developments. 
(a)  Joint consideration of the factors of both emergency access and capacity shall follow layouts for access to phased developments as follows: 
(1)  Provide at least two separate roadways fully connected to the internal system of roadways; or 
(2)  Provide a divided-type entrance roadway with a median of sufficient width to largely ensure freedom of continued emergency access by lanes on one side. The required median width shall range from 12 to 30 feet as required by the site in question. 
(b)  Phased developments are allowed to have one phase that does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, but the next phase shall bring the previous phase into compliance. Only one phase at a time is allowed not to be in compliance with this section. 
(c)  Future streets to be extended or started and being shown on the current plan proposed are to be constructed to the ends of all proposed lots. An example is where a new street is to be built in a later phase between two lots. This street is to be built to the rear property line of the two lots during the phase which create those lots. 
Sec. 4.05. - Easement standards. 
(a)  Easements shall be arranged in such a manner as to eliminate unnecessary easement jogs or offsets and to facilitate the use of easements for power distribution, telephone service, drainage, water service, sewer service and pedestrian access. 
(b)  No half easements shall be accepted unless the adjacent property owner dedicates the other half of the easement at the same time that the plat is approved. 
(c)  Easements shall be cleared of trees, debris and other materials unless it is determined by the manager of development services that such materials do not hinder the effectiveness of the easements. 
(d)  Easements for the location of garbage receptacles and for ingress and egress to such receptacles, together with fences and other screens, shall be provided when in the opinion of the manager of development services such easements and fences or screens are necessary to provide adequate garbage collection services to the proposed development. 
Sec. 4.06. - Utility easements. 
(a)  Easements at least ten feet wide, five feet wide on each side of side lot lines shall be provided for utilities for utility service to those lots only. 
(b)  Easements at least 15 feet wide shall be provided along all rights-of-way of new roads and along the frontages of new developments and subdivisions developed on existing roads. 
(c)  Public water and sanitary sewer easements, if determined by the utilities authority to be necessary shall be required. Easement placement and widths will be determined by the utilities authority. 
Sec. 4.07. - Storm drainage easements. 
(a)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, natural channel or stream that conveys stormwater from other adjoining city rights-of-way or easements, there shall be provided a right-of-way conforming substantially to the limits of such watercourse plus additional width as necessary to accommodate future construction and/or maintenance as determined by the manager of development services. 
(b)  Any manmade drainage systems, excluding planned community lakes unless they are a designed part of the storm drainage system, shall provide rights-of-way or easements conforming substantially to the limits of the system plus additional width as necessary to accommodate maintenance as determined by the manager of development services. 
(c)  No buildable lot shall be subdivided for development with a stormwater detention/retention easement contained within the bounds of the property. 
(d)  All stormwater detention/retention areas shall be conveyed to the city in fee simple title. 
(e)  Any drainage systems deeded to the city shall have access rights-of-way conveyed with it to provide legal ingress and egress for city personnel to carry out maintenance duties. Such access shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width. 
(f)  For areas on lots where fill material is placed to eliminate the ponding of stormwater, the displaced stormwater shall be directed to a designated right-of-way or easement and the design storm calculations shall allow for the increase in projected storm runoff. 
(g)  All stormwater drainage systems conveying stormwater directly from a road right-of-way to a retention/detention pond shall convey the stormwater through a closed system consisting of acceptable pipe sized to handle the calculated volume of stormwater. 
Sec. 4.08. - Subdivision lot requirements. 
(a)  Reference markers. 
(1)  At least one corner of the subdivision shall be designated by course and distance from a readily discernable reference marker such as a lot intersection marker or the intersection of two existing streets. If a corner lies within 500 feet of triangulation or traverse station of the state coordinate system this corner shall be marked with a monument so designated by computer X and Y coordinates which shall also appear on the map with a statement identifying the location of this station or monument to an accuracy of 1:10,000. 
(2)  All other intersections and lot corners shall be marked with iron pipes not less than three-fourths inch in diameter or iron rebar not less than one-half inch in diameter. Both marker types shall be not less than 24 inches long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. The above standards shall also apply to any revision or addition to an existing subdivision. 
(3)  The lots shall be marked in the field by the appropriate number as shown on the proposed subdivision plat. Such marking shall be in the form of stakes along each street front property corner. 
(b)  Lot layout. 
(1)  Side lot lines shall be as perpendicular to the right-of-way tangent as possible. In no circumstances shall the angle between the side lot line and the right-of-way tangent be less than 70 degrees. 
(2)  The lot arrangement shall be such that there shall be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the city's ordinances and in providing driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved public street. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT LAYOUT STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 4.09. - Placement of utilities. 
(a)  Every pipe or conduit for gas, communication or other use shall have a minimum cover of 24 inches. 
(b)  Where feasible and appropriate, utility companies shall indicate the locations of their undersurface structures by means of surface markings. Curb markings are an excellent method of indicating where a pipe intersects the pavement. 
(c)  Utilities in easement adjacent to roadway: 
(1)  Leesburg shall be granted exclusive utility easements parallel to all new roads accepted by the city and well as on the frontage of new developments on existing roads to a width of 15 feet beyond the right-of-way line. These easements shall be cleared at the time of road construction, unless otherwise authorized by the manager of development services, to allow access for utility companies to install their lines and accessories. 
(2)  Wherever a utility easement crosses a drainage easement or right-of-way no structures shall be placed within the bounds of the drainage easement or right-of-way unless authorized in writing by the city with the condition that the structures are to be removed from the easement if they interfere with the repair, or maintenance of the easement or right-of-way. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL CONSTRUCTION; WORK CONDITIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5.01. - Construction and work debris. 
All construction and work debris, including trees and stumps from land clearing operations, shall be removed and disposed of properly by an appropriate method. Such disposal shall be completed before any permit is closed and final approval granted. 
Sec. 5.02. - Property protection. 
Every pipe or conduit for water, sewage, gas, drainage, communication or any other use that may be encountered in trenching shall be carefully protected from injury or displacement and all damage caused, as follows: 
(1)  Use all means necessary to protect all materials and existing utilities before, during and after installation and to protect all objects designated to remain. 
(2)  In the event of damage, immediately make all repairs and replacements necessary to the approval of the owner of the structure. All costs associated with repairing the structure shall be paid by the party causing the damage. 
a.  Existing underground facilities. 
1.  Underground structures and utilities, as indicated, are located according to best available information. 
2.  Locate all underground facilities in advance of excavation to avoid conflicts with new construction. 
b.  Conflicts. 
1.  Perform work in such a manner as to cause a minimum of interference with the service rendered by the facility disturbed. 
2.  Immediately repair or replace structures or facilities damaged. Such structures shall be completely repaired to the satisfaction of the owner of the structure. 
(3)  Restore to condition existing prior to damage in accordance with best standard practices as approved by the property owner, the owner of the structure or the manager of development services. 
(4)  Protect improvements, trees and vegetation on adjoining property as well as those on property requiring route clearing work. 
(5)  Execute work so as not to create a nuisance to persons utilizing adjacent property. 
(6)  Use work methods and provide temporary facilities as necessary to prevent washing, erosion, sedimentation or dust damage, or hazard to persons and property, within and off the work area. 
Sec. 5.03. - Construction in existing roads. 
(a)  No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the centerline of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street temporarily restored. Streets will not be completely closed to traffic except when approved by the manager of development services with proper notice given to the police and fire departments noted on the permit. Construction operations shall be conducted in a manner to cause the least interruption to traffic. 
(b)  No more than 250 linear feet, measured longitudinally, shall be opened in any street at any one time. 
(c)  All utility facilities shall be exposed sufficiently ahead of trench excavation work to avoid damage to those facilities and to permit their relocation, if necessary. 
(d)  Pipe drains, pipe culverts or other facilities encounters during excavation work shall be protected. 
(e)  Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and kept trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the public travel. In order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate a dirt or dust nuisance, toe boards or bins may be required. If the excavated area is muddy and causes inconvenience to pedestrians, temporary walks shall be installed. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the permittee shall keep a passageway at least half the sidewalk width open along such sidewalk line. 
(f)  All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be properly made, backfilled and temporarily surfaced by the permittee according to city specifications. 
(g)  When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to roll, flow or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause the material to be removed from the street immediately. 
(h)  The permit holder shall place around the project such barriers, lights, warning lights, warning flags and danger signs as shall be determined by the manager of development services, as well as the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to be necessary for the protection of the public. 
(i)  Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working hours when construction operations prohibit provision of such access. 
(j)  Hydrants under pressure, valve pit covers, valve boxes, curb stop boxes, fire or police call boxes, or other utility controls shall be left unobstructed and accessible during the construction period. 
Sec. 5.04. - Survey markers for property division. 
Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey reference point or a permanent survey benchmark within the city shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first obtained in writing from the manager of development services. 
Sec. 5.05. - Interruption of service. 
(a)  Flow of storm drains maintained. Adequate provisions shall be made for the flow of drains and watercourses encountered during construction, and the structures that may have been disturbed shall be satisfactorily restored upon completion of the work. 
(b)  Interruption of water or sewer service. No valve or other control on the existing system shall be operated for any purpose by the permit holder without approval of the utilities authority. All consumers affected by such operation and the utilities authority shall be notified at least six hours before the operation and advised of the probable time the service will be restored. 
(c)  Utilities and service connection. All existing utilities and service connections shall be protected, maintained and kept in service during construction operations. Any existing utilities cut or damaged shall be repaired immediately and the service restored on the existing lines. 
Sec. 5.06. - Hazards. 
(a)  If it is necessary to haul soft or wet materials over the streets or pavements of the city, suitable, tight vehicles shall be provided to prevent deposits on the streets or pavements. In all cases where any material is dropped from the vehicles, the permit holder shall clean up the materials as often as necessary to keep the streets clean and free from any dirt, mud, or other item due to his operations. 
(b)  No materials, wastes or other substances shall be stored or maintained upon a lot in such a manner that natural runoff from such areas on a site with an approved stormwater drainage plan can impair the existing water quality of a stream, watercourse or aquifer or impair the approved drainage plan. 
(c)  All sewers, gutters, storm drains and the like shall be kept clear of any trash, mud or other residue that may result in an obstruction to normal flow in these structures. 
Sec. 5.07. - Dust control. 
The control of dust shall be provided for within residential areas and such other areas where dust is a nuisance to the public by applying appropriate measures such as sprinkling areas with water. 
Sec. 5.08. - Cleanup, site restoration and site maintenance. 
(a)  Project sites shall be kept clean at all times. Loose dirt shall not be allowed to clog ditches or cover sidewalks. Soft clay or other undesirable material removed from the trenches shall be removed from the streets, sidewalks, ditches, curb and gutter and any other drainage structures. 
(b)  All pavement, sidewalks, driveways, curb, gutter, drains or similar items removed or damaged during or by construction shall be replaced with construction of first class materials and workmanship. All pavement shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 5.09. - Nonemergency work hours. 
(a)  Work on existing rights-of-way and easements shall be performed during daylight hours, Monday through Friday. 
(b)  Work in existing residential developments shall be performed during daylight hours, Monday through Friday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. local time. 
(c)  Work adjacent to existing residential developments shall be performed Monday through Saturday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. local time. Adjacent means within sight distance of the nearest house in the development. 
(d)  For work conditions not otherwise addressed, no restrictions are placed on work hours or days. 
Sec. 5.10. - Use of explosives. 
The permit holder shall not bring explosives onto the site or use in the work without prior written permission from authorities having jurisdiction; shall use explosives only as legally permitted; and when other work materials are impractical, shall not permit explosives on the project site other than during the least practical use period and assumes final responsibility for handling, storage and use of any explosive materials. 
Sec. 5.11. - Disturbed areas. 
All areas that are disturbed due to direct or indirect construction operations shall be restored by the permit holder to a condition equal or better than the condition of the areas prior to the operations. 
The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large trees, natural groves, and similar community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers where appropriate, shall be required. 
Sec. 5.12. - Use of chemicals. 
All chemicals used during project construction or furnished for project operation, whether herbicide, pesticide, disinfectant, polymer, reactant or of other classification, must show approval from either EPA or the USDA. Use of all such chemicals and disposal of residues shall be in strict conformance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
Sec. 5.13. - Specification references. 
Where supplementary specifications such as federal, ASTM, ANSI, AASHTO, etc., are referenced in the specifications, such references shall be the latest edition of such supplementary specification. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 5.14. - General. 
(a)  Construction specifications for road subgrade, base and surface course. Construction specifications for roads shall be per Standard Specification, Construction of Roads and Bridges of the State of Georgia, latest edition and supplements. All references in the document meaning the state department of transportation or the state department of transportation engineer shall mean Leesburg and the Leesburg Manager of Development Services. 
(b)  Sampling and testing. 
(1)  Provide quality control testing during construction as necessary to assure the entire earthwork including all fill layers, subgrades, and bases meet specified requirements. Remove and reconstruct, or otherwise correct work which falls below specified density or is outside other specified limits. 
(2)  Employ an independent testing laboratory to perform quality control testing during trenching and backfilling operations. 
(3)  The manager of development services may perform sampling, surveying, inspection or testing activity during construction for the city's use, but such activity does not relieve the contractor from his responsibility to achieve specified results. 
(c)  Quality control testing reports. 
(1)  After completing construction and prior to the closing of the approved permit, the contractor may be required to file copies of the quality control test results demonstrating compliance with these specifications with the manager of development services. Which quality control tests results to be submitted shall be requested by the manager of development services at the time of application review. Such application review request period shall not limit the manager of development services from requiring additional tests during the construction process. 
(2)  At any time during the construction process, the manager of development services may request to review any quality control test results. The contractor shall provide all quality control test results. 
Sec. 5.15. - Route clearing. 
The extent of route clearing required is that minimum degree of clearing necessary to install utilities and appurtenances, and such additional clearing as shown on the drawings. 
(a)  Clearing. 
(1)  Remove above-grade structures only where specifically authorized. 
(2)  Remove abandoned underground facilities such as utilities and structures, walls, footings, basements, wells, septic tanks, tanks, underground pipe, and other items which conflict with construction. 
(b)  Holes and depressions. 
(1)  Fill holes, depressions and voids created or exposed by clearing operations with non-organic soil material, unless further excavation earth work is indicated. 
(2)  Place fill material in horizontal layers not exceeding six inches loose depth and thoroughly compact to a density at least equal to adjacent ground. 
(c)  Disposal of waste material. 
(1)  Dispose of all material in accordance with all local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(2)  Burning of cleared materials on the work site is only permitted when authorized by the Forestry Service. 
Sec. 5.16. - Roadway grading. 
(a)  All streets, roads, and service drives shall be graded so that the entire right-of-way can be constructed to the required cross section. Before grading is started the entire right-of-way shall first be cleared of stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials, along with all trees and other topographical features not intended for preservation. 
(b)  The stumps, holes and trenches shall be carefully backfilled and tamped. Heavy sod and all soft, yielding, or otherwise unsuitable materials shall be removed and replaced with acceptable fill material. 
(c)  All suitable materials from roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches, or at other places as needed. The fill shall be spread in layers and compacted. Compacted layers shall not exceed eight inches in thickness. Fills shall be rolled in accordance with state department of transportation standards. The top 12 inches of soil in both cut and fill sections shall have a dry weight density equal to or greater than 95 percent of that obtained by AASHTO designation T-99, method A or C. 
(d)  All compaction testing shall be performed to the satisfaction of the manager of development services and no base materials shall be placed over the subgrade until all test results have been approved by the manager of development services. 
(e)  Grading shall progress so as to ensure good drainage and prevent formation of depressions where water may collect in the right-of-way. 
(f)  When the natural soil cannot be made stable enough to support construction traffic, subgrade modification shall be accomplished by incorporating various standard methods such as placing course, graded, crushed stones or placing geotextile fabric. The method employed shall be approved by the manager of development services before starting work. The subgrade shall have provisions to intercept groundwater from springs and seepage plains that will prevent saturation of the subgrade. The finished subgrade shall be true to grade, free from roots and uniformly firm. 
Sec. 5.17. - Pipeline and accessories construction. 
(a)  Disposition of defective material. All material found during the progress of the work to have flaws or other defects, shall be rejected and promptly removed from the construction site. 
(b)  Handling pipe and accessories. 
(1)  Pipe shall be handled in such a manner that a minimum amount of damage to the coating will result. Damaged coating shall be repaired in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's recommendations. 
(2)  The interior of all pipe, fittings, and other accessories shall be kept free from dirt and foreign matter at all times. Each pipe shall have a swab run through it until all foreign matter has been removed. 
(3)  Valves and hydrants shall be drained and stored in a manner that will protect them from damage by freezing. 
(4)  All pipe, including water, sewer, and stormwater conveyance, shall have No. 6 tracer wire laid directly on top of the pipe for the entire length of the pipe. 
a.  For all sewer and stormwater lines the tracer wire shall originate and/or terminate inside of the manhole structures to provide easy access to the end of the wire for location. The locate wire shall be located inside the structure and shall enter under the ring, tabletop or whatever form of cover is installed so that the wire has at least one foot of excess wire inside of the structure and the wire shall be located on the same side of the structure as the pipe it serves to identify. 
(c)  Alignment and grade. 
(1)  All pipe shall be laid and maintained to the required lines and grades, with accessories at the required locations and with joints centered and spigots home and with all accessories plumb where applicable. 
(2)  Temporary support, adequate protection and maintenance of all underground and surface utility structures, drains, sewer and other obstructions encountered in the progress of construction shall be furnished. 
(3)  When an obstruction is encountered, make necessary changes in alignment or grade as approved by the manager of development services to avoid same. 
(4)  Whenever necessary to determine the location of existing pipe, valves or other underground structures, examine all available records and make all explorations and excavations for such purpose. This investigation shall be made in advance of any pipe laying. 
(d)  Excavation and trenching. 
(1)  Perform all excavation of every description and of whatever substance encountered to the depth specified on the approved plans. The contractor shall be responsible for compliance with all proper trenching safety and construction methods and OSHA regulations. Passing inspections by the manager of development services shall not be construed as to have also being in compliance with proper trenching safety and construction methods and OSHA regulations. All excavated material not required for filling shall be removed from the site and deposited in a manner and location as approved. 
(2)  No more than 300 feet of trench shall be open at any one time in advance of the completed pipe, nor left unfilled for more than 200 feet in rear thereof, except by written permission of the manager of development services. 
(3)  Excavation for structures shall be of sufficient size to leave at least one foot in the clear between their outer surface and the embankment or timber which may protect it. The trench width my vary with and depend upon the depth of trench and the nature of the excavated material encounters, but in any case shall be of ample width to permit the pipe to be laid and jointed properly and the backfill to be placed and compacted properly. The minimum width of unsheathed trench shall be 18 inches and for pipe ten inches and larger, at least one foot greater than the nominal diameter of the pipe; the maximum width of trench shall not be more than two feet greater than the pipe diameter. This should provide space as necessary on each side of the pipe for thoroughly tamping the bedding material under and around the pipe. 
(4)  Over cut in depths of structures and pipe trenches shall be backfilled with approved material and thoroughly compacted. 
(5)  All excavated material shall be piled in a manner that will not endanger the work and that will avoid obstructing sidewalks and driveways. Gutters shall be kept clear or other satisfactory provisions made for street drainage. Storm drains shall also be kept clear. 
(6)  The sides of all trenches shall be as nearly vertical as possible, sloped sides may be used only in open country and approved by the manager of development services. If sloped sides are approved, the trench sides shall be vertical from the invert of the trench to a minimum of one foot above the pipe. 
(7)  The bottom of the trench on which the pipe is to be laid shall be free from projecting stones, roots or any inequalities, and shall be brought to a true grade and so shaped as to conform to the bottom quadrant of the pipe to provide a firm, uniform bearing for the entire laying length of the pipe. Recesses shall be formed in the trench to receive the bells of the pipe or to provide ample space for making joints for tongue and groove pipe. 
(8)  Undercutting of trench bottom shall be backfilled with select material from the excavations and compacted to not less than 95 percent maximum density as determined by AASHTO T-99, prior to placing pipe. Select material shall be granular soil, free from rock, grass, wood or other similar material. If the material from the excavation is not satisfactory for backfill, the undercut shall be backfilled with gravel or slag. 
(9)  If rock is encountered in excavating the trenches, it shall be removed to a depth of at least six inches below grade and the trench brought to grade by filling with suitable material, thoroughly tamped to the contour of the bottom of the pipe. 
(e)  Shoring and sheeting. 
(1)  Upon written order of the manager of development services, sheeting or bracing may be left in place, to be embedded by the backfilling of the trench. The sheeting so left in place shall be cut off at an elevation at least 12 inches below surrounding grade and shall, in no case, be less than three feet below the finished grade of the street, or, in the absence of any street grade, from the surface of the ground. 
(2)  All sheeting and bracing not left in place shall be removed in such a manner as to not endanger the constructed pipe line, or other public or private structures or utilities. All voids left or caused by the withdrawal of sheeting shall be immediately refilled and compacted by ramming tools adapted for the purpose, by puddling, or otherwise as directed. 
(3)  When it is necessary that sheeting be driven to a depth of two feet or more below the invert elevation of the pipe for the protection of the bottom portion of the trench, the sheeting shall be cut off at the level of the top of the pipe, leaving the lower portion in place. 
(f)  Groundwater pumping. 
(1)  Pumping shall be conducted as may be necessary to permit the construction to proceed in an expeditious and workmanship manner. Removed water shall be disposed and excavations shall be constructed in such a manner as not to cause any nuisance or any injury to public health or public or private property or to any portion of the work completed or in progress, or to the surface of the streets or any impediment to the use of the streets by the public. 
(2)  In no case shall water be allowed to run over the foundation, the invert, or through the pipe until the pipe joints have hardened to the satisfaction of the manager of developments services. 
(g)  Laying pipe. 
(1)  All foreign matter or dirt shall be removed from the inside of the pipe before it is lowered into its position in the trench and it shall be kept clean by approved means during and after laying. All surplus jointing material and earth which may bind the entrance into the pipe in making the joint shall be removed. 
(2)  When pipe laying is not in progress, the open ends of the pipe shall be closed and no trench water shall be permitted to enter the pipe. 
(3)  Pipe shall be laid with bell ends facing in the direction of laying. For lines on an appreciable slope, bells shall face upgrade. 
(4)  Wherever necessary to deflect pipe from a straight line, either in vertical or horizontal plane, to avoid obstructions, to plumb stems, or where long radius curves are permitted, the degree of deflection shall be in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's recommendations. 
(5)  No pipe shall be laid in water or when the trench conditions or weather is unsuitable for such work. 
(6)  All types of pipe joints shall be installed in strict accordance with the recommendations of the joint manufacturer. 
(7)  No jointing of pipe on the bank or out of position as to line and grade will be permitted without prior approval of the manager of development services. 
(8)  The smoothness of the interior joint shall be determined by some suitable device, and no pipe shall be finally set until the inverts coincide. Maximum permitted size spigots by ASTM specifications shall not be joined with the minimum permitted size sockets. 
(9)  Wyes and tees will be inserted or proper opening provided in the pipe lines wherever the manager of development services may direct. All branches thus inserted unless connected with a service lateral, shall be closed by means of ductile iron, cast iron or PVC plugs. After a cover or a plug has been placed in any wye of tee, it shall be completely sealed with jointing compound so as to be watertight. All pipe for laterals shall be marked with metalized tape buried between 18 and 24 inches below ground. 
(10)  In pipes over eight feet in depth or whenever the manager of development services may direct, the tee or wye stacks (of an approved material) shall be extended from the connections at an angle of 45 degrees from vertical, and the end shall terminate a minimum of four feet below the ground surface. Where laterals are specified on the plans or as required by the manager of development services, they shall be laid to the existing property line or as the manager of development services may direct. The ends of stacks or laterals shall be closed with covers as specified for wye branches. A metal locating strip shall be placed as for wyes and tees. 
(11)  Whenever the pipe laying is stopped for the night or for any other cause, the end of the pipe shall be securely closed with a stopper to prevent the entrance of unsuitable material, and shall be secured to prevent the end pipe from being dislodged by movement of the placed backfill. 
(12)  Wherever service laterals are intercepted by the excavation for the new sewer pipe line, connection shall be maintained temporarily to the old sewer pipe line until the particular section of the new lines is completed, tested and approved by the manager of development services. The service lateral shall then be broken and reconnected to the new sewer line through the appropriate opening which have been placed in the line for that purpose. The dead end of the service lateral from the old sewer line shall be capped with a plug and Portland cement mortar as close as practical to the side of the excavation from which it emerges. If considered necessary by the manager of development services, a special concrete support will be constructed to support the plug. 
(13)  After each pipe section is laid, it shall be partly backfilled and made secure before the joint connection is poured and made. 
(14)  Workmen shall not walk or stand upon the newly laid pipe until the necessary backfill has been placed and tamped to prevent pipe displacement. 
(15)  Rubber boots shall be installed at the pipe/manhole connection as well as where two different types of pipe are connected. 
(h)  Backfill. 
(1)  Before backfilling any trench, the manager of development services shall examine the completed line and all joints and the contractor shall correct any deficiencies that exist. The manager of development services shall be given a 48-hour opportunity to inspect the work and report deficiencies prior to backfilling. 
(2)  No trenches or excavations shall be backfilled until concrete placed in the structures has acquired a suitable degree of hardness and the work shall be prosecuted expeditiously after it has been commenced. 
(3)  All backfilling material shall be carefully selected to ensure that it is free from roots, rocks or other unsuitable material and shall have a moisture content which will facilitate compaction. 
(4)  Selected backfill material from the excavation shall be placed alongside the pipe in layers not exceeding four inches in loose depth until at least two feet above the top of the pipe, then eight inches in loose depth. Care shall be taken to ensure thorough compaction of the fill under and around the haunches of the pipe. 
a.  Where a layer of soil material is too dry to achieve required compaction, uniformly apply water to layer as necessary to bring moisture within limits which permit compaction to at least the specified densities. 
b.  Do not place backfill or fill material on surfaces that are muddy, frozen or contain frost or ice. 
c.  All backfill or fill material shall be placed carefully to avoid damaging the pipe or to prevent wedging action of the backfill against the pipe. Place backfill uniformly around the pipe or structure to approximately the same elevation in each lift. 
d.  Compaction may be done with mechanical rammers or by hand tamping with heavy tampers with the tamping face of which shall not exceed 25 square inches. 
(5)  Achieve not less than the following percentages of maximum density of soil material compacted at optimum moisture content for each layer of soil material in place as determined by AASHTO T-99. 
a.  Right-of-way: Conform with more stringent requirements of the permit issuing authority and the requirements herein. 
b.  Backfill under all existing or proposed pavement for streets, sidewalks, or roadways except pavement under the jurisdiction of the state department of transportation shall be backfilled as hereinafter specified. After the pipe has been backfilled to a point two feet above the top of the pipe, the remainder of the trench shall be backfilled to the ground surface with material from the excavation. Backfill shall be placed in uniform layers not exceeding six inches in thickness. 
c.  The trench from two feet above the top of the pipe to within two feet of the top of the trench shall be compacted to not less than 95 percent maximum density as determined by AASHTO T-99. The remainder of the trench to within eight inches of the finish grade shall be compacted to not less than 95 percent maximum density. The top eight inches of the trench shall be compacted to not less than 100 percent maximum density as determined by AASHTO T-99. Where pavement is not replaced the top six inches of backfill shall be of a select, granular material. 
d.  Under and within two feet horizontal distance of paved walks, compact top six inches of subgrade and each layer of backfill and fill material to 95 percent of maximum density. 
e.  Under and within two feet horizontal distance of traffic using surfaces, compact layer of backfill and fill material to 95 percent of maximum density. 
f.  Under lawn and unpaved areas compact each layer of backfill or fill material to 85 percent maximum density. 
(6)  Connection of any newly installed lines shall not be made to existing lines or manholes until all sediment and water in the new lines has been removed and the work approved by the manager of development services. 
(7)  Sand. Flooding or jetting will be permitted where the clay and silt content of the backfill material is low enough to permit this method of consolidation. When allowed this method will be used from a point two feet above the top of the pipe to the original ground line. 
(8)  Muck. Flooding or jetting will be permitted or required where the clay or silt content or water content is so high as to make tamping ineffective. Flooding or jetting will be confined to that portion of the trench starting two feet above the top of pipe and ending two feet below the original ground surface. The last two feet shall be backfilled with selected earth and shall be mechanically rolled or tamped to the degree of compaction of the surrounding ground. 
(i)  Encasement pipe. 
(1)  Encasement pipe shall be installed by a dry boring method in which the casing pipe is place simultaneously with the boring action. 
(2)  Inspect the roadway or track directly above the work before, during and after the placing of the encasement for settlement. If settlement occurs, bring the roadway or track surface to its original grade by means approved by the manager of development services. 
(3)  After the carrier pipe has been installed in the encasement pipe, the space between the encasement pipe and the carrier pipe shall be filled with sand to the full encasement pipe diameter. In no case will blocking between the encasement pipe and the carrier pipe be permitted. Do not permit the encasement pipe to fill with water after the carrier pipe is installed and prior to placing of sand fill. If the carrier pipe is displaced by flotation, it shall be reinstalled to line and grade. The ends of the encasement pipe shall be sealed with an approved masonry plug. 
Sec. 5.18. - Permanent grassing. 
(a)  Providing adequate coverage of disturbed soils to prevent erosion and sediment buildup is the intent of this section. 
(b)  Grassing shall meet the requirements found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(c)  The extent of grassing consists of those areas which are disturbed by operations and are not covered over by improvements except where specifically noted otherwise together with any additional areas shown on the drawings or designated by the manager of development services. 
(d)  Grassing operations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Ground preparation; 
(2)  Seeding; 
(3)  Liming; 
(4)  Fertilizing; 
(5)  Mulching; 
(6)  Watering; and 
(7)  Maintenance of grassed areas. 
(e)  Specified work is minimum required, and any and all necessary materials and operation including reworking shall be performed to obtain specified results. 
(f)  Grassed areas will be considered acceptable when a viable stand of grass covers at least 90 percent of the total area with no bare spots exceeding one square foot and the ground surface is fully stabilized against erosion. 
(g)  Maintenance. Maintain grassed areas until the required grass coverage is achieved. 
(h)  Final inspection and acceptance. 
(1)  When the grassing work is completed, including maintenance, the city will, upon request, make an inspection to determine acceptability. 
(2)  Where inspected work does not comply with the requirements the contractor shall replace rejected work and continue specified maintenance until reinspected by the city and found to be acceptable. 
(i)  Trench grassing. 
(1)  All disturbed areas adjacent to the work shall be grassed and an appropriate grass coverage is achieved. 
(2)  Maintain as required to obtain grass coverage within 90 days, regrass after 90 days if desirable stand [not] obtained. 
(3)  No bahia grass will be permitted on city right-of-way or easements. Care shall be taken to match existing materials in developed areas. 
(4)  Apply straw or hay mulch, spread uniformly with 24 hours after seeding and/or planting. 
Sec. 5.19. - Miscellaneous construction specifications. 
(a)  Removing and replacing pavement. All paved streets or other paved areas cut by these operations shall be repaved in a workmanlike manner as specified. All work shall be in accordance with the state department of transportation's current standard specifications. Prior to excavation in paved streets or other paved areas, the pavement shall be cut along straight and perpendicular lines parallel to the centerline of the pipe. Upon completion of pipe laying, backfill shall be placed and compacted. Just prior to repaving, jagged edges shall be squared and cut to a string line so that the patch will represent a neat appearance. Centerline stripes of other pavement markings which existed prior to the start of construction shall be replaced. 
(b)  Dust control. At all times provide for the control of dust within residential areas and such other areas where dust is a nuisance to the public by sprinkling with water or other approved means. Any labor, water or material shall be provide at the expense of the permit holder. 
(c)  Disturbed areas. All areas not owned by the permit holder that are disturbed due to direct or indirect construction operations shall be restored to a condition equal or better than the condition of the areas prior to the operations. 
(d)  Existing utilities. Protect, maintain and keep in service all existing utilities and service connections during construction operations on the new water lines. Any existing utilities cut or damaged shall be repaired immediately and the service restored on the existing lines. 
ARTICLE VI. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6.01. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the Leesburg separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Leesburg separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Leesburg separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the Leesburg separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the Leesburg separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the incorporated area of Leesburg. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law; nor is it intended to modify or repeal any rule or regulation of the City of Leesburg Water and Sewer. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law, or any rule or regulation of the City of Leesburg Water and Sewer, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law, or rule or regulation of the City of Leesburg Water and Sewer, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The Director of the Development Services Department of Leesburg shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 6.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the Leesburg separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the Leesburg separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 6.03. 
Leesburg separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, Leesburg streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the Leesburg City Council; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything, which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
Sec. 6.03. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the Leesburg separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the Leesburg City Council/Development Services Department as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the Leesburg separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the Leesburg separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the Leesburg separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the City of Leesburg Water and Sewer. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the development services department requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period as determined by the director of the development service department within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the development services department. 
Sec. 6.04. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the development services department prior to allowing discharges to the Leesburg separate storm sewer system. 
Sec. 6.05. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The development services department shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the development services department. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the development services department ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The development services department shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the development services department to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The development services department may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the development services department. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the development services department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the development services department access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the development services department has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the development services department is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the director of the development services department may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 6.06. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the Leesburg separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the director of the development services department authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours after the release of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the development services department within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies (Lee County Emergency Management Director) and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
Sec. 6.07. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the development services department is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The development services department is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the development services department finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the development services department may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Leesburg City Council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the development services department. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Leesburg City Council or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the development services department then representatives of the Leesburg City Council may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 30 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the provisions below. 
(f)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the development services department may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(h)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the Leesburg City Council may seek cumulative remedies. 
(i)  Recovery of costs. The Leesburg City Council may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
ARTICLE VII. - STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7.01. - Findings of fact and purpose. 
(a)  Findings of fact. It is hereby determined that: 
•  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
•  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
•  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
•  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or "credits." The Lee County Greenspace Plan provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those greenspace areas which provide stormwater management quality and quantity benefits; 
•  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution. 
Therefore, the Leesburg City Council has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up; 
(8)  Develop policies, programs and projects that result in less impact to streams while creating sustainable communities; 
(9)  Identifying opportunities in impacted watersheds, and where practicable to retrofit or improve existing Best Management Practices (BMPs), install new BMPs where needed, disconnect impervious areas, and improve stream stability and habitat. 
Sec. 7.02. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the development services director or his designee to be a hotspot land use under the definitions of this article; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items (1) and (2) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a major subdivision or phased development project as defined in the subdivision regulations; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the development services director or his designee. 
Sec. 7.03. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The development services director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 7.04. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
Sec. 7.05. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
Sec. 7.06. - Stormwater design manual. 
The Leesburg City Council will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Volumes 1 and 2 and any relevant local addenda for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
Sec. 7.07. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the Leesburg City Council or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to Group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities, which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the Leesburg City Council to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Sec. 7.08. - General criteria. 
(a)  A development's storm drainage facilities shall be designed so that there is no increase in the flooding of property upstream or downstream of the development without all the affected landowner's consent in the form of recorded drainage easements. 
(b)  A system emphasizing a natural as opposed to an engineered drainage strategy shall be encouraged. 
(c)  The storm drainage facilities shall have the hydraulic characteristics to accommodate the expected design flow of stormwaters, which consists of the: 
(1)  Off-site and on-site stormwater, including stormwater coming into a tract from upstream; 
(2)  Discharge of water into a natural drainageway; and 
(3)  Means to convey water to a point where it will flow downstream into a stream, water channel or drainageway, or where it can be connected into an adequate existing or proposed facility. 
(d)  Storm drainage facilities shall be designed on the basis of ultimate known or projected developments (proposed by the developer) for the tributary watershed. If a stormwater management basin (holding, detention or retention pond) is to be constructed, only the storage volume required for the immediate proposed construction is required to be constructed. As additional areas are developed, the additional storage volume is required to be constructed. Even though only what is required at the time of construction is to be built, the ultimate known development shall be totally designed for at the time of first proposed phase of development. 
(e)  In no circumstances shall runoff be diverted to public or private property or public or private rights-of-way without recorded easements from the property owner. 
(f)  No storm drainage shall empty into a sanitary sewer line or system. 
(g)  Special consideration shall be given to innovative drainage designs that would not adversely affect the quality of development in a particular area. 
(h)  No damming or ponding of water in gutters, public streets or other waterways shall be permitted except to a very limited extent where the manager of development services shall consider it necessary. 
(i)  Flow or storage of water across, over, or on public streets or parking lots intended for use by the public, except through approved, properly constructed drainage systems, shall not be allowed during the storm event. 
(j)  The 100-year flow pattern (overland and collection system) shall be defined, and any existing or future structures located in the overland flow path shall be elevated or constructed to above the defined flooding level. Final subdivision plats shall state which structures have minimum floor elevations. 
Sec. 7.09. - Connection to existing stormwater system. 
(a)  If a public stormwater sewer system is reasonably accessible as determined by the manager of development services, the developer shall connect such storm drainage systems and shall do all grading and provide all drainage structures necessary to properly carry the water to the storm drainage system. 
(b)  If a public stormwater sewer system is not accessible as determined by the manager of development services, the developer shall not connect with such storm drainage systems and shall do all grading and provide all drainage structures that are necessary to properly carry water to locations in compliance with this article. 
Sec. 7.10. - Residential subdivision lot drainage. 
(a)  Residential subdivision lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern. 
(b)  Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots. 
(c)  For new dwelling structures and appurtenances to include all infrastructure facilities and garages directly serving any dwellings located on any lot within a "major" subdivision as defined in the subdivision regulations the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Requirements. 
a.  All dwelling structures and appurtenances on any major subdivision lots shall have all finished floors elevated to at least 24 inches above the centerline of the road. 
b.  Earthen fill shall be placed around the foundation of all dwelling structures so that the elevation of the finished grade immediately adjacent to the foundation of the structure shall be at least 12 inches above the road centerline. The grade shall be sloped away from the structure for a distance of not less than 25 feet at a minimum grade of four percent (25:1 slope) and a maximum grade of 25 percent (4:1 slope). 
(2)  Permit process. 
a.  At building permit application submittal the builder shall: 
1.  Sign an elevation affidavit form (provided by the building inspection department). On the affidavit the builder shall indicate the proposed elevation of the structure's finished floor and of the finished soil grade immediately outside of the structure. The finished floor elevation and the soil grade elevation shall be measured in relation to the road centerline elevation immediately adjacent to the structure (for lots with double road frontages the elevation may be to either of the roads). This may be as simple as stating: 
i.  Existing road centerline elevation plus zero inches. 
ii.  Finished soil grade elevation plus 12 inches above road centerline and 
iii.  Finished floor grade elevation plus 24 inches above road centerline. 
(3)  Field verification. 
a.  For field verification the builder shall: 
1.  Drive a two-inch by four-inch stake in the ground immediately outside of the foundation at the side of the structure facing the road. The stake shall have three marks. The marks on the stake shall indicate the elevation of the road centerline, the finished soil grade elevation, and the finished floor elevation. It shall be the builder's responsibility to determine the elevations and to verify to the building inspector that the three elevations are correct before any concrete is poured. If there is any discrepancy in the elevations as determined by the building inspector the builder shall be required to prove to the building inspector's satisfaction that the elevations are at least the minimum height above road centerline elevation. If the builder is not able to verify the elevations to the satisfaction of the building inspector then concrete shall not be poured until the problem is resolved. 
(4)  Exemptions. 
a.  Exemptions for relief due to extreme sloping lots and changes in topographic contours (downward and away from the roadway) that would make it unreasonable to construct the structure with finished floors two feet above the road centerline may be granted provided the following information is submitted prior to a building permit being issued: 
1.  A topographic survey of the lot showing one-foot contours stamped by either an engineer or surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia shall be submitted. The survey shall indicate the proposed location of the structure and all associated supporting infrastructure to include any well, septic tank and drain field, HVAC, etc. 
2.  A letter from the engineer or surveyor detailing the reasons why the exemption should be granted shall accompany the topographic survey document. 
3.  An engineer or surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia shall also determine whether the lot is located within or adjacent to a closed contour based upon local topography. If the lot is within or adjacent to the confines of a closed contour the engineer or surveyor shall certify that the building site for the dwelling is already at least three feet above the 100-year high water level. If the building site is not already at least three feet above the 100-year high water level the engineer or surveyor shall establish a finished floor elevation (FFE) so that the finished floor is at least three feet above the 100-year high water elevation of any potential ponding stormwater. 
a.  The 100-year high water elevation shall include pre- and post-developed runoff coming to the site and shall include any stormwater retention or detention area whether manmade or natural. This shall include the ponding of stormwater on the lot in question or any adjacent lot or lots within the confines of a sub-basin drainage area located in the subdivision. This shall also include any basin area adjacent to the immediate subdivision phase but still impacting lots within that subdivision phase. 
b.  If a finished floor elevation is required to be established then the formal elevation certificate process shall be followed; requiring that a flood elevation certificate shall be submitted prior to the building permit being issued and another one after the first finished floor is established to verify that the finished floor is at least at or above the established elevation. All applicable construction practices and floodplain development requirements shall be adhered to. 
(d)  For any dwellings and appurtenances to include all infrastructure facilities and garages directly serving any dwellings built on individually subdivided lots located outside of the confines of a major subdivision or any lot located in a minor subdivision as defined in the subdivision regulations the following shall apply: 
(1)  Requirements. 
a.  All dwelling structures shall have the finished floors built to an elevation that is at least three feet above the highest adjacent natural soil grade immediately outside of the footprint of the foundation. 
b.  Earthen fill shall be placed around the foundation of all dwelling structures so that the elevation of the soil grade immediately adjacent to the foundation of the structure shall be no more than 18 inches below the first finished floor on any side of the structure facing an uphill grade. (This requirement may be waived on any side of the structure where the natural grade falls away from the foundation.) The earthen fill shall slope away from the structure at a minimum grade of four percent (25:1 slope) and no steeper than a 25 percent (4:1 slope) from the foundation to the point where it ties in to natural dirt grade on the uphill side or sides of the structure. 
(2)  Permit process. 
a.  At building permit application submittal the builder shall: 
1.  Sign an elevation affidavit form (provided by the building inspection department). On the affidavit the builder shall indicate the proposed elevation of the structure's finished floor as related to highest existing natural dirt grade immediately outside of the structure. This may be as simple as stating: 
i.  Highest adjacent natural soil grade plus zero feet. 
ii.  Finished soil grade on the uphill side of foundation to be not less than 18 inches below the first finished floor. 
iii.  Finished floor grade plus three feet above highest adjacent natural soil grade. 
(3)  Field verification. 
a.  For field verification the builder shall: 
1.  Drive a two-inch by four-inch stake in the ground immediately outside of the foundation at the point where the highest adjacent natural soil grade exists immediately outside of the foundation. The stake shall have three marks. The marks on the stake shall indicate: (1) the elevation of the highest adjacent natural soil grade; (2) the finished soil grade on the uphill side of foundation; and (3) the finished floor elevation. It shall be the builder's responsibility to verify to the building inspector that the three elevations are correct before any concrete is poured. If there is any discrepancy in the elevations as determined by the building inspector the builder shall be required to prove to the building inspectors satisfaction that the elevations are at least the minimum height above road centerline elevation. If the builder is not able to verify the elevations to the satisfaction of the building inspector then concrete shall not be poured until the problem is resolved. 
(4)  Exemptions. 
a.  Exemptions for relief due to extreme sloping lots and changes in topographic contours (vertically upward and away from the roadway) that would make it unreasonable to construct the structure with finished floors three feet above the highest adjacent natural dirt grade may be granted by the development services director provided the following information is submitted prior to a building permit being issued: 
1.  A topographic survey of the lot showing one-foot contours stamped by either an engineer or surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia shall be submitted. The survey shall indicate the proposed location of the structure and all associated supporting infrastructure to include any well, septic tank and drain field, HVAC, etc. 
2.  A letter from the engineer or surveyor detailing the reasons why the exemption should be granted. The letter shall indicate whether the existing natural dirt grade at the proposed building site is at least two feet above the centerline of the roadway fronting the structure. 
i.  If the documentation provides supporting information that the requirement to elevate the first finished floor three feet above the highest adjacent natural dirt grade is extreme or unreasonable and that the structure shall not be threatened by any ponding stormwater then the development services director may wave the elevation requirement. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 7.11. - Permit application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the development services department a permit application on a form provided by the development services department for that purpose. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 7.12 ; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 7.13; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 7.14, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with section 7.15, if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with sections 7.16 and 7.17. 
Sec. 7.12. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, the land owner or developer shall meet with the development services director or his designee for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary planning of the subdivision. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan, which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum the following: existing and proposed topography, including all closed contours within the watershed basin that are immediately adjacent to or contained within the development site; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area, as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions including the (wet) seasonal high water table, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including the following: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
Local watershed plans, the Lee County Greenspace Protection Plan and map, and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
Sec. 7.13. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth below. 
This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: 
a.  A topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; 
b.  Acreage, soil types including the wet season water table and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; 
c.  All perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; 
d.  All existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; 
e.  Direction of flow and exits from the site; 
f.  Analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and 
g.  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
The predevelopment conditions for redevelopment sites shall be as follows: 
a.  An assumption of "B" soils from the hydrologic soils group will be used; 
b.  An assumption of the predevelopment land use will be "open spaces;" 
c.  An assumption of the predevelopment cover will be "fair." 
These assumptions may be altered if: supporting data; including historical documentation or more in depth soils information can be supplied by the developer's engineer. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include the following: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 3 of this article; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in division 3 of this article must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include the following: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, that take into account the wet seasonal high water table, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 3 of this article; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Leesburg Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include the following: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. A detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for all commercial, industrial, and institutional development sites greater than one-quarter acre in size for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, and responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the Leesburg City Council as provided in section 7.14, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section 7.14. 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the development services director or his designee that all other applicable permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
Sec. 7.14. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the Leesburg City Council requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the Leesburg City Council, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site for all commercial, industrial, and institutional development sites greater than one-quarter acre in size. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the development services director or his designee prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the Leesburg City Council may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in division 5 of this article. 
The Leesburg City Council, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
Sec. 7.15. - Performance and maintenance bonds. 
Maintenance bonds shall be required as defined in section 3.22. 
The developer shall post a performance bond in the amount of 110 percent of the total cost of construction for the stormwater management facility. The bond shall be kept in force until the development services director or his designee has performed a site inspection and has accepted all construction for the entire development site including the stormwater management facility. 
Sec. 7.16. - Application procedure. 
Applications for a permit under this article shall follow the permit application procedure defined in article III of this ordinance. In addition, land development permit applications involving stormwater management projects shall also include the additional requirements of this article, as follows: 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the Development Services Department of Leesburg. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 7.11 (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(3)  The development services director or his designee shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the development services director or his designee shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing including what is required to bring the application into compliance with all applicable city ordinances. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subparagraph (3) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such re-submittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the development services director or his designee that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the development services director or his designee shall issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this and all other applicable ordinances and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan or a stop work order shall be issued immediately; 
c.  The development services director or his designee shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the development services director or his designee; and 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 7.32. 
Sec. 7.17. - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee schedule adopted by the Leesburg City Council and shall be paid in full at the time the permit is applied for. 
Sec. 7.18. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
The stormwater management plans for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the development services department which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility if the offsite facility is available and if all provision have been made to use the capacity of the facility. 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the development services director or his designee that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
DIVISION 3. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article. 

Sec. 7.19. - Generally. 
Drainage collection and conveyance shall be as follows: 
(1)  All drainage computations must show the drainage area, runoff constraints, time of concentration and discharge for the required storm frequency. These computations must be in a report format and show high waters in feet above the inlet of the pipe or above the flow line of the grate. All structures must have computations for inlet control and outlet control. The methods for calculations shall be clearly stated and all assumptions clearly defined. 
(2)  These standards are to serve as a guide to engineers versed in drainage analysis and design. Unique circumstances requiring special or alternative design methods shall be brought to the attention of the city early in the project life so that agreement on problem approach can be reached without impacting the project progress. 
(3)  Peak flow and total runoff volume after development will not exceed the peak flow and total runoff volume prior to development for the following storm events two-year, five-year, ten-year, 25-year, 50-year, and 100-year unless the downstream landowner has granted legal permission to increase flooding. 
a.  Design storm of collection systems: 
1.  Ten-year event for drainage sub-basins with ten-year peak flows less than 75 cubic feet per second (hereinafter "cfs"). 
2.  Twenty-five-year event for drainage sub-basins with ten-year peak flows between 75 cfs and 200 cfs. 
3.  Fifty-year event for drainage sub-basins with ten-year peak flows greater than 200 cfs. 
4.  As the collection grows in size, the peak flow will increase and when the lower peak flow limits are exceeded then the higher design storm events are required at that point in the system. 
Sec. 7.20. - Water quality. 
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. Unless such presumption is rebutted by competent evidence presented to the development services department, it will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the development services director or his designee and as defined in section 7.07 are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
Sec. 7.21. - Stream channel protection. 
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
a.  This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the development services director or his designee for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a manmade channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream streambank or channel integrity. 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
Sec. 7.22. - Collection and conveyance. 
(a)  General inlet design criteria. 
(1)  Design and spacing requirements governing the street drainage collection system shall prevent ponding, overflow, and flooding of streets and intersections; remove runoff from surfaces where the flows exceed the criteria for flow and velocity; and shall provide for proper maintenance. Given these functions, the street drainage collection system shall locate inlets at low points and at other points required for proper drainage and inlets should be placed where they can efficiently intercept and capture water flow. The safety of the traveling public must also be addressed in the proposed design. 
(2)  All inlet grates shall be designed to avoid blockage by debris and to address bicycle and pedestrian safety. 
(3)  Locating curb inlets in the radius of intersections or driveways is not recommended and such shall be avoided if possible. 
(4)  Street drainage shall not flow through an intersection by means of crossing the roadway. Street drainage is allowed to follow the intersection radius though this is not recommended and shall be avoided if possible. 
(b)  Pipe design. 
(1)  The minimum pipe size to be a component part of a public storm drainage system shall be 18 inches in diameter. 
(2)  A manhole, junction box, or inlet shall be constructed at any point where the storm pipe has additional runoff added, has another pipe joining it, or has changed direction, grade, size, or alignment. The maximum length of storm sewer pipe between such structures shall be as follows. 

 
(3)  Headwalls, headwalls with wing walls, sloped paved headwalls, or flared end sections shall be constructed at both ends of the pipe, except where beginning or terminating in a manhole or inlet structure. This requirement applies only to pipes located with city, state, or federal rights-of-way, easements or other lands. 
(4)  Pipe cover, compaction requirements and pipe type for storm pipes: 
Under or within five feet of street pavement: 

 
In city easements, rights-of-way or other lands but not under pavement: 

 
a.  Definitions. 
Pipe cover means distance from the top of pavement to outside top of pipe, centerline and pavement edges checked. 
b.  Backfill required. 
1.  Concrete. Lean concrete (2,000 psi) placed one-half pipe diameter to top of base material. 
2.  Eighty-five percent or 95 percent may be required. May require test results (showing compliance) to be given to the manager of development services at his discretion, requires backfill to meet 85 percent or 95 percent of maximum density as determined by AASHTO T-99 (gravel may be used as an alternate to soil backfill no testing required). 
3.  Eighty-five percent or 95 percent spot check. Only in adverse situations shall test results (showing compliance) be required to be given to the manager of development services at his discretion, requires backfill to meet 85 percent or 95 percent of maximum density as determined by AASHTO T-99. 
c.  Pipe type. 
1.  RCP. Reinforced concrete pipe, class III, meeting state department of transportation specifications. 
2.  AP. Corrugated, smooth lines, or structural plate aluminum pipe, meeting state department of transportation specifications. 
3.  PP. Corrugated, smooth lined, or truss plastic pipe, reviewed on case by case basis with reference to state department of transportation specifications. 
4.  CMP. Corrugated, smooth lined, or structural plate steel pipe that meets state departments of transportation specifications. 
5.  Design life (in respect to corrosion, abrasion, weathering, etc.) of pipes is 50 years. Construction plans using metal and/or plastic pipes must provide information proving the design life is met. Standard tar coating for metal pipes shall not be considered as part of the protection. The procedure to determine adequacy shall be from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' publication Life Cycle Cost for Drainage Structures Technical Report GL-88-2. 
6.  Safety grates shall be applied to all inlet and outlet pipe ends when pipe is greater than 36 inches inside diameter and is a roadway cross drain pipe. 
7.  Energy dissipater devices are required at ends of all pipe outlets. 
d.  Open ditch design. Design shall typically conform to the following: 
1.  Design of open ditches shall be from the Georgia Stormwater Manual Volume 2. 
2.  In those cases where the grade of the ditch causes drainage water to exceed the ditch's erosive velocity limit, the ditch shall be lined with a suitable lining to prevent erosion. Such appropriate linings include concrete, suitable pavement, sod, or jute mesh. Ditch erosive velocity limits are listed in "Maximum Permissible Velocities in Vegetal-lines Channels." Federal Highway Administration, Hydraulic Engineering Circular #15 (HEC-15), and Vegetated Water or Stormwater Conveyance Channel, Chapter 6, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
3.  Drainage ditches shall be a minimum of two feet in width at the bottom and the sides shall be constructed to a slope of 4H:1V. 
4.  Design stormwater depth not to exceed two and one-half feet unless access is limited to it, such as by fencing. 
Sec. 7.23. - Stormwater management area design. 
(a)  Overall detention/retention area design shall typically conform to the following: 
(1)  Emergency spillways designed to pass the 100-year storm post-developed peak flow. Emergency spillways are to be placed in undisturbed soils wherever possible. 
(2)  Any retention basin shall have the ability to percolate a volume of one inch of runoff/acre of watershed within seven days. 
a.  All retention basins shall be designed to store the post developed runoff volume for the two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year storm events. 
b.  When the pre-developed and post-developed runoff volumes are collected and concentrated into a closed or channeled storm conveyance system and where that volume is directed to a retention facility then the capacity for that entire pre and post developed runoff storage volume shall be created within the retention facility. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  All proposed retention ponds, whether manmade or natural stormwater storage ponds, shall have the pre developed seasonal high water table elevation established based upon a detailed site soil investigation survey. 
(1)  A detailed site investigation survey shall be performed prior to plan design to determine what soils are present in the immediate confines of the proposed retention pond. The survey shall consist of either: two excavation pits located at opposite ends of the retention site or four three-inch diameter auger bores located at each corner of the retention site. The test pit and the bores shall extend vertically at least two feet below the bottom elevation of the proposed retention pond and shall be within the confines of the lowest proposed bottom contour. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the soil investigation: if the soils at the bottom of all of the test pits or bores have the ability to percolate a volume of stormwater equal to or greater than one inch of runoff per acre of watershed within a seven-day period then the retention pond shall be allowed with the required storage capacity constructed in a typical vertical configuration starting with excavation at the existing natural grade and going vertically downward to the proposed elevation for the retention pond bottom. If however any of the test pits or bores in the soils survey determines that the soils will not percolate at a volume equal to or greater than one inch of runoff per acre of watershed within a seven-day period then the storage required for retention shall be created by excavating horizontally over an area of sufficient size to store the required volume above the minimum or most restrictive elevation related to the depth of the seasonal high water table for the soil series contained in the top five feet of natural ground. 
(1)  To determine the soil series within the top five feet of the natural grade at least four samples (to be spaced at least 75 feet but not more than 100 feet apart) per acre shall be taken. The results of the soil samples shall be determined and the most restrictive soils series shall be used for determining the minimum depth to the seasonal high water table. 
(e)  The Soils Series Interpretation table located in Appendix B of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual shall be used for determining the elevation of the seasonal high water table. 
(1)  The volume and area for calculating the required retention capacity shall be based upon the depth to the seasonal high water table that shall be the most restrictive (minimum depth) listed in the table measured vertically from the natural ground to the top of the seasonal high water table. Upon the finding of the minimum depth to the seasonal high water table for the most restrictive soil series (after determining the soil series sample results) the storage capacity for retention purposes shall be created above the seasonal high water table. 
(f)  The design engineer shall certify that a soils scientist or professional engineer specializing in soil surveys classified the soils. If the pond is proposed to be built in a typical vertical configuration then the design engineer shall provide certification that based upon the determinations made by the soils scientist or professional engineer specializing in soil surveys that the soils have the ability to percolate a volume equal to or greater than one inch of runoff per acre of watershed within a seven-day period. 
(g)  The results of the soils series testing, the percolation test, the locations of the soil sample, and the engineers certification letter shall be submitted to the Development Services Department at the same time the site plan and application for a Land Disturbance Permit is submitted. 
(h)  Side slopes (into basin) steeper than 6:1 shall require a limited access control device such as a fence around the perimeter. 
(i)  Side slopes (into basin) shall not be steeper than 4:1 in any case. 
(j)  Dike requirements. 
(1)  Dike side slopes (outside pond) not steeper than 3:1. 
(2)  Dike top width: 

 
(3)  Dike is to be made from soil which has a permeability of 0.2 inches per hour or less or has a clay core with permeability of 0.06 inches per hour. 
(4)  Dike shall be subject to compaction tests. One per 2,000 square feet six-inch loose lift placement, 95 percent standard Proctor. 
(k)  A ten-foot-wide service drive shall be required around management area if possible. Drive shall not be part of side slopes. 
(l)  Minimum one-foot freeboard above flow depth in spillway to top of dike is required. 
(m)  Anti-seep collar for all pipes through dike shall be required when dike is higher than four feet. 
(n)  Riser and stand pipes shall have a trash rack per the design in the current edition of the Georgia Stormwater Manual, Volume 2. 
(o)  Discharge pipes shall meet the same requirements as for storm pipes. 
Sec. 7.24. - Storm sewer system materials. 
All materials shall typically conform to the following specifications: 
(1)  Concrete pipe. 
a.  The basic specification for concrete pipe is 18 inches and over, ASTM C 76, reinforced concrete pipe furnished in not less than eight-foot lengths. 
b.  Each length or joint of concrete pipe shall have been stamped at the plant of manufacture showing strength or reinforcement class, wall thickness designation, date of manufacture and manufacture symbol. 
c.  Joints. Fill the annular space with grout and inside of each joint shall be wiped smooth. Use grout mixture consisting of not more than five gallons of water per sack of cement. Utilize cement conforming to AASHTO M85 or M150. 
(2)  Elliptical concrete pipe. 
a.  Basic specification. ASTM C 507, reinforced, elliptical sewer pipe furnished in not less than eight-foot lengths. 
b.  Maximum absorption by standard ASTM test may not exceed seven percent and pipe must be aged at manufacturing plant for not less than five days. 
c.  Identification. Stamp each length or joint of elliptical concrete pipe at the plant of manufacture showing strength or reinforcement class, wall thickness designation, date of manufacture, manufacturer's symbol and quadrant reinforcing symbol. 
d.  Joints. Use one of the following jointing systems. Once a system is selected it shall be utilized for the entire project unless specified or authorized otherwise. 
1.  Cement grout type which results in entire joint annular space being filled with grout and inside of each joint being wiped smooth. Use grout mixture consisting of not more than five gallons of water per sack of cement. Utilize cement conforming to AASHTO M85 or M150. 
2.  Preformed flexible pipe joint compound to be confined in the tongue and groove joint meeting federal specification SS-S-00210. 
3.  Corrugated plastic pipe. Corrugated, flexible conduit with slip-on joints made of polyethylene conforming with ASTM F405 and F449. 
4.  Bituminous coated corrugated aluminum pipe. 
i.  Basic specification. AASHTO M196 with full uniform bituminous coating having minimum thickness of 0.05 inch and conforming with AASHTO M190. 
ii.  Joints. Fully bituminous coated coupling bands manufactured from base metal as pipe. Utilize bands of same manufacturer as pipe. 
iii.  Pipe fittings. Use standard, factory fabricated adapters, wyes, tees, and other necessary fittings comparable to pipe with which connected. 
(3)  Coarse granular material for pipe bedding. 
a.  Crushed stone, crushed gravel or natural gravel meeting ASTM C33, and having No. 67 gradation (¾ to No. 4 sieve). 
b.  Fine granular material for pipe bedding shall be uniformly graded, natural or manufactured sand composed of hard, durable particles with 100 percent passing a No. 4 sieve, not more than 25 percent passing a No. 100 sieve and containing no more than 25 percent total of silt and clay. 
(4)  Miscellaneous materials. 
a.  Clay brick. ASTM C32, grade MS or ASTM C32 sewer and manhole brick or ASTM C216 facing brick. Grade MW or SW, of nominal size 8 x 2¼ x 3¾ inches, select color and texture. 
b.  Concrete block. ASTM C55, grade P-II of nominal size 8 x 2¼ x 3¾ inches, gray-white concrete color with smoothed formed natural texture. 
c.  Rubble stone. Provide stone not less than six inches thick and 12 inches wide and of proper shape to bring masonry structures to true lines, shapes and elevations. Smaller stones may be used to fill interior of walls. Provide stone free of rounded, worn, weathered and scarred surfaces, and also free of segregation, seam, cracks, pyrite intrusions and other defects tending to reduce weather resistance. 
(5)  Precast concrete drainage structures. 
a.  Use precast, concrete drainage structures, including precast concrete pipe sections, flared end sections, adjustment rings, tapered sections, drop inlets, manholes, and other related products which conform to the requirements of ASTM C478 and/or C789. Furnish structure having a minimum wall thickness of four inches or 1/12 the interior diameter, whichever is greater. Accurately cast openings to meet specific project requirements. 
(6)  Structure steps. 
a.  Use steps conforming with applicable government safety regulations and the requirements stated below. 
b.  Provide individual steps, mortared or cast into walls, and conical tops of all manholes and similar structures. Align steps so as to form a continuous ladder with steps equally spaced vertically, no more than 16 inches apart, using steps having a minimum length of ten inches and which project a minimum clear distance of four inches from the wall. Use steps designed to prevent the foot from sliding off the end, and whose exposed parts are free of any hazardous, sharp edges, burrs or projections. 
c.  Steps, fastenings and installation must be capable of supporting a single, concentrated load of 300 pounds. Use designs based on imposed loads being concentrated at such points as will cause maximum stresses in the structural element being considered. 
d.  Plastic coated steel meeting the requirements of ASTM C478, D1246 and A615 grade 60. 
(7)  Metal castings. 
a.  Provide castings of uniform quality, free from blowholes, porosity, hard spots, shrinkage, distortion or other significant defects, and having smooth surfaces free of casting sand, fins and burrs. Use component parts which fit together uniformly, in a secure fashion. Where castings have lids or covers, make provisions for a non-rocking fit. Use gray iron castings meeting the ASTM A38, class 30 specification. Shop paint all casting surfaces with not less than one coat of asphaltic paint. 
(8)  Mortar materials. 
a.  Cement. Portland cement ASTM C150, type I or II. 
b.  Sand. ASTM C144. 
c.  Water. Clean, fresh, free from oil, acid, organic material and other detrimental substances. 
(9)  Additional specification for storm sewer. 
a.  Precast concrete units. 
1.  Set precast units plumb and to exact grade on approximately three inches of compacted sand bedding. 
2.  In the event field conditions necessitate additional pipe connections for which no holes have been cast, neatly chip necessary holes, being careful not to crack portions of unit to remain. Replace any units excessively damaged as a result of field modification. 
3.  For storm sewer units constructed of more than one precast element, fill all joints solidly with mortar. Use mortar or concrete to seal joints between units and connecting pipe. 
b.  Masonry structures. 
1.  Examine masonry units before installation and reject all units which are cracked, damaged or in any way fail to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
2.  Set masonry units in full mortar bed, carefully fit units around pipe openings, etc., so as to fill all voids. Completely fill any remaining voids with mortar. Do not use mortar which has been mixed more than 45 minutes or which has been retempered. 
3.  When using multi-wythe construction, make every fifth coarse a header coarse. 
4.  Do not install masonry when air temperature is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit and falling. 
5.  Do not backfill against masonry structures until they are at least seven days old. In cold weather delay backfilling for a longer time to allow additional curing time for mortar. 
c.  Metal castings. 
1.  Examine each casting before installation and reject all castings which are cracked, damaged or in any other way fail to meet the specifications. 
2.  Clean castings of dirt, mud, grease, etc., before installation. 
3.  Set castings according to location and arrangement shown on the plan. Rigidly support castings to maintain true alignment and elevation. Where castings are located in concrete or mortar construction, thoroughly work concrete or mortar around the casting so as to eliminate voids and provide sold bearing surfaces and rigid construction. 
4.  Make frames subject to traffic firm and stable under actual traffic conditions. When constructed in paved areas, set frames to conform with exact pavement surface including tilting frame where necessary to match pavement surface. 
Sec. 7.25. - Overbank flooding protection. 
Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under section 4.02 is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(1)  This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the development services director or his designee for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
Sec. 7.26. - Extreme flooding protection. 
Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(1)  This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the development services director or his designee for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
Sec. 7.27. - Structural stormwater controls. 
All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the development services director or his designee before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the development services director or his designee may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
Sec. 7.28. - Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. 
The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 7.20. The applicant may, if approved by the development services director or his designee, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Sec. 7.29. - Drainage system guidelines. 
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual, and for all retention facilities shall account for the seasonal high water elevation as shown in section 7.23; and 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
Sec. 7.30. - Dam design guidelines. 
Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS OF POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 7.31. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the development services director or his designee or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the development services director or his designee. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
All inspections shall be documented with written reports submitted to the development services director's office and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. Such corrective action shall be taken by the party responsible therefore within a reasonable time as required by the development services director. 
Sec. 7.32. - Final inspection and as-built plans. 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy or final approval shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the development services director or his designee is required before the release of any performance bonds or securities can occur. 
DIVISION 5. - ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES AND PRACTICES 

Sec. 7.33. - Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
The responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement shall inspect a stormwater management facility or practice on a periodic basis. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the development services director or his designee shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify a reasonable time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the Leesburg City Council may correct the violation as provided in section 7.36. 
Inspection programs by the development services director or his designee may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to, the following: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, the following: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
Sec. 7.34. - Right of entry for inspection. 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the development services director or his designee to enter upon the land of the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of routine inspections of the stormwater management facility located upon or related to such property. This right-of-entry also includes the right to enter upon the land of a property when the development services director or his designee has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred, and also to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
Sec. 7.35. - Records of maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide written records of all maintenance and repairs, whether routine or emergency, to the development services director or his designee every six months. 
Sec. 7.36. - Failure to maintain. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the Leesburg City Council, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The Leesburg City Council may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work. A lien shall be placed on the property, and may be assessed against the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the same manner as such taxes are collected. 
DIVISION 6. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 7.37. - Generally. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction, which is continuous with respect to time, is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
Sec. 7.38. - Notice of violation. 
If the development services director or his designee determines or reasonably believes that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan, the provisions of this article, or has engaged in activities covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. The notice of violation shall be personally served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Leesburg City Council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), but the filing of such appeal shall not stay the enforcement action, and, unless otherwise order by the Leesburg City Council, no further development of the property shall be undertaken during the time that such appeal remains pending. 
Sec. 7.39. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, and no appeal has been filed, or if filed, such appeal has been denied, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the development services director or his designee, shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of his intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the development services director or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The development services director or his designee may issue a stop work order, which shall be personally served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The development services director or his designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy or grant final approval for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The development services director or his designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated [upon such conditions as the development services director or his designee may deem necessary] to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the development services director or his designee may cause the issuance of a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate of violation of this article, and each day upon which any violation of this article shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DESIGN ELEMENTS FOR ROADS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8.01. - Introduction. 
All new streets and intersections shall be constructed one foot above the 100-year (base) flood elevation as defined by the current flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and/or any determined flood elevations for detention/retention basins, ponds or lakes. 
Sec. 8.02. - Street design. 
(a)  Pavement width. 
(1)  Pavement widths in this section do not include curb and gutter dimensions. Tables 5.3 and 5.4 contain the standard minimum pavement widths. 
(b)  Minimum clear sight distance. Minimum clear sight distance shall be calculated for wet pavement conditions at the various design speeds and using the K factors for the various types of streets. These sight distances shall be provided on both horizontal and vertical curves. For horizontal curves, the sight distance shall be checked by direct scale from the midpoint of the curb lane. The minimum vertical curve length required shall be calculated by multiplying the algebraic difference in grade times the K factor found in Tables 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5 for residential, nonresidential and collectors respectively. Vertical curves shall be designed into the roadway layout when meeting grades that are in excess of two percent. 
(c)  Cul-de-sac specifications. 
(1)  Where allowed. Cul-de-sac streets shall be allowed only under the classification of a local street. 
(2)  Length shall be measured from the edge of the pavement of the outside lane of the intersecting street to the outside edge of the pavement on the turnaround radius as listed in Tables 5.3 and 5.4 for residential and nonresidential streets respectively. 
(3)  No more than six lots shall front on the turnaround of a cul-de-sac. This includes any combination of traditional and flag style lots. 
(4)  The minimum radii of a round turnaround for residential and nonresidential cul-de-sac streets are listed in Tables 5.3 and 5.4 respectively. 
(5)  Standard street pavement shall be required in turnarounds. 
(6)  A single road serving a high-density development such as apartments or condominiums will usually exceed the average daily trips for local roads. Such road shall not be granted to the city and shall be considered as part of the internal access to that development. 
(d)  Road to be extended because of phased development. 
(1)  A gravel turnaround is allowed if the road is expected to be extended in less than two years and has less than the maximum number of average daily trips (ADTs) loading for the type of street (residential or nonresidential). Such a turnaround shall not be allowed on any street classified as a minor street or higher. A monetary guarantee shall be required as described in subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
(2)  A monetary guarantee is required for any kind of non-paved turnaround for the specified time limit plus one month. This guarantee is to ensure that a paved turnaround is installed or the roadway is continued. This monetary guarantee is to be for 110 percent of the cost of constructing a paved turnaround to the existing standards and shall meet all requirements of an improvements guarantee as specified elsewhere in this ordinance. 
(3)  "T" or hammerhead turnarounds are allowed for roadways that are expected to be extended within five years of final construction of the present phase. Such a turnaround shall not be allowed on any street classified as a major street or higher. 
(e)  Right-of-way widths. 
(1)  New or proposed streets. Tables 5.3 and 5.4 list right-of-way widths for new streets. 
(2)  Existing streets with no or partial city deeded rights-of-way shall have right-of-way widths determined on the following criteria; volume of traffic, road type classification, pavement type, drainage problems, etc. 
(f)  Structural roadway design. The specifications for construction of roads within the incorporated areas of the city shall include the latest edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges, with all appendices. 
(1)  Pavement design period to be 20 years. 
(2)  Minimum average daily traffic for design purposes shall be: 
a.  Residential streets plus four percent annual growth rate. 
1.  Local, 300 ADT with minimum 0.5 percent truck volume. 
2.  Minor, 1,150 ADT with minimum 0.5 percent truck volume. 
3.  Major, 1,600 ADT with minimum 0.5 percent truck volume. 
b.  Nonresidential streets plus four percent annual growth rate. 
1.  Local, minor, and major are determined by traffic counts with a minimum one percent truck volume. 
c.  Collector plus six percent annual growth rate. 
1.  Minor and major, determined by traffic counts with a minimum 1.5 percent truck volume. 
(3)  Minimum asphaltic concrete thickness is to be not less than 1½ inches after compaction. 
(4)  Minimum Portland cement concrete thickness is to be not less than four inches after compaction. 
(5)  The applicant shall provide an engineering study certified by a state licensed engineer showing the proposed design to be in compliance with this section. The engineering study shall include a pavement structural detail based on the AASHTO, Guide for Design Pavement Structures, or other design method and specifications for the materials and construction of the proposed design approved by the manager of development services. 
(6)  All materials and construction methods used in construction of roadway pavement shall conform to the standards of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Sec. 8.03. - Additional design for residential streets. 
(a)  Pavement widths, rights-of-way and residential street design shall be in compliance with the specifications contained in Table 5.3. 
(b)  A maximum of 50 dwelling units shall be allowed on a cul-de-sac. 
(c)  "T" type turnarounds shall be at least 60 by 30 feet and shall be designed to the same standards as the road to which it is attached. 
(d)  Gravel turnarounds, if allowed under this ordinance, shall be at least 60 feet in diameter and have a design life of at least two years at a traffic loading of 200 ADT. 
(e)  Table 5.3. Minimum design elements for residential streets. 

 
Low-density means smallest frontage abutting lot is 100 feet or greater. 
High-density means smallest frontage abutting lot is less than 100 feet. 
Note: 
* Maximum grade within 50 feet of an intersection is six percent. 
Sec. 8.04. - Additional design for nonresidential streets. 
(a)  Design compliance. Pavement widths, rights-of-way and nonresidential street design shall be in compliance with the specifications contained in Table 5.4. 
(b)  Cul-de-sac specifications. 
(1)  Length. The maximum length shall not exceed 800 feet and the minimum length shall not be less than 150 feet. 
(2)  Radius. Minimum radius of a round turnaround shall be 60 feet. 
(c)  Roads to be extended due to phased development. 
(1)  "T" turnarounds shall not be allowed on nonresidential streets. 
(2)  Temporary turnaround. A temporary, soil-cement base turnaround is allowed if the road is expected to be extended in less than two years and has less than 400 ADTs. Such turnaround shall be at least 80 feet in diameter and shall be made of six inches of soil cement base with a tack surface coat. The soil cement construction shall be the same as for the roads. The top level of the surface shall be level with the adjacent pavement. A monetary guarantee equal to 110 percent of the cost of constructing a paved turnaround under existing standards shall be required. This guarantee shall meet all the requirements of the improvements guarantee described in this ordinance. 
(d)  Table 5.4 Minimum nonresidential street design elements. 

 
Notes: 
(1) Low density means smallest frontage abutting lot is 100 feet or greater. 
(2) High density means smallest frontage abutting lot is less than 100 feet. 
(3) Listed are right-of-way widths for new proposed vertical or mountable curb and gutter, paved streets only. New proposed streets without curb and gutter shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 80 feet. 
Sec. 8.05. - Additional design for collector streets. 
(a)  Design compliance. Collector street design shall be in compliance with the specifications contained in Table 5.5. 
(b)  Culs-de-sac are not allowed for collector streets. 
(c)  Table 5.5, Minimum collector street design elements: 

 
Sec. 8.06. - Intersection design. 
(a)  Design compliance. Intersection design shall be in compliance with the specifications in Table 5.6. These standards shall govern all residential/residential, residential/collector, and collector/collector intersections. 
(b)  Approach speed. A minimum approach design speed of 25 miles per hour is required for all intersections. The safe approach speed involves safe stopping distance on vertical and horizontal curves beginning about 100 feet from the intersection, plus clear sight distance. 
(c)  Clear sight distance. Minimum sight triangle distances as shown in Table 5.6 are required at all intersections. 
(1)  Where any street intersection is created that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility within the clear sight triangle the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary by the manager of development services to comply with the sight distance requirements of this section and shall not erect any sign or improvement that would preclude safe sight distance. 
(d)  Minimum angle of intersection. It is required for all intersection approaches to meet as close as possible to a 90-degree angle. Skewed or angled intersections shall be avoided. 
(e)  Minimum centerline offset of adjacent intersection. 
(1)  Offsets of at least 125 feet between centerlines shall be required. In the case of two collector street intersections, this offset shall be increased to at least 150 feet in order to allow for left turn storage between intersections. 
(2)  When offset intersections are used at an arterial they should be located to avoid conflicting left turns. Such left-turn conflicts exist when an intersection offsets to the right rather than to the left. 
(f)  Minimum tangent length approaching intersection. See Table 5.6. The guidelines in this table would not apply to a collector with a 1,000 foot radius that is intersected by a residential street. It would apply to an intersecting residential street with a 200 foot radius leg. 
(g)  Table 5.6: Minimum intersection design standards. 

 
Sec. 8.07. - Roadway safety requirements. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Every street shall be designed and constructed in the safest possible manner. Every precaution shall be taken during the construction and operations phases of each street to ensure the safety of the public. 
(2)  Permanent traffic control devices shall be completely installed or constructed before the roadway is open to traffic. 
(3)  The application of all types of traffic devices, whether they be of a permanent or temporary nature, shall be governed by the requirements and principles set forth in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). 
(b)  Street name signs. Street name signs shall be of the type normally existing within the incorporated parts of the city. Any atypical sign shall be approved by the city council and shall meet all requirements for visibility by the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Signage shall be purchased from the city at the city's cost. The city will install all signs except atypical signs. Any atypical signs approved by the city council shall be installed and maintained at the sole cost and expense of the subdivision developer or the subdivision homeowners' association. 
(c)  Traffic signs. 
(1)  Each sign shall conform to the standards set forth in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Each sign shall be displayed only for the specific purpose described in the manual. 
(2)  Signs shall be located to optimize night visibility and in conformance with safety factors related to fixed obstacles near the roadway. Signs shall not be located where they may obscure other signs or where they may be hidden from view by roadside objects. Signs requiring different decisions by vehicle operators shall be spaced sufficiently far apart for the required decisions to be made safely. 
(3)  Stop signs shall not be erected at intersections controlled by traffic control signals and shall be removed if a traffic control signal is installed at the same location. 
(4)  Signs shall have the maximum practical lateral clearance from the edge of the traveled way for the safety of vehicles that might leave the road and strike the sign posts. Sign posts and their foundations and sign mountings shall be constructed to hold signs in a proper and permanent position to resist swaying in the wind and to resist displacement by vandalism. Special care shall be taken to see that weeds, shrubbery and construction materials are not allowed to obscure the face of any sign. 
(5)  Traffic control signs shall be of the type normally existing within the incorporated areas of the city. Signage shall be purchased from the city at the city's cost and included in the overall subdivision fee. The city will do all installation. 
(d)  Traffic signals. 
(1)  When it has been determined that a street or development requires the installation of a traffic signal the developer (or government for governmental projects) shall be responsible for all costs associated with the installation of the signal equipment. 
(2)  The use of more than one signal head on each approach shall be mandatory. 
(e)  Temporary safety requirements. 
(1)  All temporary traffic control devices shall be governed by the following principles as described in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices: 
a.  Traffic safety in work areas shall be an integral part and high priority element of every project from planning through design and construction. Maintenance work shall be planned and conducted with the safety of vehicle operators, pedestrians and workers kept in mind at all times. 
b.  Traffic movement shall be inhibited as little as practical. 
c.  Traffic movement shall be guided in a clear and positive manner while approaching and traversing work areas. 
d.  To ensure acceptable levels of operation, routine inspection of traffic control elements shall be performed. 
(2)  The closing of portions of any street shall be coordinated with the city manager and city police department so as to interfere with traffic as little as possible. Suitable barricades and signs to direct traffic shall be provided and appropriately placed and maintained as long as necessary. Such barricades and signs shall be promptly removed when no longer needed. The city public safety departments shall be notified in advance of the closing and reopening of any street. 
(3)  Specific criteria described in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for the temporary closing of street shall be strictly adhered to. 
(f)  Street lighting. 
(1)  Streetlights shall be installed in all new major subdivisions or phases of major subdivisions in R-1, R-2, and R-3 zoning districts at the developer's expense and subject to the specifications of this ordinance. Major subdivisions are defined in section 1.08 of the subdivision regulations. 
(2)  The developer shall contract with the electric service provider that provides coverage where the subdivision is located to purchase, install and perpetually maintain the lighting system. A copy of the executed contract between the developer and the service provider shall be included with the application for final subdivision approval. 
(3)  Specifications. 
a.  A lighting system plan meeting the specifications of this Ordinance shall be submitted along with all other plan sheets and required documents for approval of a land development permit. 
b.  A light fixture shall be installed as follows: 
1.  A lighting fixture shall be installed on the lot line, at every second lot on alternating sides of the road with intersections to be considered as a lot for design purposes. 
2.  Right-of-way widths vary depending on whether roads are constructed using curb and gutter or open ditches for conveying stormwater. Therefore the following shall apply: 
i.  On curb and gutter roads the light poles shall be set on the utility easement, one foot outside the right-of-way line. 
ii.  On open ditch roads the grades of the front and back slopes of the stormwater conveyance ditches can vary from one project to another depending on the slope of the back ditch. The light poles shall be set so that the poles will not be located in the front slope, back slope or bottom of the ditch. In no case shall the light pole be installed in the functional stormwater conveyance portion of the ditch. All light poles shall be set at the top of the back slope, in the utility easement at least one foot outside the right-of-way line. If the point one foot outside the right-of-way line is still within the confines of the ditch then the pole location shall be moved further up the back slope until out of the active conveyance area of the ditch. 
c.  All power cables providing electricity to street lights shall be buried within the utility easement and run parallel to the right-of-way. Any power lines passing under a city road supplying power to the opposite side of the road shall be installed in conduit and shall run parallel to the right-of-way line. No power cable or electrical conduit shall traverse a city roadway on a skewed angle to the right-of-way. 
d.  For specifications for lighting fixtures, poles and required accessories see the following table: 

 
  

 
(4)  The lighting system for the entire subdivision shall be activated when the city building inspection department certifies the first dwelling within the development for occupancy. The city utility billing department will begin billing individual lot owners $3.00 per month for electric service for the street lights starting with the first regular billing cycle after the electric power is activated for the lighting system in the subdivision. 
(g)  Road striping requirements. 
(1)  All new major subdivisions and new phases of existing major subdivisions shall have pavement striping installed at the time the project is built for all roads classified as minor collector and higher classifications as defined under section 4.02. The developer shall pay all associated costs. 
a.  When meeting the criteria of minor collector or above, all internal subdivision roads in new phases of existing major subdivisions and in all new major subdivisions shall be striped with a yellow, broken centerline. 
b.  All lines shall be four inches in width. All striping shall be in accordance with the most current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) as well as the most current edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications (section 652). 
c.  The design engineer shall evaluate the proposed road design. Upon completion of the evaluation and in conformance with the guidelines contained in Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), the design engineer shall incorporate in the plan any requirements for road striping as he/she deems necessary regarding the safety of the public. This shall include any roadway design; even those roads classified as less than a minor collector. 
Sec. 8.08. - Driveway and right-of-way encroachment requirements. 
(a)  General driveway topics. The purpose of this section shall be to provide standards and procedures for permitting the use of city right-of-way and easements and access to city roads in order to achieve the following: 
(1)  For maximum protection to the public through the orderly control of traffic entering and leaving a part of the city roadway system to reduce traffic conflicts and confusion; 
(2)  To make ingress and egress as safe as possible to the traveling public and to those who patronize the roadside commercial establishments; 
(3)  To prevent hazardous and indiscriminate parking adjacent to the roadway surface; 
(4)  To ensure uniform design and construction of driveways on the city roadway system; 
(5)  To keep driveway construction from interfering with the safety of the traveling public; and 
(6)  To provide for future modification and expansion. 
(b)  Applicability. This standard is applicable to all roads under the jurisdiction of the city council including frontage roads and service roads of limited access highways. However, these provisions do not apply to roads under the jurisdiction of the state department of transportation. 
(c)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  Construction of masonry or other substantial structures other than those specifically allowed by this ordinance within the city right-of-way or city owned easements shall be prohibited. 
(2)  No sign shall be permitted in city owned right-of-way or easements other than those placed by the governing authority. 
(3)  No vehicles, equipment, trailers, boats or other similar items shall be parked, placed, or stored on city owned right-of-way or easements except in the case of an emergency. 
(d)  Restoration. No person shall use city owned right-of-way or easements for any purpose for which a permit is required by this ordinance without first obtaining a permit therefor. In the event city owned right-of-way or easements are used and/or construction takes place without a permit, upon written notice by the manager of development services, the person shall remove any construction and restore the area to its original condition and cease any nonpermitted use. 
(e)  Removal. Any construction within city owned right-of-way or easements that is done without the required permit or that is permitted but is not in compliance with all applicable requirements shall be altered to comply with the governing city ordinance or shall be removed from the right-of-way or easement. If the required corrective measures or removal has not been completed within 30 days of issuance of notice to comply issued by the manager of development services, the manager of development services shall take all action necessary to correct or remove the illegal condition. The city shall hold the party responsible for the illegal condition responsible for all costs incurred in correcting or removing the illegal condition and take all action necessary to recoup those costs. 
(f)  General requirements. 
(1)  All driveways shall be paved within the right-of-way if the roadway is also paved. If the roadway is not paved no paving or headwalls shall be allowed in the right-of-way. 
(2)  Minimum size storm pipe for driveways is 18 inches in diameter and 24 feet in length. 
(3)  The city encourages the use of sloped paved, or flared end sections on storm pipes instead of vertical headwalls on all roads. Where allowed, vertical headwalls shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Vertical headwalls shall not be allowed on roads with speed limits greater than 35 miles per hour. 
b.  The top elevation of the vertical headwalls and any adornments shall not exceed 12 inches above the finish grade elevation of the driving surface of the driveway at any point within city owned right-of-way or easements. This shall be measured from the finished grade surface of the driveway immediately adjacent to the headwall. 
c.  The edge of a vertical headwall shall not extend out of the drainage ditch and onto the shoulder of the road. 
d.  Vertical headwalls or other structures, except those specifically allowed by this ordinance, shall not be allowed within the city owned right-of-way or easements on curb and gutter roads. 
(g)  Changed conditions necessitating alterations of city owned rights-of-way or easements. 
(1)  In addition to the conditions agreed to by the applicant, the applicant agrees that at any time the city may alter or close the driveway or require the applicant to alter or close the driveway for the following reasons: 
a.  The driveway at any time creates an unreasonable interference with the proper use of a public road by the traveling public; 
b.  It becomes necessary to use the right-of-way to widen the existing roadway or to construct service roads or to make any other revisions in location, alignment or grade of the roadway, making the approved plan impractical, hazardous or otherwise objectionable. 
(2)  The city shall not alter or close a driveway or require to be closed a driveway if such alteration or closing would substantially interfere with the legal right of access to the public roads of the city roadway system. 
(h)  General conditions for driveway design. 
(1)  No width shall exceed the maximum or be less than the minimum (listed below) measured parallel with the roadway or, if roadway is on a curve, parallel with the tangent of the curve at the point where the centerline of the driveway intersects the curb, or edge or pavement where no curb exists. 

 
(2)  Any types of developments not listed shall meet the commercial and industrial classification. 
(3)  Although paved driveway widths may be less than 24 feet, the improved access point to the property shall not be less than 24 feet wide when the driveway crosses an open ditch to access the roadway. 
(4)  Driveways 40 feet wide shall be approved only where long wheel base vehicles are to be a majority of the traffic to a facility. 
(5)  Where the driveway is for the sole purpose of serving a garage, shop, warehouse or other structure having a door of sufficient dimensions to accommodate a vehicle and also arrangements for driving through the building or turning the vehicle around inside the building, the driveway shall not be constructed to a greater width than the width of the door it serves. This condition applies only when the building is located less than 40 feet from the city right-of-way and the driveway is to be located in front of the building. 
(i)  Sight distance along roadway. 
(1)  All driveways shall be so located, designed and constructed so that vehicle operators using them will have adequate sight distance in both directions along the road. 
(2)  All exit driveways or driveway lanes shall have the following minimum sight distance measured in each direction. The following are minimums; the manager of development services may require longer distances based on the site specific road conditions to assure safety: 

 
(3)  A permit shall not be issued for an entrance when the specified sight distance is not available along the entire road to the fronting shoulder opposite each driveway. In instances where an application's frontage is limited and a driveway cannot be constructed due to an inadequate sight distance, a plan may be required that incorporates a service or approach road off the right-of-way to a point where a satisfactory and safe intersection with the roadway is possible. The applicant shall bear the cost of construction and maintenance of such service or approach road. 
(j)  Mailboxes. 
(1)  No new, replacement or relocated mailbox shall be allowed to exist on the city's right-of-way or easements if it interferes with the safety of the travelling public or the uniform standards of function and beautification on the city roadway system. 
(2)  The mailbox shall be located in accordance with the rules and regulations of the postmaster general and this ordinance. 
(3)  On an uncurbed roadway mailboxes shall be set back a sufficient distance to allow the postman to be completely off the travel lanes to deliver mail. 
(4)  If the roadway has a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour no brick, concrete or similar restrictive structure is allowed to serve as a new, replacement or relocated mailbox. 
DIVISION 2. - ROAD, RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND EASEMENT STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 8.09. - Curbs. 
(a)  Street parking. 
(1)  If vertical curbs are used then an additional eight feet of pavement shall be required when on-street parking is planned. 
(2)  If mountable or roll type curbs are used eight feet of shoulder space at a one-half-inch per foot slope shall be required when on-street parking is planned. 
(3)  If open ditch road sections are used then ten feet of shoulder at a one-half-inch per foot slope shall be required when on-street parking is planned. 
(b)  Types of curbs. 
(1)  Vertical curb and gutter sections: Eighteen-inch gutter with a six-inch wide by six-inch high curb (total 24-inch width). 
(2)  Mountable curb section: Twelve-inch gutter with a 12-inch wide by four-inch high curb (total 24-inch width). 
(3)  Header curb section: Twelve-inch below pavement by six-inch above pavement by six-inch wide (total six-inch width). 
(4)  Valley gutter section: Twenty-four-inch wide with a center depression of three-inch (total 24-inch width). 
(c)  Construction standards. Construction of curbs shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  When required curbs and gutters shall be placed along edges of all street pavements and shall be formed to the cross section shown on the plans. Whenever practical, the curb and gutters shall be constructed using slip-form or extrusion equipment. 
(2)  Constructed of Portland cement, air-entrained concrete, class B, 3,000 psi. 
(3)  Weakened plane joints, straight and at regular intervals not to exceed ten feet. Where curb and gutter is adjacent to concrete pavement the weakened plane joints shall be aligned with the pavement joints where practical. 
(4)  Expansion joints shall be provided meeting the following requirements: 
a.  Expansion material shall be one-half-inch premolded; 
b.  Spaced at a maximum interval not to exceed 100 linear feet; 
c.  All joints shall be installed vertical and perpendicular to the line of the curb; 
d.  The joint filler shall not protrude above the finished surface of the concrete; 
e.  No expansion joints shall be constructed in access ramps or driveways; 
f.  Expansion material is required at any point where new curb and gutter abuts any other concrete structure; and 
g.  A five-foot long transition shall be provided between normal gutter and pitched gutter unless otherwise noted on construction plans. 
Sec. 8.10. - Transverse slope. 
(a)  A transverse slope or crown shall be provided to expedite surface drainage. On low volume streets up to one-half-inch per foot is permissible. As traffic speeds increase, the crown shall be decreased, but a minimum of one-eighth-inch per foot shall be maintained. The following table gives general crown slope for different widths of pavement. This table applies only to city owned or roads intended to be dedicated to the city and does not apply to state or federal roads. 

 
Sec. 8.11. - Roadway pavement design. 
(a)  Design thickness of flexible base and surface pavement. 
(1)  In no case shall there be less than six inches of graded aggregate base when used or less than two inches of bituminous base in the pavement design. 
(2)  All proposed flexible pavement material thickness shall be submitted to the manager of development services for approval prior to construction. No placement of materials shall commence until the manager of development services has granted approval. 
(3)  Pre-designed standards: 
a.  Residential roadway (local, minor and major): 
1.  Six inches soil cement base with seven percent Portland cement, 1.5 inches type "E" surface mix. 
2.  Six inches soil cement base with seven percent Portland cement, 0.5 inches surface treatment, 1.0 inches type "E" surface mix. 
3.  Seven inches graded aggregate base, two inches type "E" surface mix. 
b.  Nonresidential roadway (local and minor, not allowed for truck traffic greater than ten percent volume): 
1.  Six inches soil cement base with seven percent Portland cement, 1.5 inches type "E" surface mix. 
2.  Six inches soil cement base with seven percent Portland cement, 0.5 inches surface treatment, 1.0 inches type "E" surface mix. 
3.  Seven inches graded aggregate base, two inches type "E" surface mix. 
c.  Nonresidential roadway (major): 
1.  Seven inches soil cement base with seven percent Portland cement, two inches type "E" surface mix. 
2.  Seven inches soil cement base with seven percent Portland cement, 0.5 inches surface treatment, 1.5 inches type "E" surface mix. 
3.  Eight inches graded aggregate base, 2.0 inches type "B" bituminous base, 1.5 inches type "E" surface mix. 
d.  Collector: 
1.  Seven inches soil cement base with seven percent Portland cement, 2.0 inches type "E" surface mix. 
2.  Seven inches soil cement base with seven percent Portland cement, 0.5 inches surface treatment, 1.5 inches type "E" surface mix. 
3.  Eight inches graded aggregate base, two inches type "B" bituminous base, 1.5 inches type "E" surface mix. 
e.  Arterial: 
1.  No predesigned standard has been established. 
(b)  Overlays for asphalt roads. 
(1)  The overlay thickness shall be designed to correct a below average pavement condition, not to provide the extra structural strength needed for localized weak areas. 
(2)  All weak areas shall be repaired with proper patches. Structural patches shall be designed and constructed with full depth asphaltic concrete to ensure strength equal to or exceeding that of the surrounding pavement structure. 
(3)  When the surface is distorted the construction of leveling courses or leveling wedges are required to restore proper lines and cross sections. Leveling wedges are patches of asphaltic plant mix used to level sags and depressions in a pavement. 
(4)  When repairs are completed the overlay construction process is to follow normal Georgia Department of Transportation standards. 
Sec. 8.12. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Sidewalk. The following requirements shall be met with respect to sidewalks which are subject to the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be located four feet from the back of the curb. All new sidewalks shall match and provide a smooth transition to any existing sidewalk. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be installed during the construction of the development. The city shall inspect the location and construction of the sidewalk and final acceptance of a subdivision phase shall not be given until the required sidewalk is properly installed. 
(3)  A strip of grass or other approved landscape material at least four feet in width shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs on local streets and minor collector streets. The sidewalk shall be separated from the curb by a ten-foot wide planting strip on major collector and arterial streets. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be concrete and a minimum of four feet wide and four inches thick. Concrete shall have a strength of 3,000 psi at 28 days. Disturbed areas along sidewalks shall be backfilled, stabilized, and grassed. 
(5)  Standard joint spacing is five feet. 
(6)  Maximum grade is that of the street which is adjacent to the sidewalk. 
(7)  Minimum grade is 0.5 percent. 
(8)  Minimum lateral drainage slope is one percent. 
(9)  Use ramps instead of steps. 
(10)  Provide proper access from the street for the handicapped. 
(11)  Scored at five-foot intervals with expansion joints at a maximum spacing of 30 feet. 
(12)  Cross slopes a minimum of one-eighth-inch per foot. 
(13)  Concrete surface finished with a non-slip broom finish immediately after trowel finishing. 
(14)  When slope exceeds five percent gradient then walk is considered ramp. 
(15)  Cross slope not to exceed 1:48. 
(16)  Level changes greater than one-fourth and less than one-half-inch shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2. Level changes exceeding one-half-inch shall be treated as a ramp. 
(17)  Whenever possible, gratings shall not be located within or along sidewalks. 
(18)  When gratings must be located in sidewalks, clear openings shall not exceed one-half inch in one direction. If grate openings are elongated the long dimension shall be perpendicular to the predominant direction of travel. 
(19)  Additional sidewalks and/or pedestrian easements may be required in subdivisions or developments where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities. 
(b)  Curb ramps. The following specification shall be followed: 
(1)  Curb ramps shall be provided whenever a walk crosses a curb; 
(2)  Curb ramps at street intersections shall be located within and to one side of marked crossings unless adequate and safe maneuvering space (48 inches minimum clear space), permits positioning of curb ramps at diagonal corner locations. Curb ramps shall be located or protected to prevent their obstruction by parked vehicles or street furnishings; 
(3)  Maximum slope shall be 1:12 except for existing sidewalks where a maximum slope of 1:8 may be used if it is impractical to install a more gradual slope; 
(4)  A flush, smooth transition shall be provided at the juncture of a curb ramp with grade or street level; 
(5)  The minimum width shall be 36 inches, exclusive of flared sides; 
(6)  If a curb ramp is positioned where pedestrian traffic is likely to walk across the ramp, then it shall have flared sides with a maximum slope of 1:8; 
(7)  Where pedestrians are prevented from walking across the ramp flared sides may be omitted; 
(8)  Built up curb ramps are the least preferred method or curb ramping and shall only be used when no other alternative is available; and 
(9)  The surface of curb ramps shall be the same as for walking surfaces. 
Sec. 8.13. - Roadway safety requirements. 
(a)  Pavement markings. 
(1)  The material used shall provide the specified colors during both daylight and night hours and maintain the required visibility throughout their lifetime. All pavement markings shall be completed prior to acceptance of the street by the city. 
(2)  For night visibility all pavement marking materials shall have glass beads embedded to produce a retro directive reflecting surface. 
(3)  Plastic markings shall be used where heavy traffic rapidly destroys painted markings. Mandatory locations are stop bars, crosswalk lines and location where traffic travel is perpendicular to the marking. 
(4)  Large mushroom buttons and concrete several inches high, with or without reflectors, lights, symbols or messages shall be used to designate pedestrian islands or to assist in channelization. In these application they function as curbs or islands and are restricted to each application. 
(5)  Pavement markings shall be white, yellow or red in color. 
a.  Yellow markings shall be used as follows: 
1.  Centerlines that separate traffic flows in opposite directions; 
2.  Left pavement edge lines on multi-lane divided highways and interchange ramps; 
3.  No passing zone lines on two-lane and three-lane, two-way roadways; 
4.  Pavement width transitions (only between opposing lanes of traffic and the no passing zone line); 
5.  Approaches to obstructions (only between opposing lanes of traffic); 
6.  Approaches to railroad crossing (only the no passing zone line or the center line portion); 
7.  Curb markings to indicate parking prohibitions covered by signs and/or ordinances; and 
8.  Curb markings to outline islands in the line of traffic. 
b.  White markings shall be used as follows: 
1.  Lane lines; 
2.  Right pavement edge lines; 
3.  Paved shoulder markings (unless otherwise specified); 
4.  Pavement width transitions (except transitions between traffic in opposing directions); 
5.  Channelizing lines; 
6.  Approaches to obstructions (if obstruction is between lanes where travel is in the same direction); 
7.  Turn markings; 
8.  Stop lines; 
9.  Crosswalk lines; 
10.  Approaches to railroad crossings (except centerlines and no passing zone lines); 
11.  Parking space limits; 
12.  Word and symbol markings; and 
13.  Lane use control markings. 
c.  Red markings shall be used to delineate roadways that shall not be entered or used by the viewer of those markings. 
Sec. 8.14. - Utility crossings of new roads. 
Underground utilities, crossing paved streets shall have installed adequately sized conduits and pull wires for each planned utility crossing prior to placement of pavement base construction. All crossings shall be constructed and installed perpendicular to the roadway and right-of-way boundaries of the roadway. 
Sec. 8.15. - General driveway topics. 
(a)  Backing vehicles onto the right-of-way. Where the applicant for a driveway permit has planned for or developed an angle parking arrangement on his property adjacent to the highway right-of-way the driveway shall not be located in a position which requires or invites vehicles to be backed into the right-of-way when entering or leaving the parking arrangement. 
Sec. 8.16. - Boundaries. 
(a)  Frontage. The frontage of any parcel adjacent to a public roadway shall be considered to be confined between lines drawn from the intersection of the property lines with the right-of-way lines of the roadway to the curb, when a curb exists; otherwise, the edge of the roadway pavement. Such lines shall be perpendicular to the axis of the roadway or if the axis is a curve, to the center of curvature or a combination of the two. These lines shall be known as boundaries. 
(b)  Boundary encroachment. 
(1)  Joint driveways when requested or required may encroach upon common side lot boundary line. 
(2)  Duplex driveways. 
a.  May encroach upon the common side lot boundary line. If this is the case the driveways shall be joined together as a joint driveway; 
b.  If the duplex driveway is not constructed as a joint driveway it shall meet the requirements for a residential driveway; 
(3)  Residential driveways shall be constructed so that no portion of the driveway contained within the right-of-way boundaries, excluding the radius return, shall be closer than six feet from the boundary line. The radius return may become tangent at the boundary line. 
(4)  Commercial and industrial. 
a.  May be a joint driveway (see section 8.17(e)) and encroach upon the common side lot boundary line. 
b.  If not a joint driveway then: 
1.  For passenger and small wheelbase vehicles boundary encroachment shall not be less than 15 feet. 
2.  For long wheelbase (tractor trailer) boundary encroachment shall not be less than 30 feet. 
Sec. 8.17. - Number of driveways. 
(a)  Single-family, duplex or townhouse residential structure on a single lot. 
(1)  Only one point of ingress and egress (driveway) shall be allowed to each residential lot except where frontages of greater than 150 feet are present or the lot is a corner lot with more than 150 feet of frontage on each street. In the case of a corner lot meeting the previous requirement, there shall only be one access point per street frontage. In those later cases, drives shall not enter the same side of collector or arterial streets at intervals less than 300 feet. Every additional 150 feet of frontage qualifies the property for an additional ingress/egress point up to a maximum of three per lot. 
(b)  Single businesses on a single interior lot. 
(1)  Movements confined primarily to on-site employees totaling no more than 40: one two-way drive. 
(2)  Movements consisting primarily of in and out customer activities where no more than 50 parking spaces are on the site or sites with less than 300 feet of frontage: one, two-way drive or two one-way drives. 
(3)  Fast food operations, banks with drive through service, medical offices and other facilities with more than 50 on-site parking spaces and a minimum of 300 feet of frontage: two, two-way drives. 
(4)  Service stations and convenience stores which include gas and oil sales and have a minimum frontage of 150 feet: two, two-way drives. 
(c)  Single business on a corner lot. 
(1)  One, two-way drive on main road and one, two-way driveway on the secondary road totaling two, two-way driveways. Driveways are to be located as far as practical from the intersection. Two, one-way driveways may be substituted for one, two-way drive. 
(d)  Multiple businesses on commercial tracts. 
(1)  Up to 300 linear feet of frontage: one, two-way drive or two, one-way drives. 
(2)  Frontages between 300 and 1,000 linear feet: two, two-way drives. 
(3)  Frontages between 1,000 and 2,000 linear feet: three, two-way drives. 
(4)  Frontages between 2,000 and 3,000 linear feet: three, two-way drives or two, one-way drives and one multilane driveway. 
(5)  Frontages of over 3,000 linear feet: driveways as determined by the manager of development services on a case-by-case basis. 
(e)  Joint driveways. 
(1)  A joint driveway may be authorized when requested by two applicants owning adjacent property or when required by the city as part of a subdivision review. 
(2)  Joint driveways are required when one of the following is present: 
a.  Commercial and industrial lots with less than 300 feet of right-of-way frontage and fronts a roadway with more than 2,000 trips per day. 
b.  Residential lots with less than 300 feet of right-of-way frontage and fronting a road with more than 6,000 trips per day. 
Sec. 8.18. - Driveway design. 
(a)  General conditions. Where turnouts and driveways access state or federal roads and permits are required by the state department of transportation, a copy of such permit shall be supplied to the city by the applicant. 
(b)  Acceleration/deceleration lane requirements. 
(1)  The appropriate deceleration lane (commercial or industrial uses) shall be constructed. Acceleration lanes shall also be required where it is determined by the manager of development services that they are needed because of the nature of the business or type traffic in question. Such lanes shall be constructed at no cost to the city. The right-of-way for such lanes and for future provision of acceleration lanes shall be dedicated to the city by the applicant. 
(2)  The pavement section for the lanes shall match that of the main road or be a lessor design if approved by the manager of development services. In areas where there will remain an open road side ditch, curb and gutter will not generally be required along the longitudinal part of the decel/accel lanes, but shall be provided on the radii, medians, etc., in order to prevent pot holes in the radius of the drive. 
(3)  Deceleration lanes shall be required of all developments that have at least one of the following criteria present: 
a.  Frontage road has more than 10,000 ADTs; 
b.  Frontage road has speed limit of 45 mph or greater; 
c.  The total development when built out will generate more than 2,000 ADTs; and 
d.  Sight distance at driveway is less than the minimums described in section 8.03(e). 
(c)  Angle. 
(1)  The angle of one-way driveways with the roadway shall be as close to 90 degrees as possible. 
(2)  Driveways used for two-way operation shall intersect the roadway at an angle as near 90 degrees as possible. 
(3)  If joined with another two-way driveway conditions shall be that no vehicle will have to make a deflection of greater than 90 degrees when entering or leaving the property. 
(d)  Driveway radii. 
(1)  Rural radii shall not approach the boundary lines except as provided in this ordinance and shall not encroach upon the arc of a curve connecting the curb or edge or pavement at an intersection. In all cases a minimum eight-foot tangent section shall be required between all driveway radii and all roadway intersection radii. The range of radii vary from ten to 30 feet for a driveway. The radius for long wheelbase vehicles shall not exceed 30 feet. When planning for passenger vehicles the radius shall be six feet. For small truck traffic the radii lengths shall be 15 feet. When the angle of the intersection of the inside edge of the driveway and the line paralleling the highway pavement is 45 degrees; a five-foot radius shall be used. This shall be increased to 7½ feet when the angle is 60 degrees and ten or 15 feet or larger if the intersection angle is 90 degrees. 
(2)  Urban radii shall not approach the boundary lines referred to in this ordinance or encroach upon the arc of the curve of the edge of the pavement or curb connecting intersecting streets or roads. The driveway radii shall not be greater than 35 feet except where there is little pedestrian traffic in which case the radii may be increased if required to prove a satisfactory entrance appropriate for the type of vehicles which the driveway is designed. The acute angle radius shall not exceed five feet. When curb and gutter are removed for the purpose of constructing a driveway, the driveway shall be constricted of equivalent material. The entrance curb shall be of the same design and material as the existing curb and gutter to which it is joined. 
(e)  Driveway radii adjacent to roadway intersections. In urban or rural areas, as determined by the manager of development services, driveways to be near street intersections shall be located so as to provide for a minimum 30-foot radius on the curb line of the street. In rural areas as determined by the manager of development services, driveways to be near street intersections along open ditch roads shall have a 35-foot minimum radius as the minimum condition. 
(f)  Grade. 
(1)  Residential driveways (single-family, duplex, triplex, quadraplex only): the driveway grade shall not exceed eight percent maximum change within the right-of-way area. Of great importance is the change in grade, which shall not exceed 12 percent within the ten feet of distance. Car bottoming on the crest can be avoided by use of eight percent maximum change per ten feet as required. 
(2)  Nonresidential driveways: 
a.  Rural as determined by the manager of development services. The grade of the driveway shall slope downward and away from the road surface at the rate not less than 2.08 percent or more than 6.25 percent out to the road ditch line, but in no case less than 18 feet from the edge of the pavement. Where the roadway pavement is super-elevated and the upper shoulder is graded to the slope of the pavement, the grade of the driveway shall conform to the slope of the shoulder to a point 12 feet from the edge of the pavement. However, beyond this 12-foot line the driveway and islands shall be designed to rollover grade so that water from this area will not flow onto the roadway shoulder or pavement. In some cases it may not be feasible to continue the slope of the pavement upward with the super elevation. In such cases the manager of development services shall make this determination during his inspection and review of the permit request and will revise the plans submitted accordingly, as well as provide adequate documentation as to why this variance was made in this particular instance. Through the remaining right-of-way width the grade of the driveways shall not be greater than 6.25 percent, positive or negative. In areas where the right-of-way exists the elevation of the driveway at the right-of-way line shall not be more than one foot higher or lower than the edge of the road at the point opposite that point on the driveway unless specifically waived by the manager of development services and documented on the plan as to why the waiver was justified. 
b.  Urban as determined by the manager of development services: The grade of the driveways shall usually conform to the grades to the back of the gutter. When curb or curb and gutter exists, the grade of the driveway shall not exceed the grades set forth in the preceding paragraph in this ordinance. Where curb and gutter does not exist the grade shall conform to the rural requirements. 
(g)  Joint driveways. 
(1)  The maximum width of a joint driveway shall be 40 feet. A joint driveway shall be at 90 degrees with the highway. Its location may result in unequal areas of the driveway on each frontage. The side of the joint driveway shall be parallel one with the other as required for individual driveways. 
(h)  Driveway sides. 
(1)  The two sides of any driveway shall be parallel. 
(i)  Lane use and paving. 
(1)  A drive shall not be designed or marked to allow more than one lane of traffic to enter the roadway at a time unless such a drive is separated and channelized in accordance with state department of transportation requirements. 
(2)  Pavement is required for all acceleration and deceleration lanes. All driveways shall be paved within the right-of-way if the roadway is also paved. If roadway is not paved, then no paving is allowed within the right-of-way. 
(3)  Pavement materials and construction shall conform to the standards of this ordinance. 
(j)  Driveway widths. 
(1)  Driveways serving large volumes of daily traffic or traffic over 15 percent truck traffic shall be required to utilize high to maximum dimensions. 
(2)  No width shall exceed the maximum or be less than the minimum listed below, measure parallel with the roadway or if the roadway is on a curve, parallel with the tangent of the curve at the point where the centerline of the driveway intersects or edge of pavement where no curb exists. 

 
(3)  Any types of developments not listed above shall meet the commercial and industrial requirements. 
Sec. 8.19. - Island locations, dimensions, development and delineation. 
(a)  Island area required. Any two driveways' connection with a highway shall be separated by an island area. The side of the island adjacent to the highway travel lane shall be located at the existing curb line if any. Otherwise the side of the island shall be ten or more feet from the edge of the pavement as specified by the city. If approved by the manager of development services the distance between the side of the island and the edge of the pavement may be less than ten feet. 
(b)  Adjacent to acceleration and deceleration lane. 
(1)  Where an acceleration or deceleration lane exists, the side of the island adjacent to the road travel lane or shoulder thereof shall be located at the island roadside ditch, or if curb type barrier is used, at the outer edge of the acceleration or deceleration land, but not less than ten feet from the edge of the normal pavement unless so specified by the manager of development services. 
(c)  Adjacent to turning lane. 
(1)  When a curb turning lane lies within the frontage of the property the island shall extend to the existing curb of the turning lane. Where no turning lane exists the side of the uncurbed island shall be at the roadside ditch. If the island is required to be curbed the curb shall be installed 24 inches from the edge of the turning lane pavement (where this pavement is greater than ten feet from the edge of the pavement of the normal section) utilizing paved concrete gutter between the edge of the pavement and the curb. 
(d)  Pavement markings. 
(1)  Curbing shall be painted either reflectorized white or yellow in accordance with the MUTCD. 
(e)  Minimum length. 
(1)  Islands shall extend to the right-of-way and shall be a minimum length of 20 feet including radii at that point. The length of the island at the shoulder will be determined by the angle of the driveway and ROW depth but shall not be less than 20 feet. Although an island 20 feet in length is authorized in many instances where the open ditch plan, the island or distance between the driveway pavements must be greater than 20 feet in order to fulfill maximum permissible slope requirements and prevent the need for headwalls and conform to this ordinance. Length is to be that distance measured parallel to the roadway. Depth will be that distance between the right-of-way line and the pavement edge. 
(f)  Unpaved islands. 
(1)  The area or island between the uncurbed driveways serving roadside enterprises shall remain unpaved unless a sidewalk is required of sufficient width to cover the entire island. 
(g)  Open ditch islands. 
(1)  Where a roadside ditch exists, providing an acceptable obstacle to prevent vehicular traffic over the island, the applicant may request to retain the condition. If approved by the city, delineation of the driveway and roadway will not be required. However, an acceptable barrier consisting of six or eight vertical concrete curb, six inches or more in height which shall circumscribe those islands installed between and on either side of the driveways. 
Sec. 8.20. - Encroachment upon intersection design. 
(a)  Right-of-way line projection. 
(1)  No portion of a driveway shall be within the area lying between the normal right-of-way lines continued or projected on existing courses to the curb line or edge of the pavement at intersections. Provided that, with good cause shown, the city may waive this provision when a deep right-of-way or an acute angle or intersection of the roadway makes such action appropriate. 
(b)  Right-of-way miter. 
(1)  Right-of-way acquired for or used for improvement of visibility or for traffic channelization (right-of-way miter). At intersections where additional right-of-way has been secured for the roadway back of the prolongation of the normal rights-of-way lines in order to provide for channelization of traffic or more adequate sight distances, no part of any entrance or exit shall be permitted to encroach upon such additional right-of-way. The area described shall be considered as restricted areas and may be filled. 
(c)  Encroachment upon intersection features. 
(1)  The legs, connections, ramps and other roadway features of a roadway intersection or interchange are a part of the intersection and the safety of the public and the planned movement of traffic require that no driveway shall be connected with such features for the purpose of serving roadside areas. 
(2)  A driveway serving a roadside areas shall not be connected to a service or frontage road of a limited access road in the area where said service road serves the dual purpose of a leg, connector or ramp of an intersection or interchange. 
(3)  No driveway shall be connected to a frontage or service road in the area where the service road is widened or curved for connection with an interchange or intersection connection, ramp or leg. 
(4)  No portion of a driveway other than a normal radius shall enter the right-of-way at a point at distances of less than 25 feet from the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines or no driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 50 feet of the point of tangency of the existing or proposed curb radius. This provision may be reduced in areas where limited access rights-of-way exist and the frontage is limited in such a manner as to deny all access to the property. 
Sec. 8.21. - Minimum setback for fuel pumps and other structures. 
(a)  No driveways parallel to the roadway shall be constructed on the right-of-way in front of gasoline pumps, loading or unloading platforms or other structures requiring and outside or frontage driveway. 
(b)  Pump islands or other structures requiring an outside driveway shall be located at a minimum distance of 20 feet from the right-of-way line in order that the outside driveway and services areas shall not encroach on the right-of-way line. In instances where pump islands are to be located opposite any part of the driveway, the end of the pump island nearest the right-of-way shall be a minimum of 40 feet behind the right-of-way line. 
(c)  Pump islands which must be less than 20 feet behind the right-of-way shall in all cases require the erection of an acceptable barrier along the right-of-way line for at least the length of the pump island. This distance from the right-of-way line to the pump islands shall be increased if space is available if the development plans to accommodate tractor trailers, recreational vehicles, buses or other long wheel base vehicles. 
(d)  An island with right-of-way barrier is required opposite all structures which will function as a traffic obstacle (such as bumper curbs, sidewalks, front of buildings, etc.) located or to be located less than 40 feet from the right-of-way lines. Such a barrier may not be necessary in cases where structures will not have an outside driveway or service area between the right-of-way and the front of the structure. 
Sec. 8.22. - Special right-of-way encroachments. 
(a)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  Pipe headwalls, paper delivery boxes, entrance ways (headwalls without the pipe) and all other structures shall meet the design requirements and placement locations of this ordinance. 
(2)  Flared end sections with safety grates or slope-paved headwalls with safety grates shall be used on all pipe ends where the speed limits are in excess of 35 miles per hour and the pipe is larger than 24 inches in diameter. 
(3)  Within the city owned right-of-way or easements plants cannot be of a type which will exceed a height of 30 inches at maturity and/or a trunk diameter of four inches. 
(b)  Median openings. 
(1)  Generally, no openings shall be authorized in mountable-type medians except at street intersections and opposite driveways to schools, fire, police and ambulance stations. 
(2)  No median on any city road shall be breached, cut, opened, widened or otherwise revised in any manner without the approval of the manager of development services. 
(c)  Prohibited encroachments on city right-of-way or easements. 
(1)  City rights-of-way or easements shall not be used for the parking, placement or storage of any vehicle, heavy machinery, trailers or other similar equipment. Nothing in this section shall prohibit emergency parking or stopping as long as reasonably necessary. 
(2)  No materials shall be stored or placed upon the right-of-way or easements. 
(3)  No stormwater from property off the right-of-way or easements shall be diverted into the city right-of-way or easements except as allowed in this ordinance. No wastewater shall be allowed on the right-of-way or easements. 
(4)  No signs, plant life or other material or property belonging to the city shall be removed from a right-of-way or easement. 
Sec. 8.23. - Street tree standards. 
All street tree planting, removal and maintenance shall be performed in accordance with these standard specifications. 
The street trees planted in the City of Leesburg shall be those trees approved by the director of public works or his designated representative. A permit for planting street trees may be obtained through the office of the director of public works, department of public works. 
(a)  Standard specifications for planting street trees. 
Planting of street trees shall be subject to approval and inspection by the director of public works or his designated representative, who shall be notified not less than 48 hours prior to the anticipated time of planting. 
The following specifications shall apply to the size and method of planting said street trees: 
(1)  On lots of frontage up to 80 feet, trees shall be planted one to the lot; on lots of frontage over eighty feet, trees shall be planted two to the lot; on corner lots the number of trees required on the side street shall be determined by the depth of the lot and location of underground utilities. 
(2)  On streets where the sidewalk has been, or will be, located adjacent to the curb, trees shall be planted as per specifications of the respective project. On streets where there is, or will be, space between the walk and curb, the trees shall be planted midway between the walk and curb. 
(3)  Planting locations on major streets shall be determined by the director of public works or his designated representative. The following spacing standards shall be adhered to: 
a.  On corner lots, 30 feet from the beginning of curb radius (BCR) on the approach to an intersection and 30 feet from the end of curb radius (ECR) on the exit side. 
b.  Thirty-five feet from adjacent trees planted in the public right-of-way. 
c.  Fifteen feet from street light standards, power poles, fire hydrants and street signage. 
d.  Ten feet from sewer laterals. 
e.  Eight feet from the edge of driveway approaches (measured from the curbside, not sidewalk side of the parkway). 
f.  Eight feet from water meters, gas lines, underground electrical or telephone and cable communication lines and boxes. 
g.  Five feet from privately installed service or house walks. 
h.  Ten feet from other hardscape or underground improvements not included in the above (i.e., storm drains, drain lines, etc.) 
(4)  Trees shall be vigorous, in a healthy condition, of good structure and free from diseases and insects, pests or the effects of previous infestation. Trees shall be not less than 15 gallons in size, minimum height of six feet, single-trunked and of standard form with an established root ball free of kinked and circling roots. On residential and commercial projects, an inspection of street trees shall be performed by the director of public works or his designated representative prior to trees being planted in the public right-of-way. 
(5)  Trees shall be planted in holes 30 inches in depth and 30 inches in width. The planting holes shall be excavated so that the sides taper outward into the soil; the sides of the planting holes shall be roughened, not smoothly sculpted, which shall allow roots to penetrate more easily into the surrounding soil. The planting holes shall be filled with water and allowed to completely seep prior to planting. Trees shall be planted one to two inches above ground/grade level; the trunk flare shall be exposed above ground/grade level. Trees shall be installed with four 21-gram slow-release Agriform plant fertilizer tablets or equivalent evenly spaced within the top eight to 12 inches of soil and two inches from the root ball; the two-thirds backfilled planting holes shall be filled with water and allowed to completely seep. Backfill of the planting holes shall be completed, eliminating all clods and debris, and lightly tamp in soil with feet or shovel handle to insure there are no air pockets and that the soil is reasonably firm. Mulching is desirable up to two inches in depth, as a layer above the native soil; however, mulch should not come in contact with the trunk flare. 
(6)  Nursery stakes shall be removed. Trees shall be staked parallel to the frontage and positioned perpendicular to prevailing wind with two two-inch diameter, round, pressure-treated, pencil-point lodgepole pine stakes, eight or ten feet long (use appropriate size to match height of tree(s) to be planted), driven just to the outside of the tree root ball (approximately ten inches) and embedded a minimum of two feet into the ground. Trees shall be tied to the stakes in two or more places with soft-rubber cinch ties or equivalent at the lowest points possible to maintain the tree in an upright position and nailed to each stake with one aluminum or galvanized roofing/shingle nail. Trees shall be installed with one trunk guard/protector or equivalent. 
(7)  At the time of planting, trees shall be surrounded with an earthen basin or "berm" of not less than 30 inches in diameter, inside measurement, and six or more inches in height. 
(8)  All trees shall be watered thoroughly the day they are planted. Owners and/or occupants of real property fronting on a public street(s) shall be responsible for continued adequate watering of the street tree(s) abutting their property. The abutting property owner shall bear the expense of replacement of street trees where death is the result of insufficient water and/or general negligence. Owners and/or occupants shall be provided with a new tree care door hanger to assist with any questions that the owner and/or occupant may have in regard to watering, fertilizing and any special care requirements that may be needed to insure the survival of the newly planted street tree(s). 
(9)  All trees shall be planted in accordance with tree planting methods approved by the director of public works or his designated representative, in order to ensure the growth and survival of the tree(s). Final inspection on all residential projects and commercial projects shall be performed after all interior landscaping is completed. This inspection shall be performed by the director of public works or his designated representative prior to the acceptance of fulfillment of the above standard specifications. A 48-hour notice shall be given before any final inspection. 
(10)  When tree root barriers, grates, drainage/aeration piping, irrigation or paving stones are required as part of the planting of street trees, all installation work shall be in strict accordance with the methods recommended by the manufacturer and/or the City of Leesburg Public Works Department. 
(b)  Standard specifications for removal of a street tree or shrub. 
Permission for the removal of a recognized City of Leesburg street tree or shrub (over 42 inches in height) shall be issued only when the necessity for such removal exists as determined and approved by the director of public works or his designated representative. 
When a street tree or shrub is removed under authority of this section, the following shall be adhered to: 
(1)  Property owner shall obtain a permit from the director of public works or his designated representative and pay all applicable fees (i.e., permit, inspection, service request, performance bond). 
(2)  The stump shall be removed to a depth of two feet below the surface of the ground/grade level. All surface roots shall be removed to a depth at least six inches below ground/grade level. 
(3)  The grinding chips are to be removed and the hole(s) shall be backfilled with native soil. The soil shall be compacted and level to grade suitable for seeding. 
(4)  All debris shall be removed from sidewalks as soon as practicable. No debris shall remain at the work location overnight. 
(5)  A tree being removed shall be replaced by a designated tree from the director of public works or his/her designee according to the following schedule: 
a.  If the tree being removed is less than 6½ inches in diameter, then the replacement tree assessment shall be a tree 15 gallons in size. 
b.  If the tree being removed is 6½ inches in diameter, but less than 12½ inches in diameter, then the replacement tree assessment shall be a 24-inch box size tree. 
c.  If the tree being removed is 12½ inches in diameter or greater, the replacement tree assessment shall be a 36-inch box size tree. 
If a property owner does not wish a tree to be replaced after it is removed, the city shall replant the intended replacement tree at a location, in the city, which shall benefit the most from its placement according to the director of public works or his/her designee. 
(c)  Standard specifications for street tree maintenance. 
Maintenance of street trees shall be subject to approval and inspection by the director of public works or his/her designated representative. The instructions in this section are minimum specifications which shall be observed in maintaining street trees. 
(1)  It shall be the responsibility of the City of Leesburg to prune all street trees, as determined by the city, abutting public or private property regardless of whether such property is developed. 
All work shall be in accordance with the latest pruning standards for street/shade trees established by the American National Standard Institute (ANSI), International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) and National Arborist Association (NAA). A copy of the most current of these standards shall be filed in the office of the public works director or his designated representative. 
(2)  Owners and/or occupants of real property fronting on a public street may raise the lower limbs only on the adjacent street tree(s) abutting their property. On the street side and on the sidewalk side, where practical, street trees may be raised 15 feet from the top of the curb and ten feet above the grade of the sidewalk, without detracting from the natural shape of the tree(s) provided the owner and/or occupant of the real property first obtains a permit from the office of the public works director or his designated representative. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or occupant to properly maintain the parkway planting strips abutting their property regardless of whether such property is developed. All trees on private property and over-hanging into the public right-of way shall be kept trimmed by the owner and/or occupant so as to provide a minimum clearance height of 15 feet from the top of the curb and ten feet above the grade of the sidewalk, allowing sufficient vehicular and pedestrian clearance and without detracting from the natural shape of the tree(s). 
(3)  Tree pruning shall include the removal of all dead, broken, diseased, insect infested limbs and stubs larger than one-half inch in diameter throughout the tree. The tree shall be thinned out by the removal of a minimum of 30 percent of the internal side limbs. 
(4)  Tree limbs shall be shortened which extend beyond the natural perimeter of an otherwise symmetrical form. 
(5)  Limbs shall be pruned to lighten the end weight where such overburdening appears likely to cause breakage of limbs two inches or more in diameter. This shall require a 20 to 30 percent reduction in height and width in some types of trees. Only the "drop crotch" method of pruning shall be used in this instance. All cross limbs and water sprouts (suckers) shall be removed to improve structural integrity, safety and aesthetics. 
(6)  All trees on which vines are growing shall have said vines removed. Vine tendrils shall be removed in a manner which shall not injure trees or cause scarring of low branches and tree trunks. 
(7)  All pruning cuts shall be made without leaving a stub. Pruning cuts shall be made in a manner that favors the earliest possible covering of the wound with callous tissue growth. This requires that the wound created by the pruning cut be as small as practicable; the cut must be reasonably flush with the branch bark ridge and the cambium tissues at the edge of the cut must be alive and healthy. Extremely large flush pruning cuts which produce large wounds and weaken the tree at the point of the pruning cut shall not be made. 
(8)  Tree pruning and cutting tools shall be kept sharpened to a condition that shall permit an unabraised cambium edge on all pruning cuts. All tools shall be kept clean and sterile to prevent the spread of infectious materials and/or diseases throughout the street tree population. 
(9)  The use of climbing spurs or spike shoes shall not be permitted. 
(10)  The pruning of all street trees shall provide adequate clearance as determined by the city for mast arm, globe, utility line or sign, electrical lines, luminaires, luminaire mast arms, utility lines, telecommunication lines, official traffic control devices, traffic signals and other public facilities and appurtenances. 
(d)  Appeal process. Any person wishing to appeal the action of the public works director or his designated representative may do so in writing to the department of public works within 15 days of such decision by the director of public works or his designated representative. If the written appeal application is denied by the director of public works, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Leesburg City Council. The decision of the Leesburg City Council shall be final. 
ARTICLE IX. - OFF-STREET PARKING, DRIVES, SERVICE AND OUTDOOR STORAGE AREAS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9.01. - General criteria. 
(a)  Parking requirements for additions to existing uses shall be based only upon the new addition even if the existing use is deficient. 
(b)  Except as provided in this article, no application for a building permit shall be approved by the planning and development department unless there is included with the plan for such building an approved land development permit for off-street parking and service purposes. 
(c)  All required open parking areas and access ways to such areas shall be properly drained and all such areas shall be a paved surface unless otherwise allowed by these specifications. 
(d)  Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be provided. Paved access drives or driveways shall be provided in accordance with the criteria provided in this ordinance. Should exterior curb and gutter not exist, curb and gutter, where required shall be constructed. 
(e)  No public or private parking areas or interior drives to such areas shall be constructed, altered or added to until a land development permit has been approved. 
(f)  Driveways and parking areas shall not be allowed within any rights-of-way for purposes of parking, loading, servicing, etc. 
Sec. 9.02. - Minimum number of off-street parking spaces. 
(a)  The minimum number of parking spaces required is referenced in the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Handicapped parking spaces shall not be included in the count of the overall number of required spaces as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 9.03. - Pavement design. 
(a)  Parking and interior drive pavement shall consist of either asphaltic concrete or Portland cement concrete. The methods and standards used can be found in publications by the Asphalt Institute and AASHTO. 
(b)  The specifications for construction of off-street parking and service areas within the incorporated areas of the city shall include the latest edition of the state department of transportation's standard specifications for roads and bridges with all appendices. 
(c)  Minimum design standards are as follows: 
(1)  Pavement design period shall be 15 years; 
(2)  Minimum ADT for design purposes are to be determined by traffic counts with a four percent annual growth rate; 
(3)  The applicant shall provide an engineering study certified by an engineer showing the proposed design to be in compliance with the intent of this article. The engineering study shall include a pavement structural design based on the AASHTO Guide for Design of Pavement Structures, or other design methods and specifications approved by the manager of development services for the materials and construction of the proposed design; and 
(4)  Minimum pavement design shall have either six inches of Portland cement concrete or an inch asphaltic concrete on six inches of soil cement base with seven percent cement. 
(d)  To provide proper drainage, the minimum slope of a parking lot shall be 0.5 percent and the maximum slope shall be ten percent. 
Sec. 9.04. - Layout design. 
(a)  Parking space allocations shall be oriented to specific buildings. All parking shall be so arranged that cars and trucks may be turned on the lot so that it is not necessary to back into any street. 
(b)  The width of all aisles providing direct access to individual parking stalls shall be in accordance with the following requirements: 

 
(c)  Parking areas or lots providing for more than 60 vehicle spaces shall, where possible, be subdivided into smaller lots of not greater than 60 spaces each. 
(d)  Curbed parking areas shall be permanent and durable to confine cars to striped parking, without overhang or projection onto sidewalks, driveways, bicycle parking areas, planting areas or adjacent landscape areas. Curbing shall be curb and gutter and, where allowed by the manager of development services, raised precast concrete curbs attached to the parking surface. 
Sec. 9.05. - Parking space criteria. 
(a)  Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, and pavement directional arrow or signs shall be provided in each travel way wherever necessary to direct traffic flow. Markers, directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their efficiency. 
(b)  Parking stripes shall be four inches wide and shall be white in color. 
(c)  Every parking space shall measure not less than nine feet in width, measured perpendicularly between parking stripes and not less than 18 feet in length. 
Sec. 9.06. - Protection of sidewalks and walkways. 
(a)  Sidewalks between parking areas and principal structures, along aisles and driveways, and wherever pedestrian traffic shall occur, shall be provided with a minimum width of four feet of passable areas and be raised six inches or more above the parking areas, except when crossing streets or driveways. 
(b)  Parked vehicles shall not overhang or extend sidewalk areas unless an additional sidewalk width of 2.5 feet is provided to accommodate such overhang. Bumper blocks may be used instead of the additional sidewalk width. 
Sec. 9.07. - Parking lot lighting. 
All business that have after dark business hours shall have lighted parking areas as appropriate. Such lighting shall be shielded in such a manner as not to create a hazard or nuisance to the adjoining properties or the traveling public. 
Sec. 9.08. - Handicap requirements generally. 
(a)  Handicap parking spaces shall be placed at each off-street parking lot and at selected on-street parking locations throughout the city as determined by the manager of development services. Any business shall install the appropriate signs and painted spaces. 
(b)  Each parking space reserved for the handicapped shall be painted and sign marking as per the requirements set out in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(c)  For all buildings open to the general public, at least one accessible walk having no steps or abrupt changes in level and complying with all criteria specified within this ordinance, shall be provided from the parking spaces for disabled people into each accessible primary building entrance. Accessible walks shall also be provided between buildings on a common site. Doors swinging onto or away from walks shall have level areas. Walk surfaces shall be stable, firm and of sufficient texture to resist slippage. 
Sec. 9.09. - Handicap parking spaces. 
(a)  A parking lot servicing each entrance provided for the physically handicapped shall have a number of handicap parking spaces as set forth in the following table: 

 
(b)  Spaces shall be: 
(1)  As near as possible to the building entrance provided for the handicapped, with a maximum travel distance of 200 feet; 
(2)  Identified (wheelchair symbol) and controlled for use by individuals with physical disabilities; 
(3)  A minimum of nine feet in width, with a four-foot-wide pedestrian access aisle on one side of the space; and 
(4)  Spaces parallel to a curb (four inches high maximum) on the building side of the parking area are desirable. If perpendicular parking is necessary, four-foot-wide access aisles between every other bay shall be required. 
(c)  Spaces shall be substantially level (one-eighth-inch per foot slope for drainage), suitable for wheeling and walking, and accessible to the building by a clear, level or ramped path of travel. 
Sec. 9.10. - Fire lane requirements. 
(a)  All off-street parking areas provided for shopping centers, malls, large mercantile businesses, large apartment complexes, industries, storage warehouses, or other businesses as determined by the manager of development services and/or the fire chief, shall have fire lanes for providing adequate access for emergency vehicles and equipment to and from the buildings and structures. Fire lanes shall be established as required by the fire code and at other locations as deemed necessary by the fire chief. It is the responsibility of the building owner to paint, sign and mark all required fire lanes in a manner approved by the fire chief. 
(b)  Fire lanes shall be marked with approved yellow paint on the pavement and curb, and approved signs indicating "fire lane" shall be installed adjacent to the fire lane. 
Sec. 9.11. - Outdoor storage areas. 
(a)  Surfaces that are reasonably firm and permanent such as gravel, brick, asphalt rubble, or paver block may be used as outdoor storage areas. Other types of surfaces not listed may be used if approved by the manager of development services. 
(b)  An outdoor storage area shall not be used for parking of customers, employees, or owner's vehicles. 
(c)  An outdoor storage area shall allow access to the stored material, and provide a turnaround or drive through space with no blockage of drainage swales and structures. 
Sec. 9.12. - Internal drives for truck access. 
(a)  Truck access drives shall be designed sufficiently to accommodate the anticipated size of truck vehicles for turning radii, sight distance, turnaround ability, etc. 
(b)  A suitable material is required to pave the drive and parking areas for trucks. Such suitable materials are compacted milled asphalt or crushed concrete, soil cement base, full depth asphaltic concrete, etc. Noncompacted gravel and or gravel depth less than six inches is not allowed. 
Sec. 9.13. - Dumpster pads and access drives. 
(a)  All commercial, industrial, and institutional sites shall have a dumpster pad and paved access provided for the removal of refuse from the property. The utility billing supervisor shall determine the appropriate size of the refuse receptacle. The size requirements for the receptacle shall be determined based upon the proposed business and the intended use. The refuse receptacle requirements shall be incorporated in the site plan submitted to the city manager of development services for review. The following applies to all types of businesses: 
(1)  The dumpster pad and approach shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The pad shall be made of concrete measuring six inches thick and having a minimum compressive strength of 4,000 psi at the 28-day break. 
b.  The minimum dimensions of the concrete pad shall measure 20 feet, six inches long by 12 feet, six inches wide. 
(2)  The dumpster receptacle enclosure shall consist of three walls and a front gate. The walls and gate shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The minimum measurements for the interior of the walled enclosure shall be ten feet deep and 11 feet wide. 
b.  The walls shall be eight feet high or at least 24 inches above the top of the dumpster receptacles. 
c.  All forms of business other than food establishments have the option of using masonry block, wood, or other suitable material for the construction of the walls to enclose the dumpster receptacle. 
d.  An opaque front gate shall be installed to provide containment of loose trash and to provide for concealment of the refuse receptacle. 
e.  A minimum of three six-inch diameter pipe bollards spaced two feet apart (on center) and 18 inches (on center) from the rear wall of the enclosure shall be installed to protect the rear wall from damage. The bollards shall be filled with concrete. They shall be seven feet in length with three feet set below finished grade and four feet above finished grade. The three feet of the bollard set below finished grade shall be encased in concrete. The concrete easement shall measure at least 18 inches in diameter and shall extend a minimum of four inches below the bottom of the metal casing of the pipe bollard. Paint all bollards OSHA yellow. 
f.  Each section of the access gates shall swing open a full 120 percent from the closed position. A pipe bollard shall be installed for each section of gate at the full open position to restrict the gate from opening further. Bollards shall meet the same requirements for installation as stated in section 9.13(a)(2)e. 
g.  The gates shall have three-fourths-inch diameter by one and one-half-inch deep recesses formed in the concrete and asphalt for the gate cane bolts to fit in. Provide two each at gate in closed and open positions. Field verify the exact locations. 
h.  An optional three-foot-wide access gate in the side wall of the enclosure may be provided for employees to gain access to the enclosure to facilitate the emptying of trash receptacles. For food establishments the following additional requirements apply: 
i.  The walls for dumpster pads at food establishments shall be made of masonry brick or block material only. 
j.  To provide for the washdown of trash containers there shall be a sump with a grate inlet within the confines of the walled dumpster enclosure. The inlet shall be connected to an approved drain pipe that is directly connected to the sanitary sewer line leading either to an approved septic drain field or an approved public sanitary sewer system. 
k.  To reduce the amount of rain water run-off from entering the sanitary sewer system through the sump grate inlet the concrete pad shall be designed so that the rain water from the surrounding parking lot does not enter the enclosure. This may be accomplished by raising the concrete pad above the adjacent parking lot grade or, by sloping the pad to shed stormwater away from the front opening of the enclosure. Spot elevations shall be shown for the dumpster pads. 
(3)  Appropriate lane width and turning radius shall be incorporated in the site construction plans for the refuse removal vehicle to access the dumpster receptacle and to exit the property safely. 
(4)  All businesses are required to maintain the dumpster enclosure in a continuous state of repair to include: 
a.  The gate shall be maintained so that it is fully functional. It shall open and close as designed. 
b.  Any walls of the enclosure that are damaged from any cause shall be repaired. 
(5)  As of October 1, 2006, all dumpsters located in the incorporated areas of the city shall conform to all requirements for dumpster receptacle enclosures. 
DIVISION 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND OUTDOOR STORAGE AREA STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 9.14. - Pavement design. 
(a)  Parking and interior drive pavement shall consist of either of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Option 1: 
a.  Ninety-five percent compacted base soil; 
b.  Six inches of 95 percent compacted, crushed stone; and 
c.  One and one-half inches of compacted, asphaltic concrete wearing surface. 
(2)  Option 2: 
a.  Six inches of compacted soil cement base (six percent cement); and 
b.  One inch compacted, asphaltic concrete wearing surface. 
(3)  Option 3: This surface must be approved on a case-by-case basis by the manager of development services. 
a.  Ninety-five percent compacted base soil; and 
b.  Six inches of compacted, Portland cement concrete. 
(4)  The requirements listed above are for the off-street parking of cars and light trucks. In areas where heavier vehicles and large trucks will load, unload, or park, the material thickness shall be increased as specified by the manager of development services to accommodate the greater loads. 
(b)  To provide proper drainage, the minimum slope of a parking lot shall be 0.5 percent and the maximum slope shall be ten percent. 
Sec. 9.15. - Parking lot lighting. 
All businesses which have after dark business hours shall have adequately lighted parking areas. Such lighting shall be shielded in such a manner as not to create a hazard or nuisance to the adjoining properties or the traveling public. 
ARTICLE X. - POTABLE WATER REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10.01. - Service to new developments and new subdivided lands. 
(a)  The city utilities authority has control over the supply of potable water to all lands subdivided after July 27, 1995, and all other kinds of nonagricultural development whose plans are submitted for a land development permit after July 27, 1995, in the incorporated areas of the city. 
(b)  An agreement for the manner of supply for potable water shall be made with the utilities authority. 
Sec. 10.02. - General requirements. 
The state public health regulations and the utilities authority control the installation of potable water facilities. The following are additional minimum requirements: 
(1)  When future extensions are possible, water easements through the proposed development shall be required. All new development in the City of Leesburg is required to be connected to the city water system. 
(2)  Drinking water wells shall be approved by the applicable state health agency when such systems are permitted by the utilities authority. 
(3)  Any project shall be designed so as to conform to the utilities authority's master plan for water development. Where in the opinion of the utilities authority it is deemed necessary in order to implement the master plan to provide additional capacity in the design of the distribution or collection facilities for future needs of the utilities authority, the cost of additions shall be borne by the utilities authority. 
(4)  All public water systems shall be placed in such a way so as to have access to public rights-of-way or easements. Public water systems shall meet the minimum standards set forth in the zoning ordinance or any other applicable local, state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
(5)  A ten-foot-wide buffer screen made of plants described in the zoning ordinance is required around all property containing public water pumping, treatment and storage systems and all property containing public sewage treatment systems for all properties located within or adjacent to residential developments. 
(6)  Access to any properties containing public water production or sewage treatment systems must have an access easement, a driveway connection and a suitable surface to drive upon. 
Sec. 10.03. - Water line design criteria. 
(a)  Working pressure. All pipe, fittings, valves, fire hydrants and appurtenances shall be capable of full service at a working pressure of not less than 150 psi. 
(b)  Pressure. All water mains including those not designed to provide fire protection, shall be sized after hydraulic analysis to maintain a minimum, in service pressure of 20 psi at ground level under all conditions of design flow. 
(c)  Design flow. 
(1)  The design flow is to consist of projected demand plus fire flow (if required). To determine projected peak flow for residential developments the values in Table 6.3A shall be used. For developments other than residential, utilize AWWA Manual of Water Supply Practices M22, Sizing Water Service Lines and Meters, to establish peak demand. For fire flow, select the proper value from Table 6.3B. 
(2)  Any new water lines connected to a utilities authority water main with pressure supplied by an elevated tank shall be required to design for fire flow. 
Table 6.3A Peak Water Demand for Residential Developments 

 
Table 6.3B Minimum Design Fire Flows 

 
Sec. 10.04. - Water line requirements. 
(a)  All public water system mains shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter. The pipes to be used for any public water main are as follows: 
(1)  Ductile iron pipe may be used for all pipe sizes. Such pipe shall be push-on or mechanical joint conforming to AWWA C104, and the interior and exterior shall receive an approved bituminous coating. All gaskets, bolts and lubricants shall be furnished. 
(2)  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pressure pipe may be used for sizes eight through 12 inches for water lines except for fire hydrant branch lines, for creek crossings and 50 feet adjacent thereto or other similar locations. It is the intent that PVC water pipe is to be used in long runs between fittings and/or valves only. PVC pipe shall conform to the requirements of AWWA C-900, Standard for Pressure Pipe with Iron Pipe outside diameter. Pipe shall be class 150 with a standard dimension ration of 18. 
(b)  Typically, new water mains to be located along any future or existing city roadways shall be placed on the south and west side of the road, set ten feet from the back of the curb or 15 feet from the edge of the pavement where there is no curb. Site specific conditions may vary the actual placement of the water mains. Such variation shall be approved by the manager of development services. 
Sec. 10.05. - Fire hydrant requirements. 
(a)  Typical fire hydrant spacing shall be 500 feet. Hydrants shall be located in a manner to provide complete accessibility, and in such a manner that the possibility of damage from vehicles or injury to pedestrians will be minimized. Except when waived by the manager of development services, a fire hydrant shall be located at all street intersections in all zoning districts. 
(b)  Each hydrant shall be connected to the main pipe with a six-inch cast iron or ductile iron branch. Piping between hydrants and mains shall not be plastic. Each fire hydrant shall be controlled by an independent six-inch gate valve. Inlet connection shall be furnished with mechanical joint for connection to spigot of mechanical joint hydrant lead. 
(c)  Size of hydrant valve shall be 5¼-inch minimum. All hydrants shall have two, 2½-inch hose nozzles and one 4½-inch pumper nozzle and shall be designed for 150 pounds working pressure or 300 pounds hydrostatic pressure, and shall conform to the latest specifications of the AWWA C502. All working parts shall be bronze (bronze to bronze waterway). All hose threads shall be national standard threads. On 2½-inch outlets, there shall be 60-degree V-threads, 7½ threads per inch. On 4½-inch pumper nozzles, there shall be four threads per inch. Hydrants shall have a six-inch mechanical joint end inlet. 
(d)  Fire hydrant main valves shall open against water pressure and close with water pressure. Operating threads shall be isolated from the hydrant water way completely by an O-ring seal plate. 
(e)  Hydrants shall be compressive type, self-oiling, non-freezing and provided with a safety flange and coupling. The operating nut shall be totally sealed away from the hydrant barrel and all working parts shall be continuously and automatically lubricated from a large oil reservoir and packing gland. Drain mechanism shall be simple, positive and automatic in operation. The safety flange on the barrel and the safety coupling on the valve stem shall be constructed so as to reduce damage to barrel and stem in case of a traffic accident. The force of impact shall break the flange and spread the coupling. The construction of the flange and coupling shall be such as to permit rapid replacement. They shall be located above the ground line. 
(f)  The hydrant shall be constructed so as to permit facing the nozzles in any direction at any time without digging or cutting off water. All working parts of the hydrant, including the seat ring shall be removable through the top without digging. Seat rings shall be so shaped and arranged as to be readily removable. Seat rings shall be bronze and shall screw into a bronze bushing in the shoe. Hose and steamer connections shall be breached locked into the hydrant barrel and then caulked with lead to seal them permanently, or threaded and pinned into the hydrant body. 
Sec. 10.06. - Water main valve requirements. 
Valves shall be located at no more than 1,500-foot intervals in residential areas and 1,000-foot intervals in nonresidential areas. At water main junctions, the minimum number of valves to be provided shall equal the number of pipes extending from the junction minus one. When connecting to an existing water main only one valve is required to be constructed on the new main. 
Sec. 10.07. - Construction constraints. 
(a)  Quality assurance. 
(1)  Qualification of workmen. Provide at least one person who shall be present at all times during the construction who is thoroughly familiar with the work involved and who shall direct the work. 
(2)  Codes and standards. Conform to all federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(3)  Qualifications of testing agency. Where the services of a testing agency are required, use only qualified testing laboratories with not less than three years' experience in conducting and evaluating the required tests. 
(b)  Submittals. Submit laboratory reports to the manager of development services for all tests performed on this project as required by this section or by applicable federal, state or local agencies. 
(c)  Prevention of contaminated water at lines in service. Sections of water lines adjacent to existing water lines that are in service shall be chlorinated, flushed and checked for absence of bacteria before the new section of the line can be pressure tested. A pressure test may be performed on the line before chlorinating, provided the new line is not connected to any existing line during the pressure test. This procedure is set forth to prevent contaminated water or water with high chlorine content from being forced into a line in service through a faulty valve or other defect during pressure tests. 
DIVISION 2. - POTABLE WATER SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 10.08. - Water system design criteria. 
(a)  Minimum design criteria. 
(1)  At water main and sewer line crossings, one full length of water pipe (20 feet) must be centered directly over the sewer line such that ten feet of pipe is on each side. 
(2)  For crossings of new construction of sewer mains and water lines, the water lines are to be on top of sewer mains. 
(3)  At surface crossing, pipes of special construction with flexible watertight joints must be used. 
(4)  Only ductile iron is to be used within 20 feet of the bank of any stream. 
(b)  Locations. 
(1)  Water main line location. Pipes 16 inches and larger shall have minimum cover of 48 inches and pipes smaller than 16 inches shall have minimum cover of 30 inches. At street intersections or where the new pipelines cross existing or proposed underground lines at the approximate same depth as the new line, the cover shall be increased and the new line laid below the existing or proposed pipelines. Where the new pipeline crosses existing or proposed ditches, the top of pipe shall be a minimum of 36 inches below the existing or proposed invert of ditch, whichever is lower. 
(2)  Fire hydrant location. 
a.  The setting of any hydrant shall conform to the following. 
1.  Curb lines. When placed behind curb, the hydrant barrel shall be set so that no portion of the pumper or hose nozzle cap will be less than 60 inches nor more than 90 inches from the gutter face of the curb. 
2.  Sidewalk. When set in the lawn space between the curb and the sidewalk or between the sidewalk and the property line, no portion of the hydrant or nozzle cap shall be within 18 inches of the sidewalk. 
3.  Ditch section streets. When placed along a roadway having a ditch section the hydrant barrel shall be set so that no portion of the pumper or hose nozzle cap will be less than 20 feet nor more than 24 feet from the edge of the roadway pavement. 
4.  Position of nozzles. All hydrants shall stand plumb and shall have their nozzles parallel with or at right angles to the curb with the pumper nozzle between 18 inches and 24 inches above the ground. Hydrants shall be furnished for a minimum cover of four feet from top of the pipe. 
(3)  Water service laterals. Water service laterals shall have a minimum cover of 24 inches within the right-of-way. Within five feet of the water meter the cover shall not be reduced to less than 18 inches. 
(4)  Water meters. Water meters shall be located off of the right-of-way but within six inches of the right-of-way. 
(c)  Sprinkler connections. For each fire protection sprinkler connection to publicly owned water system, provide a double detector check valve installation consisting of not less than two detector check valves with bypass meter on the second unit and two gate valves all enclosed in an accessible concrete or masonry pit. The pit is to have an aluminum access hatch. 
(d)  Anchorage of bends, tees, and plugs. 
(1)  Limiting pipe diameter and degree of bend. Reaction or thrust backing shall be applied on all pipelines four inches in diameter or larger at all tees, plugs, caps and at bends deflecting 22.5 degrees or more according to Table 1 or movement shall be prevented by attaching rust proof tie rods. 
(2)  Material for reaction backing. Reaction or thrust backing shall be placed between solid ground and the fitting to be anchored. The backing shall be so placed that the pipe and fitting joint will be accessible for repairs. 
(3)  Retainer glands. Mechanical joint retainer glands of adequate strength to prevent movement or other suitable means may be used instead of concrete backing. 
Table 1. Minimum Thrust Block Area 

 
Sec. 10.09. - Quality assurance. 
(a)  Qualification of workmen. Provide at least one person who shall be present at all times during the construction who is thoroughly familiar with the work involved and who shall direct the work. 
(b)  Codes and standards. Conform to all federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(c)  Qualifications of testing agency. Where the services of a testing agency are required, use only qualified testing laboratories with no less than three years' experience in conducting and evaluation the required tests [sic]. 
(d)  Submittals. Submit laboratory reports to the manager of development services for all tests performed on this project as required by these specifications or by applicable federal, state or local agencies. 
(e)  Phasing of water line testing. 
(1)  Sections of water lines connected to existing water lines that are in service (even though valved off) shall be chlorinated, flushed and checked for absence of bacteria before the new section of line can be tested for hydrostatic compliance. This is set forth to prevent contaminated water or water with high chlorine content from being forced into a line in service through a faulty valve or other defect during pressure tests. 
(2)  Sections of water lines not physically connected to existing water lines, at the contractor's option, may test the line for hydrostatic pressure compliance before chlorinating. 
(3)  After water lines have passed the waterline purification test, the lines are tested for hydrostatic pressure compliance. Each valved section of water line is to be tested separately. 
(4)  The manager of development services shall be notified 48 hours prior to testing and allowed opportunity to witness hydrostatic testing and waterline purification. 
(f)  Water line purification. 
(1)  Before being placed into service. All new water distribution systems or extensions to existing systems, or any valved section of such extension or any replacement in the existing water distribution system shall be chlorinated. Any of the following methods of procedure shall be followed: 
a.  Liquid chlorine gas-water mixture; 
b.  Direct chlorine feed; and 
c.  Calcium hypochlorite and water mixture. 
(2)  Preliminary flushing. Prior to chlorinating, all dirt and foreign matter shall be removed by a thorough flushing through the hydrants, or by other approved means. Each valved section of newly laid pipe shall be flushed independently. On dead-end lines, temporary flushing outlets shall be provided and dead-end thoroughly flushed. Temporary outlets shall be removed and the end of the line plugged after flushing is complete. This shall be done after the pressure test is completed. 
(3)  Liquid chlorine. A chlorine gas-water mixture shall be applied by means of a solution fed chlorinating device, or if approved by the manager of development services, the gas shall be fed directly from a chlorine cylinder equipped with proper devices for regulating the rate of flow and the effective gas diffusion of gas within the pipe. Chlorinating with the gas-water mixture is preferred to the direct feed. 
(4)  Point of application. The preferable point of application of the chlorinating agent shall be at the beginning of the pipeline extension, or any valved section of it, and through a corporation stop inserted in the horizontal axis of the newly laid pipe. The water injector for delivering the gas-water mixture into the pipe shall be supplied from a tap on the pressure side of the gate valve controlling the flow into the pipeline extension. In a new system, application may be at the pumping station, or the elevated tank, or the standpipe or the reservoir if available. 
(5)  Rate of application. Water from the existing distribution system or other source of supply shall be controlled to flow very slowly into the newly laid pipeline during the application of chlorine. The rate of chlorine gas-water mixture flow shall be in such proportions to the rate of water entering the pipe that the chlorine dose applied to the water entering the newly laid pipe shall be at least 40 to 50 ppm. 
(6)  Back pressure prevented. Back pressure, causing a reversal of flow in the pipe being treated shall be prevented. 
(7)  Retention period. Treated water shall be retained in the pipe long enough to destroy all non-spore forming bacteria. The period shall be at least 24 hours and preferably longer as may be directed by the manager of development services. After the chlorine treated water has been retained for the required time, the chlorine residual at pipe extremities and at other representative points shall be at least 24 ppm. Water samples must be taken from suitable taps. 
(8)  Chlorinating valves and hydrants. In the process of chlorinating newly laid water pipe, all valves or other appurtenances shall be operated while the pipe is filled with the chlorinating agent. 
(9)  Final flushing and test. On dead-end lines, temporary flushing outlets shall be provided and the dead-end thoroughly flushed. Temporary outlets shall be removed and end of line plugged after flushing is complete. 
(10)  Repetition of procedure. Should the initial treatment prove ineffective, the chlorinating procedure shall be repeated until confirmed tests show that water sampled from the newly laid pipe conforms to the requirements of this ordinance. 
(11)  Calcium hypochlorite or chlorinated lime in water. On approval of the manager of development services, a mixture of either calcium hypochlorite or chlorinated lime of known chlorine content may be substituted as an alternative for liquid chlorine. 
(12)  Proportions of calcium hypochlorite or chlorinated lime and water mixture. A five percent solution shall be prepared consisting of five percent of either powder to 95 percent water by weight. 
(13)  Application. This calcium hypochlorite or chlorinated lime and water mixture, first made into a paste and them thinned to a slurry, shall be injected or pumped into newly laid pipe under conditions heretofore specified for liquid chlorine applications after preliminary flushing. 
(14)  Approval. Provisions for final flushing, testing and approval under this alternative shall be the same as those described previously. 
(15)  Procedure when cutting into existing pipelines. Cuts made in existing pipelines for the insertion of valves, fittings, repairs, or for any other purpose shall be chlorinated by shaking a predetermined quantity of the powder into the pipe on each side of the cut-in. After slowly filling the section and reversing the flow, the chlorinated water shall be retained for at least four hours, then flushed until no odor of chlorine can be detected in the flushing water, or until a check has been made for residual chlorine as provided for herein. If the contractor has any knowledge of foreign material entering the water line, or if the unfinished connection has been left unattended, or if the manager of development services requests, service shall not be restored until the absence of bacteria in the water has been demonstrated. 
(16)  Resumption of service. After satisfactory chlorinating by any of these alternative procedures, the consumer may be served from the newly laid pipeline or the service may be resumed on existing pipelines only after approval of the public health authority having jurisdiction and the city. 
(g)  Water quality tests of water mains. 
(1)  Following chlorinating, all treated water shall be thoroughly flushed from the newly laid pipe line at its extremities until the replacement water is throughout its length. 
(2)  After thoroughly flushing the new pipe, the water is required to be, upon testing, both chemically and bacteriologically proven equal to the water quality served the public and approved by the public health authority having jurisdiction and the manager of development services. 
(3)  Should the initial treatment as specified above prove ineffective, the water line purification procedure shall be repeated until confirmed tests show that water sampled from the newly laid pipe conforms to the requirements. 
(4)  Resumption of service. After satisfactory waterline purification by any of the procedures above, the consumer may be served from the newly laid pipeline or the service may be resumed on existing pipelines only after the approval of the public health authority having jurisdiction and the manager of development services. 
(h)  Hydrostatic tests of water mains. 
(1)  Pressure of test. Hydrostatic pressure to be used shall be 150 psi. (AWWA C500 Sec. 4.1 and 4.2) 
(2)  Duration of pressure test. Test shall last at least two hours. 
(3)  Procedure. Each section of pipe shall be slowly filled with water and the specified test pressure, measured at the lowest point of elevation, shall be applied by means of a pump connected to the pipe in a satisfactory manner. The pump, pipe connection, gauges and all necessary apparatus shall be furnished by the contractor. 
(4)  Expelling air. Before applying the specified test pressure all air shall be expelled from the pipe. To accomplish this, taps will be made, if necessary, at points of highest elevation and afterwards tightly plugged. Tapping clamps and saddles shall be used on PVC pipes. 
(5)  Permissible leakage. Suitable means will be provided by the contractor for determining the quantity of water lost by leakage under normal operating pressure. No pipe installation will be accepted if the leakage (evaluated on a pressure basis of 150 psi) is greater than that determined by the following formula: 
L = SD(P).5/133,200 

 
(6)  Variation from permissible leakage. Should any sections of pipe show leakage greater than the specified limit, the contractor shall locate and repair the defective part of the section until the leakage is within the specified allowance. When existing valves are used to isolate a section of line being tested, the contractor shall provide temporary caps or plugs to isolate the line being tested if the existing valve will not hold the required test pressure without leaking. 
(7)  Leakage defined. Leakage is the quantity of water to be supplied into the newly laid pipe, or any valved section on it, necessary to maintain the specified leakage test pressure after the pipe has been filled with water and the air expelled. 
(8)  Time for making test. Pipe may be subjected to hydrostatic pressure, inspected and tested for leaking at any convenient time after partial completion of backfill. 
Sec. 10.10. - Construction. 
(a)  Setting valves, valve boxes, fittings and blow-offs. 
(1)  General. Gate valves, butterfly valves and pipe fittings shall be set and jointed to new pipe in the manner heretofore specified for cleaning, laying and jointing pipe. 
(2)  Valve boxes. Cast iron valve boxes shall be firmly supported, and maintained centered and plumb over the wrench nut of the valve, with box cover flush with the surface of the finished pavement or at other such level as may be directed by the manager of development services. In other than paved areas, after setting the valve box, construct a protective concrete collar around the cover at ground level and slope away from the box cover. Concrete collar shall be a minimum of four inches thick by 18 inches square. 
(3)  Back siphoning to be prevented. Drainage branches of blow-offs shall not be connected to any sewer or submerged in any stream or be installed in any other manner that will permit back siphoning into the distribution system. 
(b)  Setting fire hydrants. 
(1)  Wherever hydrants are set in impervious soil, a drainage pit two feet in diameter and two feet deep shall be excavated below each hydrant and filled completely with coarse gravel or broken stone mixed with coarse sand, under and around the bowl of the hydrant and to a level six inches above the waste opening. No hydrant drainage pit shall be connected to a sewer. 
(2)  The bowl of each hydrant shall be well braced against the unexcavated earth at the end of the trench with stone slabs or concrete backing. Both hydrant and valve shall be tied to the pipe with mechanical joint retainer glands. Concrete backing shall be installed in such a manner as to leave pipe and fitting accessible for repair. In no case shall the waste opening be obstructed from free drainage. 
(3)  Hydrants shall be thoroughly cleaned of dirt or foreign matter before setting. 
(c)  Plugging dead-ends. Standard plugs shall be inserted into the bells of all dead pipes, tees or crosses and spigot ends shall be capped. Plugs or caps shall be jointed to the pipe or fittings in the appropriate manner. 
(d)  Special construction. For construction on piers, supporting pipe on bridges, or other special work, use safe and generally accepted construction methods to accomplish the required work. 
Sec. 10.11. - Materials. 
(a)  Any pipe, solder or flux used in the installation or repair of the water lines must be lead free. Pipes and fittings must no contain more than eight percent lead and solders and flux must not contain more than 0.2 percent lead. 
(b)  Pipe and fittings. 
(1)  Ductile iron pipe shall be centrifugally cast with minimum wall thickness as follows. 

 
(2)  The project sponsor shall submit certification to the authority or its agent that the soil along the route of the proposed pipeline had been analyzed and evaluated in accordance with AWWA C105, pages 4-7 of Appendix A and that the soil will not be corrosive to ductile iron pipe. In areas where soil is corrosive to ductile iron pipe the pipe shall be covered with a sealed polyethylene sheath as hereinafter described in these specifications. 
(3)  The pressure rating, metal thickness, net weight of pipe without lining, length of pipe, name of manufacturer and letters "DI" shall be clearly marked on each length of pipe. 
(4)  If it is necessary to cut ductile iron pipe, in no case shall it be cut by burning, but shall be cut by saw, cutter, abrasive wheel or other approved means. 
(5)  In areas where it is shown that soil will be corrosive to ductile iron pipe, the pipe shall be covered and sealed with a polyethylene sheath. 
a.  Polyethylene sheath shall be class "C" in accordance with AWWA specification C105. 
b.  Where polyethylene sheath is placed on pipe, the trench shall be backfilled to a depth of not less than one foot above the top of the pipe with sand or sand-clay backfill. Sand or sand-clay backfill shall be specially selected from the excavation and shall contain no stumps, roots, rocks or other items that will puncture sheathing. 
(6)  Flexible joint pipe. Flexible joint pipe shall meet the requirements of AWWA C151 for ductile iron pipe and may be of the bolted or boltless type suitable for 150 psi working pressure. If bolted type pipe is used all bolts shall be corten steel. All pipe and fittings shall meet the applicable requirements AWWA C151. The interior and exterior of all pipe and fittings shall receive an approved bituminous coating, except the ball and machined surfaces which shall receive a protective coating as recommended by the manufacturer. The interior of all pipe shall be cement mortar lines as specified in AWWA C104. 
(7)  PVC pipe for water lines. Pipe joints shall be integral bell and spigot type with rubber ring sealing gasket. The pipe bell shall be designed to be at least as strong as the pipe wall. Standard lengths shall be 20 feet except that 15 percent of total footage for a particular project may be random lengths of not less than ten feet each. Each pipe shall be tested by the manufacturer to 600 psi for a minimum of five seconds. The bell shall be tested with the pipe. All pipe shall be listed by the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. and by Factory Mutual as approved for use in underground municipal water distribution systems and private fire protection systems. Cast iron or ductile iron fittings shall be used with PVC pipe. Cast iron or ductile iron fittings shall meet the requirements of subsection (b)(10) or (11) of this section. 
(8)  All PVC water mains shall be marked with a locating wire to provide a means of locating PVC water mains using standard pipe location equipment. Locating wire shall be a minimum of # 8 copper or aluminum wire suitable for underground burial and shall be placed within three inches of pipe for the entire length of main. Intermediate in depth between the PVC water main and ground surface, non-metallic water main warning tape is to be placed during the process of backfilling the ditch line. 
(9)  Pipe for service connections. Connections from the corporation stops to the house services shall be type K annealed copper tubing with flared fittings, or 160 psi polyethylene per ASTM D2239 with SS compression fittings or "Insta-Tite" fittings by Mueller. Polyethylene is not approved for use near existing or potential future manufacture, use, storage, or disposal of petrochemicals. Where polyethylene is used, fittings shall be used for all vertical bends of more than 22½ degrees, and special attention shall be given to assure proper bedding. 
(10)  Cast iron fittings shall be mechanical joint and shall conform to AWWA C110 for sizes six-inch through 12-inch and shall be class 250. Fittings 14 inches and larger shall be class 150 and shall be of the dimensions and metal thickness as shown in the Handbook of Ductile Iron Pipe as published by the Ductile Iron Pipe Research Association. All fittings shall be cement mortar lines in accordance with AWWA C104 including an approved bituminous seal coat. 
(11)  Ductile iron fittings shall be designed for pressure rating of 250 psi and shall be in accordance with AWWA C110. Fittings shall be mechanical joint. All fittings shall be cement mortar lines in accordance with AWWA C104 including an approved bituminous seal coat. 
(c)  Backflow preventers shall be required. Use reduced pressure type suitable for 150 psi working pressure and complying with ASSE 1013 and AWWA C506 specifications. Use flanged cast iron body with bronze trim. Developer shall furnish complete unit including preventer, strainer and test cocks. 
(d)  Gate valves. 
(1)  Twelve inches and smaller: Each valve shall have mechanical joint bell ends. Valve shall be for horizontal mounting and valve stem shall be furnished with two-inch square water works nut. Resilient seat gate valves are acceptable. 
(2)  Fourteen inches and larger: Each valve shall have mechanical joint bell ends. Valves shall be for horizontal mounting and shall be provided with bypass valve with two-inch square operating nut. The main valve shall be provided with watertight bevel gear case with outside, packed stuffing box with a gland enclosure. Both main valve stem and pinion stem shall be provided with accessible alemite connections. The test plug in each main valve shall be provided with a brass gage cock with handle lever. 
(e)  Butterfly valves. 
(1)  Butterfly valves shall be rubber seated for 150 psi, minimum working pressures and line velocities up to 16 fps. The bodies of all valves shall be cast iron construction of ASTM A126, Class B or ASTM A48, Class 40. Valves shall be manufactured by a company acceptable to the manager of development services. Underground valves shall be provided with operators with non-corrosion construction for input shafts, seals, bushings, and bolting. Operators shall be totally enclosed and permanently lubricated for direct burial of the valves and frequent submergence in water up to 20 feet of head. The operators shall open the valves on a counter-clockwise rotation of the operator wrench nut which shall be AWWA two-inch, square cast iron. The valve ends shall be mechanical joint in accordance with AWWA C111. Except as modified herein, the butterfly valves and operators shall meet or exceed the applicable requirements of the Specifications for Rubber Seated Butterfly Valves, AWWA C504 for Class 150B. 
(2)  All butterfly valves shall be provided with O-ring seals, nonadjustable stuffing boxes and shall be of a self-sealing or self-adjusting type that can be replaced without the necessity of removing the valve or the valve shaft from its pipeline location. 
(3)  The valves shall be installed with the valve shaft in a horizontal position. The shaft shall be of 18-8 stainless steel, type 304. A machined, one piece, high tensile steel, hexagonal shaft fitting a matching opening through the valve disc, completely sealed from the pipeline contents with type 304 stainless steel bushings is acceptable. Valve discs shall be keyed or pinned securely to the valve shaft. Pins, wedges, and accessories shall be 18-8 stainless steel, type 304 or 316. 
(4)  Valve discs may be made of ASTM A536, Ni—Resist Type 1 ductile iron or ASTM A48 Class 40 cast iron. 
(5)  Valve seat surfaces shall be 18-8 stainless steel, type 304 or Monel, or Ni-resist on natural rubber or an approved equal. 
(f)  Fire hydrants. 
(1)  Hydrants shall be of the same general type as hydrants in the existing system. Barrels of hydrants shall be designed to permit installation of one or more extension sections to increase the depth of bury of the hydrant. 
(g)  Encasement pipe. 
(1)  Encasement pipe shall conform to AASHTO standards and the state department of transportation standards where being placed under roads and to AREA 1-5-B where placed under railroads. Encasement pipe shall be installed by a dry boring method in which the casing pipe is placed simultaneously with the boring action. Inspect the roadway or track directly above the work before, during and after the placing of the encasement for settlement. If settlement occurs the contractor shall bring the roadway surface to its original grade by means approved by the state department of transportation or realign the track to its proper grade by means approved by the track owner. 
(2)  Corrugated metal encasement pipe shall be the size, section modulus and type required and shall conform to AASHTO designation N-36-60. The pipe shall be bituminous coated inside and outside in accordance with AASHTO designation M-190-60, type A. 
(3)  Welded steel encasement pipe shall be of the size and wall thickness required and shall conform to ASTM designation A-252, Grade 2. The pipe shall be coated on the outside only with a coal tar primer coat followed by a single application of hot coal tar enamel 3/32 inch thick plus a 1/32 inch, bonded 15 lb. asbestos felt wrap or approved equal. At the option of the contractor, uncoated pipe may be used subject to the approval of the City of Leesburg, the Georgia Department of Transportation or the railway company provided the wall thickness is at least 0.063 inch greater than coated pipe. 
(h)  Corporation and curb stops. 
(1)  Corporation stops shall be Mueller No. H-9971, H-15009 or equals from Hays, McDonald, Ford or Jones. 
(2)  Curb stops shall be Mueller No. H-15175, H-15211, or H-15171 or equals from Hays, McDonald, Ford or Jones. 
(i)  Miscellaneous materials. 
(1)  The threaded rods and clamps for anchorage shall be mild steel conforming to ASTM A-36. The rods and clamps shall be brushed clean of all rust and foreign matter and completely coated with "no-oxide" or an approved equal before backfilling. 
(2)  Anchoring couplings shall meet the requirements set forth for cast iron or ductile iron fittings. 
(3)  Locked mechanical joint retainer glands shall be ductile iron retainer glands equipped with the hardened cupped and set screws. Assembly shall be designed for a minimum pressure or 250 psi. Retainer gland screws shall be tightened as recommended by the manufacturer. 
(4)  Tapped valves and sleeves shall meet the requirements set forth for gate valves. Tapping sleeves shall be all stainless steel or ductile iron construction. 
(5)  The minimum compressive strength required for formed concrete at 28 days is 3,000 psi. 
(6)  All stone for riprap shall consist of rough, unhewn quarry stone weights not less than 165 pounds per cubic foot as nearly rectangular in section as possible. The stone shall be resistant to the action of air, temperature changes and water. It shall be sound and dense and suitable in all other respects for the purpose intended. 
a.  A six-inch thick blanket of slag or gravel shall be placed as a bed for riprap. Slag or gravel shall be as hereafter specified. 
b.  Riprap shall be placed in such a manner as to ensure that the larger pieces are distributed uniformly and that the smaller pieces will fill the spaces between the larger pieces. After placing the riprap it shall present a reasonably smooth surface to the thickness. 
c.  After riprap is in place the voids shall be completely filled with clean gravel or slag. The gravel or slag shall be worked into the crevices between the rocks with rodding or other approved methods. 
(7)  Gravel or slag shall be screened, washed and shall be 100 percent retained by the one-quarter-inch screen. One hundred percent shall pass a one-inch opening and shall be uniformly graded from maximum size to minimum size. Foreign matter shall not exceed three percent by weight when dry. 
(8)  Geotextile fabrics shall be as designated on the plans and approved by the manager of development services. 
(j)  Iron pipe corrosion. 
(1)  Submit certification to the manager of development services that the soil along the route of the proposed pipeline has been analyzed and evaluated in accordance with AWWA C105 and that the soil will not be corrosive to ductile iron pipe. 
(2)  Where polyethylene sheath is placed on pipe, the trench shall be backfilled to a depth of not less than one foot above the top of the pipe with sand or sand-clay backfill. Sand or sand-clay backfill shall be specially selected from the excavation and shall contain no stumps, roots, rocks, or other items that will puncture sheathing. 
ARTICLE XI. - SANITARY SEWAGE REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11.01. - Service to new developments and new subdivided lands. 
(a)  The city utilities authority has control over the receipt of sanitary sewage from all lands subdivided after July 27, 1995, and all other kinds of nonagricultural development whose plans are submitted for a land development permit after July 27, 1995, in the incorporated areas of the city. 
(b)  An agreement for the manner of receipt and treatment of sanitary sewage shall be made with the utilities authority. 
Sec. 11.02. - General requirements. 
The state public health regulations and the utilities authority control the installation of sewage facilities. The following are additional minimum requirements. 
(1)  When future extensions are possible sewer easements through the proposed development shall be required. All new development in the City of Leesburg is required to be connected to the city sewer system. 
(2)  Private disposal systems, treatment plants and septic tanks shall be approved by the applicable state health agency when such systems are permitted by the utilities authority. 
(3)  Any project shall be designed so as to conform to the utilities authority's master plan for sanitary sewer development. Where in the opinion of the utilities authority it is deemed necessary in order to implement the master plan to provide additional capacity in the design of the distribution or collection facilities for future needs of the utilities authority the cost of additions shall be borne by the utilities authority. 
(4)  All public sewer systems shall be placed in such a way so as to have access to public rights-of-way or easements. Public sewer systems can only be placed on parcels meeting the minimum standards set forth in the zoning ordinance or any other applicable local, state federal law, rule or regulation. 
Sec. 11.03. - Sewerage system design criteria. 
(a)  Sanitary sewer stub-outs shall be provided for each development lot and shall extend from the sewer line to the property line if public sanitary sewer service is provided in the development. 
(b)  No sanitary sewer shall be allowed to connect to any storm drainage pipes or systems. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer velocities shall be sufficient to prevent deposition, yet not high enough to cause separation or cause erosive damage to the pipe. In order to accomplish this sewers shall be sloped to achieve a minimum velocity of two feet per second when the conduit is flowing half full. The slope shall also be designed so that the velocity will not exceed ten feet per second. The required slope to achieve minimum velocity (n = 0.13) shall be: 

 
(d)  Infiltration into the sewer shall not exceed 200 gallons per minute per mile of sewer per inch of inside diameter of pipe per 24 hours in any section between successive manholes. In areas where the seasonal or normal groundwater is above the top of the pipe, the plans are to be noted as such and special conditions may be placed on those pipes. 
Sec. 11.04. - Pipe requirements. 
(a)  Sanitary sewers shall be sized to ensure that estimates of quantities of wastewater flows based upon present and future populations, along with projected infiltration and inflow do not exceed pipe capacity. 
(b)  In no case shall pipe less than eight inches in diameter be allowed for collector or interceptor lines. Special consideration shall be given to the pipe diameter if commercial and industrial customers are anticipated to contribute to the system. 
(c)  Pipe material may be ductile iron, cast iron or polyvinylchloride (PVC). 
(1)  Ductile iron. 
a.  Ductile iron pipe and fittings can be used as specified for gravity sewers. The minimum wall thickness shall be as specified in ASTM A746 for thickness class 52. Extra thickness shall be provided where required by deep cover in accordance with ASTM A746, table 12, for type 2 laying conditions. 
b.  Ductile iron pipe for gravity sewers shall be mechanical joint or push on joint, unless specified otherwise, conforming to ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51. Pipe and fittings shall have a cement mortar lining conforming to ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4. A standard bituminous coating shall be applied to the exterior of all ductile iron pipe fittings. 
c.  Ductile iron lock joint shall meet the requirements of ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51 for ductile iron pipe and may be of the bolted type suitable for 150 psi working pressure. If bolted type pipe is used, all bolts shall be corten steel. 
d.  Ductile iron fittings shall be designed for a pressure rating of 250 psi and shall be in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10. Fittings shall be mechanical joint. 
(2)  Cast iron. 
a.  Cast iron pipe shall be mechanical joint conforming to federal specifications WW-P-421c. Fitting shall be class 150 or its equivalent, for the mechanical joint pipe or slip on joints, if approved by the manager of development services. 
b.  Cast iron pipe in general, shall be used at wet crossings and at points specifically designated on the plans, including force mains. 
(3)  Polyvinylchloride (PVC). 
a.  Plastic gravity sewer pipe and fittings shall be unplasticized PVC meeting or exceeding ASTM D3034, classification SDR 35, for smooth wall pipe, or ASTM F794 for ribbed sewer pipe. Ribbed pipe shall be homogeneous and have a smooth interior with a solid cross sectional rib exterior. Exterior ribs shall be open profile and perpendicular to the axis of the pipe to allow placement of the sealing gasket. 
b.  Pipe lengths shall not exceed 20 feet and provisions shall be made at each joint to accommodate expansion and contraction. 
c.  All pipe and fittings shall be joined by means of integral wall bell and spigot and sealed with a rubber gasket. This joint shall be capable of withstanding an internal hydrostatic pressure of 25 psi for one hour with no leakage. 
d.  When using PVC pipe, metalized locating tape shall be placed 18 to 24 inches below the ground surface. 
Sec. 11.05. - Manhole requirements. 
(a)  Generally. Manholes shall be located at the end of each line; at each change in grade, direction, size of pipe or alignment; at each street intersection; and at a distance not to exceed 400 feet. 
Sec. 11.06. - Force mains. 
(a)  Force mains shall be of ductile iron of PVC C-900 water quality pipe for sizes up to and including 12-inch diameter. Force mains shall have at least 30 inches of cover. 
(b)  Placement procedures of the pipe shall meet the same requirements as water lines. Testing and limits of acceptability of the pipeline shall be the same as for water lines. 
DIVISION 2. - SANITARY SEWER STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 11.07. - Sewer system design criteria. 
(a)  Minimum design criteria. 
(1)  When sewer mains cross water mains a minimum vertical separation of 18 inches shall be provided between the outsides of the pipes. 
(2)  At sewer main and water line crossings, one full length of sewer pipe (20 feet) must be centered directly under the water line. 
(3)  For crossing of new construction of sewer mains and water lines, the water lines shall be on top of the sewer mains. 
(4)  Sewer mains must be laid at least ten feet horizontally from any existing or proposed water line. Where it is not practical to maintain the ten-foot separation, the water main must be laid in a separate trench and that the bottom of the water line be at least 18 inches above the top of the sewer line. 
(5)  Only ductile iron is to be used within 20 feet of the bank of any stream. 
(6)  Mains, service lines, structures, etc., shall not be located on or in close proximity to an existing or abandoned landfill site of any other site used for waste disposal. 
(b)  Locations. 
(1)  Sewer mains when located in the right-of-way or adjacent utility easement will be located on the opposite side of the road when water lines are present. 
Sec. 11.08. - Field quality control. 
(a)  Infiltration. 
(1)  Infiltration into the sewer shall not exceed 200 gpm per mile of sewer per inch of inside diameter of pipe per 24 hours in any section between successive manholes. The amount of leakage shall be measured by a weir or other suitable device. This measurement shall be made between 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless line segments are plugged to prevent normal sewage flow or it is a new line that has no taps connected. 
(2)  If the infiltration exceeds the specified amount, necessary corrections shall be made to bring the line septage within the acceptable limit. All visible leaks or points of infiltration shall be repaired even if the infiltration is below the specified limit. 
(b)  General leakage requirements. 
(1)  The entire sewer line system shall be as watertight as possible. Eliminate all visible points of ground water infiltration and any other significant points of leakage which can be located, regardless of test results obtained as hereinafter required. 
(2)  Upon completion of pipe installation and trench backfilling to within one foot of finished grade, perform system infiltration test and piping or joint air test for all work constructed. 
(3)  Infiltration testing is required on all new sewer line segments extending completely from manhole to manhole unless waived by the city. 
(c)  System infiltration testing. 
(1)  Measure infiltration into each major section of sewer during wet weather as requested by the city. Use suitable temporary weirs and depth measuring devices acceptable to the city as giving reasonably accurate flow measurement, to be furnished, installed and removed by the contractor. 
(2)  Take whatever action may be necessary to permanently reduce infiltration from all water sources into all constructed work to rates, as determined by tests witnessed by the city which do not exceed 0.0375 gallons per inch of nominal pipe diameter per foot of pipe per 24 hours. 
(d)  Air testing. 
(1)  Nominal four-inch to 36-inch pipe: After completing backfill of a sewer line section, conduct a low pressure air test using methods and devices acceptable to the city. Perform such tests using the following general procedures. 
(2)  Temporarily plug line segment between two manholes using plugs having airtight fittings through which low pressure air can be introduced into the pipe segment being tested. 
(3)  Introduce low pressure air into the test pipe segment until the internal air pressure reaches 4.0 psi above ground water pressure if any. 
(4)  Wait at least two minutes for air temperature in the test segment to stabilize while internal air pressure remains no less than 3.5 psig above ground pressure. 
(5)  Accurately determine the elapsed time for internal pressure to drop 1.0 psi. 
(6)  The air test is acceptable if elapsed time is no less than shown by the following table: 

 
(7)  Air leakage time is based on pipe being damp. If pipes and joints are dry, dampen line if helpful in meeting air test time requirements. 
(e)  Deflection testing. 
(1)  Conduct internal deflection testing on all installed gravity sewer lines six-inch size and larger, no sooner than 15 days after completion of trench backfilling. Repair or replace all defective pipe found during mandrel testing and conduct another deflection test to determine the extent and necessary repair of any additional deficiencies. After repairing all defects, perform successful mandrel testing in the presence of the city. Mandrel testing is successful when the mandrel device can be pulled through the pipe between manholes in a continuous operation, without interruption. 
(2)  Furnish mandrel test gauges, sized and constructed below: 
Five Percent Deflection Mandrel (ASTM D 2412) 

 
(f)  Certification. Upon request of the manager of development services, the contractor shall certify the accuracy of the mandrel test gauges by use of proving rings to an accuracy of 0.05 inches. Use proving rings complying with ASTM F 679 and ASTM D 3034. 
Sec. 11.09. - Construction. 
(a)  Manhole construction specifications. 
(1)  Use whatever care, materials and construction technique are required to achieve permanent watertight joints and connections. 
(2)  Every manhole is to be fully and completely built as the work progresses, as each is reached by the laid pipe, and shall be carried up to its top finish grade. Manholes and any attachments to them shall be neatly and accurately built, of proper materials and in a workmanlike manner. Brick shall be hard-burned, common brick meeting ASTM specifications C-32-58, grade NA or concrete brick meeting ASTM C-55-55, grade A. The minimum compressive strength for concrete used shall be 3,000 psi at 28 days. Field specimens for laboratory tests shall be made in accordance with ASTM standards. 
(3)  Manhole bottoms shall be either cast-in-place or integral with the lower section of the riser walls. Cast-in-place bottoms shall be a minimum of eight inches thick and shall be not less than 12 inches in diameter larger than the bottom outside diameter of the riser section. The invert of the manhole shall be built up with cement grout so to facilitate the entrance and flow of sewage through the manhole. Manhole bottoms shall have shaped inverts and channels completed neatly so as to permit smooth hydraulic flow of sewage through the manhole. The shaping may be constructed with cement grout or an approved alternate. 
(4)  When required, single lengths of pipe shall be built into manholes to receive either present or future branch lines. To relieve pressures in brick manholes, the brick is to be arched over all such pipe. Where there is no intent to construct the branch lines at once, the pipe inserted must be securely closed in a manner that the future connection can be made without breaking the pipe. 
(5)  Where the manhole intercepts existing laterals, the lateral service to the existing manhole shall be kept intact until the new section of sewer line is completed and approved. Then the laterals shall be broken and fed to the new manhole and the dead-end at the manhole wall shall be plugged and grouted. 
(6)  Precast concrete units. 
a.  Set precast units plumb and to exact grade on approximately three inches thickness of compacted sand bedding. 
b.  In the event field conditions necessitate additional pipe connections for which no holes have been cast, neatly chip necessary holes, being careful not to crack portions of unit to remain. Replace any units excessively damaged as a result of field modification as determined by the manager of development services or his designee. 
c.  Fill joints between sections with butyl based sealant especially formulated for sewer service or an approved equal. Supplement connecting joints with manufactured water stops or seals when recommended by pipe manufacturer or necessary to minimize leakage. 
d.  Precast concrete units shall have structure bottom integral with the lower section of the riser walls. 
e.  Joints in riser and cone sections shall have rubber gaskets or an approved equal. 
(7)  Masonry structures. 
a.  Examine masonry units prior to installation and reject all units which are cracked, damaged, or in any way fail to meet this specification. 
b.  Use only clean masonry units, free of dirt and debris which would adversely affect mortar bond. Do not use frozen materials, or materials mixed or coated with ice or frost. 
c.  Set masonry units in full mortar bed, carefully fitting units around pipe openings, etc., so as to fill all voids; completely fill any remaining voids with mortar. Do not use mortar that has been mixed more than 45 minutes or which has been retempered. 
d.  When using multi-wythe construction, make every fifth coarse a header coarse. 
e.  Do not install masonry when the air temperature is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit and falling. 
f.  Do not backfill against masonry structures until they are at least seven days old. In cold weather delay backfilling for a longer time to allow additional curing time for mortar. 
g.  Saturate outside wall of each manhole with water, and plaster with a smooth, one-half-inch thick minimum coat of mortar, except that the mortar shall be mixed with one part cement to two parts sand. Do not add hydrated lime to plaster mortar. 
h.  Brick shall be hard-burned common brick meeting ASTM specifications C-32-58, grade NA or concrete brick meeting ASTM C-55-55, Grade A. 
i.  Minimum compressive strength for concrete and concrete brick shall be 3,000 psi at 28 days. Field specimens for laboratory tests shall be made in accordance with ASTM standards. 
j.  Masonry structures shall have cast-in-place bottoms and they shall be a minimum of eight inches thick and shall not be less than 12 inches in diameter larger than the bottom, outside diameter of the riser section. 
k.  To relieve pressures caused by single lengths of pipe built into brick, the brick shall be arched over all such pipe. 
(8)  Metal castings. 
a.  All castings shall be made of clean, even grain, tough gray cast iron being smooth and free from projections, sand, holes or defects. 
b.  The quality of iron shall conform to the current ASTM A-48, class 30, gray iron casting specifications. 
c.  The raised letter "Sanitary Sewer" shall be cast on the upper surface of all manhole covers. 
d.  The portion of the frame and cover which forms the cover seat shall be machined so that no rocking of the cover is possible. 
e.  The castings shall be coated with a coal tar, pitch varnish. 
f.  Examine each casting before installation and reject all castings which are cracked, damaged or in any other way fail to meet the specifications. 
g.  Clean castings of dirt, mud and grease before installation. 
h.  Set castings according to location and arrangement shown on the drawings. Rigidly support castings to maintain true alignment and elevation. Where castings are located in concrete or mortar construction, thoroughly work concrete or mortar around the casting so as to eliminate voids and provide solid bearing surfaces and rigid construction. 
i.  Make frames, subject to traffic, firm and stable under actual traffic conditions. When constructed in paved areas set frames to conform with exact pavement surface including tilting frame where necessary to match pavement surface. 
(b)  Installing sanitary sewer in tunnel liner or pipe encasement. 
(1)  Tunnel liner, six to 42 inches. Insert sewer pipe concentrically into tunnel liner by securing hardwood blocks radially around sewer pipe at no more than ten-foot, longitudinal intervals. Use stainless steel banding for securing wood blocks in place. Blow sand into annular space between sewer pipe and tunnel liner starting at the longitudinal center and proceeding outward to each end. Use techniques which assure complete filling of all voids. 
(2)  Tunnel liner, 42 inches and larger. Use the following procedure for installing sewer pipe in tunnel when adequate working room is available, otherwise follow same procedures as specified for tunnel liners that are between six and 42 inches. Insert sewer pipe into tunnel liner after having grouted bottom of tunnel to exact grade required to support pipe in proper position. Permanently secure sewer pipe in position by blocking each pipe length at top and sides with brick and mortar, followed by bedding sewer pipe to a depth equal to one-fourth the pipe outside diameter, with concrete. Plug ends of tunnel with 12-inch thickness of masonry, leaving weep holes at lower end of tunnel. 
(3)  Pipe encasement. The encasement used shall be bituminous coated, welded steel pipe of wall thickness and size shown on the drawings or an approved equal. Pipe shall conform to ASTM A-252, Grade 2. Encasement shall conform to AASHTO standards and state department of transportation standards where placed under highways and to AREA 1-A-13 where placed under railroads. 
(c)  Wyes, tees and service. 
(1)  Provide wyes and/or service tees at points indicated on drawings, specified herein, and as requested by the manager of development services. If wyes or service extensions are not to be connected to a building sewer under this work, close end of pipe with removable, factory fabricated plug or stopper. 
(2)  When replacing and existing sewer, connect all existing service lines to the new sewer. 
(3)  Service lines, unless otherwise shown on the drawings or requested by the city, are to be run to suit field conditions at a minimum grade of two percent and with a minimum pipe cover of 30 inches. 
(4)  Provide clean-outs in service lines at not more than 75-foot intervals and where pipe horizontal deflection exceeds 45 degrees. Unless noted otherwise, furnish clean-outs consisting of wye and 45-degree fittings, vertical pipe and threaded brass or PVC removable plug. 
(d)  Force mains. 
(1)  Force mains shall be of ductile iron pipe and shall be constructed only so far in advance of pipe laying as the manager of development services shall permit. Force mains shall have at least 30 inches of cover. The trench widths shall be at least one foot greater than the pipe diameter and the maximum clear trench width shall not be more than two feet greater than the pipe diameter. 
(2)  Placement procedures of the pipe shall meet the same requirements as water lines. Testing and limits of acceptability of the pipeline shall be the same as for water lines. 
(3)  Submit certification for the manager of development services that the soil along the route of the proposed pipeline has been analyzed and evaluated in accordance with AWWA C105 and that the soil will not be corrosive to ductile iron pipe. 
Where polyethylene sheath is placed on pipe, the trench shall be backfilled to a depth of not less than one foot above the top of the pipe with sand or sand-clay backfill. Sand or sand-clay backfill shall be specially selected from the excavation and shall contain no stumps, roots, rocks, or other items that will puncture sheathing. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1980 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1980 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1980 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2003 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2003 Code, as updated through May 6, 2014, which are included herein. Sections of the 2003 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia State Law. 

 