THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND DEVELOPMENT RESOLUTION FOR THE UNINCORPORATED AREA OF PEACH COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2004 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
COUNTY OF 
PEACH, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS PUBLICATION 
____________ 
James E. Khoury 
Chairperson 
____________ 
Thomas Palmer 
Vice Chairperson 
____________ 
Joe R. Collins 
Martin H. Moseley, Jr. 
Walter Smith 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Marcia W. Johnson 
County Administrator 
____________ 
Jeffrey Liipfert 
County Attorney 
PREFACE 
This volume constitutes a publication of the comprehensive land development resolution for the unincorporated area of Peach County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of this publication were the land development resolution adopted on January 9, 1973, and subsequent provisions subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each such subsequent provision is included in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived from the original resolution. By use of the tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any subsequent provision included herein. 
Except as otherwise noted, the resolution has been printed as set out by the county, and the original numbering system has been maintained. A uniform style has been employed for titles, headings, capitalization and numbers in text. Obvious misspellings and puncuation errors have been corrected without notation. Words or phrases added by the editor for purposes of clarification are enclosed in brackets. 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Senior Code Attorney, and William B. Eddy, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Jeffrey Liipfert, County Attorney, Ms. Marcia W. Johnson, County Administrator, and Mr. Rickey Blalock, Zoning Enforcement Official, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a publication which will make the land development code of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Peach, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: table of contents; section catchlines; section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Peach, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Peach, Georgia. 2004. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances/resolutions/amendments have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances/resolutions/amendments that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances/resolutions/amendments that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND DEVELOPMENT RESOLUTION FOR THE UNINCORPORATED AREA OF PEACH COUNTY, GEORGIA 
THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND DEVELOPMENT RESOLUTION FOR THE UNINCORPORATED AREA OF PEACH COUNTY, GEORGIA 
A resolution of the county commission of Peach County, Georgia, establishing zoning districts and regulating the uses of land therein; and specifying off-street parking and loading requirements; adopting general zoning regulations; adopting a map for the purpose of indicating land districts; describing zoning rules and regulations in said districts; defining said districts; providing for rezoning and redistricting; establishing certain building and zoning regulations in each of the said districts; regulating land uses and accessory uses; prescribing the percentage of land area which may be occupied under varying circumstances providing for variances and nonconforming uses; establishing a board of zoning appeals; providing for the regulation of subdivision of land; adopting general subdivision regulations; defining certain of the terms herein used; providing a method of administration and practice and procedure; providing penalties for a violation; providing remedies for enforcement hereof; to repeal all conflicting laws and resolutions; and for other purposes. 
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND ENACTMENT 

Section 11. - General. 
The county commission of Peach County, Georgia, under the authority of the Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, or the general welfare of the unincorporated area of the county and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; hereby ordains and enacts into law an official Land Development Resolution for the Unincorporated Area of Peach County. 
ARTICLE II. - TITLE 

Section 21. - Designated. 
This resolution shall be known and may be cited as "The Comprehensive Land Development Resolution for the Unincorporated Area of Peach County, Georgia." 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED IN THIS RESOLUTION 

Section 31. - General. 
In the construction of this resolution, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Except as specifically described herein, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. Words used in the present tense include the future tense and words used in the future tense include the present. Words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, corporation, club, association, society, organization, trust, partnership or body politic. The word "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes "structure. 
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; the word "may" is permissive. The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designated to be used or occupied." The word "map" means the "Official Zoning Map of the Unincorporated Area of Peach County." 
Section 32. - Specific definitions. 
When used in this resolution, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section: 
1.  Accessory use: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
2.—5.  Reserved. 
6.  Airport: A transportation terminal facility where aircraft take off and land (not to include private landing strips at which less than ten airplanes are based). 
7.  Airport elevation: The highest point of an airport's usable landing areas measured in feet from sea level. 
8.  Airport hazard: Any structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near such airport, which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing and take off at such, airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or take off of aircraft. 
9.  Alley: A public way dedicated to and accepted by a governing body and which is primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
10.  Approach, transitional, horizontal and conical zones: These zones apply to the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal and conical surfaces as defined in section 75.1.5. 
11.  Automobile repair garage: A building or portion thereof, other than a private or parking garage, designed or used for the storage, servicing, repairing equipping, or hiring of motor-driven vehicles. 
12.  Automobile service station: Any area of land, including structures thereon, used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil, automobile accessories, and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, automobile washing, and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but excluding painting and major repair. 
13.  Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
14.  Boardinghouse: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation and/or by prearrangement, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons. 
15.  Buffer: A dense planting of shrubs and trees established and maintained to a height of not less than six feet on a strip of land not less than ten feet in width. 
16.  Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels. 
17.  Building, accessory: A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of the main building or land. 
18.  Building, alterations of: Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls, beams, columns, and girders) except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use resulting from moving a building from one location to another. 
19.  Building, height of: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building, including parapets, except that the distance shall be measured to the average height between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs and to the deck line of a mansard roof. 
20.  Building, main: A building in which is conducted, the principal use off the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated. 
21.  Building setback line: A line across a lot, generally parallel to the street right-of-way line, indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected. 
22.  Clinic: An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by doctors, nurses or other such medical professionals. 
23.  Club: Buildings and facilities owned or operated by corporation, association, person or persons for social, educational, or recreational purposes but not primarily for profit or to render a service to the general public. 
24.  Community sewer system: A privately owned sewer system meeting the minimum standards set by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, as approved by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
25.  Comprehensive plan (master plan): The various maps, plats, charts, and descriptive and explanatory material and all textual matter approved by the Peach County Planning Commission for the purpose of guiding and shaping the growth of any portion of the unincorporated area of Peach County. 
26.  Conical zone: Refer to section 75.1.5. 
27.  County commission: The board of commissioners of Peach County, Georgia. 
28.  Day care center: Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, or institution, or any other group wherein are received for pay seven or more children under 18 years of age for group care, without transfer of custody, for more than four hours and less than 24 hours per day. 
29.  Day care home: Any place operated by any person who receives for pay three to six children under 17 years of age for group care, without transfer of custody, for more than four hours and less than 24 hours per day. 
30.  District: A section of the unincorporated area of Peach County within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
31.  Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential purposes. 
32.  Dwelling, multifamily: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more families living independently of each other with individual kitchen and bathroom facilities. 
33.  Dwelling, single-family: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family (but not including manufactured homes or mobile homes). 
34.  Dwelling, tenant: A residential structure located on a farm and occupied by a farm worker employed by the owner of the farm as defined in section 71.1.5. 
35.  Dwelling, two-family (duplex): A building designed for and occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other with individual kitchen and bathroom facilities. 
36.  Dwelling unit: A dwelling or portion thereof providing complete living facilities for one family. 
37.  Easement: A grant by a property owner for the use for a specific purpose (or purposes) of a piece of land by the general public, a corporation, or a person or persons when not used for subdivision purposes. 
38.  Factory built or modular home (industrialized building): Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled, in accordance with the Georgia Industrial Building Act (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq.) and the Rules of the Commissioner of Community Affairs, in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. State-approved buildings meet the state building and construction codes and bear an insignia of approval. In lieu of state approval, under certain circumstances (section 3282.12 Federal Register, May 13, 1976) inspection and approval may be granted by the zoning enforcement official. 
39.  Fallout shelter: A structure or portion of a structure intended to provide protection to human life during periods of danger from nuclear fallout, air raids, storms, or other emergencies. 
40.  Family: One or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a boardinghouse, motel or hotel, as herein defined. 
41.  Fence: A barrier, intended to prevent unwarranted intrusion, made of post and wire or boards. 
42.  Flea market: The ongoing sale or trading of new or used clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, baked goods or other food items, antiques, or similar goods or merchandise where said inventory may have been received by purchase, on consignment, or by donation with the intent to resale. Flea markets shall be subject to section 95 of this Code. 
43.  Floodplain: The area adjoining any watercourse which has been or may hereafter be inundated by flood waters. 
44.  Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
45.  Floor area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the total number of floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, but not including: The attic space providing headroom for less than seven feet; unusable basement or cellar space not used for retailing; uncovered steps or fire escapes; open porches; accessory water or cooling towers; accessory off-street parking spaces; and accessory off-street loading berths. 
46.  Frontage, lot: The distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
47.  Frontage, street: All the property on the side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or if the street is dead ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
48.  Garage apartment: A dwelling unit for one family erected above a private garage detached from the main dwelling. 
49.  Garage, parking: A building or portion thereof designed or used for storage of motor-driven vehicles, and at which motor fuels and oils may be sold, and in connection with which may be performed general automotive servicing as distinguished from automotive repairs. 
50.  Garage, private: An accessory building or a portion of a main building used for the parking or storage of automobiles of the occupants of the main building. A carport is considered a private garage. 
51.  Garage sale: See Yard sale. 
52.  Home occupation: An occupation for gain or support conducted only by members of a family residing on the premises and entirely within the main dwelling and will be subject to section 95 of this Code. Home occupations shall not include yard sales, garage sales, or flea markets. 
53.  Horizontal zone: Refer to section 75.1.5. 
54.  Hotel: A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for more than 20 persons and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally made through the interior of the building. 
55.  Institution: A nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment. 
56.  Junkyard: A lot, land, or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage, and sale of old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, or waste; junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof; iron, steel, and other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous material, waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material, or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, and salvaging, or for the sale of parts thereof. 
57.  Kennels: Any location where raising, grooming, caring for, or boarding of dogs, cats, or other small animals for commercial purposes is carried on. 
58.  Kindergarten: A school for pre-elementary school children ranging in age from four through six years, which operates for less than four hours per day. 
59.  Landing area: The area of an airport used for landing, taking off, or taxiing of aircraft. 
60.  Laundromat: A business that provides home-type washing, drying, and/or ironing machines for hire. 
61.  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup: A business that provides only for the convenience of taking and picking up of laundry, such as establishments not having any equipment for processing of the laundry. 
62.  Loading space: A space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks and other carriers. 
63.  Lot: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for building development. 
64.  Lot, corner: A lot bounded on two adjacent sides by streets. 
65.  Lot, depth of: A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of its side lot lines. 
66.  Lot, double frontage: A lot having frontage on two streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
67.  Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
68.  Lot of record: A lot or parcel of land the existence, location, and dimensions of which have been recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Peach County. 
69.  Lot width: The distance between lot side lines measured at the building line. 
70.  Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
71.  Maximum probable flood elevation line: That line, established by the county commission, adjacent to and generally paralleling a watercourse below which the land would be expected to be inundated by a flood or a 100-year frequency magnitude or greater. 
72.  Mobile home (house trailer): A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
73.  Mobile home park or manufactured home park: Any parcel of land where mobile homes or manufactured homes are customarily parked for a longer period of time than 30 days for living or sleeping purposes, or where spaces are set aside and offered for rent for use by mobile homes or manufactured homes for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building, structure, or facility used by occupants of mobile homes or manufactured homes on such premises. 
74.  Mobile home space or manufactured home space: A plot of ground within a mobile home park or a manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home or manufactured home. 
75.  Mobile home subdivision or manufactured home subdivision: A subdivision designed and intended for residential use where residence is primarily in mobile homes or manufactured homes. 
76.  Motel: A building or a group of buildings containing sleeping accommodations for rental primarily to automobile transients and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally to the outside of the building. 
77.  Nonconforming use: A building, structure, or use of land existing on January 9, 1973, or at the time of a zoning amendment and which does not conform with the regulations of the use district in which it is located. 
78.  Open space: A yard area which is not used for or occupied by a driveway, off-street parking, loading space, drying yard, or refuse storage space. 
79.  Parking space: The area required for parking one automobile, which in this resolution is held to be an area of 200 square feet, excluding passageways, and so arranged as to accommodate a standard automobile and to provide necessary maneuvering space. 
80.  Planned unit development (PUD): A parcel of land which is developed as an integrated unit under single ownership or control, which includes two or more main buildings and where the specific requirements of a given district may be modified and where the minimum area is fixed. 
81.  Planning commission or commission: The Peach County Planning Commission, as established by the county government. 
82.  Plat: A map, plan, or layout of a county, city, town, section, or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties. 
83.  Playschool: A school for pre-kindergarten children ranging in age from three to four years and which operates for less than four hours per day. 
84.  Primary surface: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width proscribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
85.  Principal use: The primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
86.  Professional: When used in connection with "use" and "occupancy" a use or occupancy by persons generally engaged in rendering personal, executive, sales, or administrative services or activities, including accountants, architects, engineers, and land surveyors, doctors, lawyers, insurance offices, real estate offices, religious organizations, stockbrokers, and administrative agencies considered professional in character. The term, however, does not include repairs or sales of tangible personal property stored or located within the structure nor any use which would create any loud noise or noxious odors. 
87.  Public way: Any piece of land over which the general public has a right of usage, whether acquired through prescription, by adverse use of the general public, or otherwise. 
88.  Restaurant, drive-in: An eating and/or drinking establishment which caters to motor-driven vehicle business where the person being served may consume food and/or drink while sitting in a motor-driven vehicle. 
89.  Right-of-way: Access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose or purposes. 
90.  Right-of-way line: The dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land contiguous to street, railroad, or other public utility rights-of-way. 
91.  Roominghouse: A building other than a hotel or motel where lodging for three, but not more than 20 persons, is provided with no meals served. 
92.  Runway: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take off of aircraft along its length. 
93.  Runway, nonprecision instrument: A runway having existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA planning document or military service's military airport planning document. 
94.  Runway, visual: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan, a military service's approved military airport layout plan, or by any planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority. 
95.  Shopping center: A group of commercial establishments planned and developed as a unit, with common off-street parking provided on the property. 
96.  Sign: Any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or marks, or combinations thereof by which anything is made known, such as the designation of an individual, a firm, an association, a profession, a business, a commodity, or a product which are visible from any public way and used as an outdoor display. 
97.  Sign area: The smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof encompassing the entire advertising area, excluding architectural trim and structural supports. 
98.  Sign, outdoor advertising: A structural poster panel or painted sign, either freestanding or attached to a building, for the purpose of conveying information, knowledge, or ideas to the public about a subject unrelated to the premises upon which it is located. 
99., 100.  Reserved. 
101.  Sign structure: A structure composed of one or more poles which is located on the ground or on top of another structure and which supports no more than two signs. 
102.  Sign structure facing: The surface of the sign upon against, or through which the message of the sign is exhibited, not including architectural trim and structural supports. 
103.  Site plan: The drawing(s) which put forth the pattern of development to take place on a particular piece of land. 
104.  Story: That portion of a building other than a cellar included between the surface of the floor and the ceiling above it. 
105.  Street: A public way dedicated to and accepted by a governing body for the use of vehicular or pedestrian traffic by the general public and may be referred to as a street, highway, parkway, road, avenue, drive, boulevard, lane, place, etc. 
106.  Street line: A right-of-way or property line of a street as indicated by dedication or by deed or plat of record. 
107.  Structure: Anything constructed or erected material, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground. 
108.  Subdivider: Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as herein defined. 
109.  Subdivision: Any division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy or building development, and includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included in this definition: 
(a)  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved, provided that the requirements of article XIV, section 144.2 are met. 
(b)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between separate or common owners of adjoining properties, provided that additional lots are not thereby created, and that the lots created are in accordance with the provisions of this regulation. 
110.  Townhouses: A number of single-family dwelling units which are attached and erected in a row as part of a single building, on adjoining lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by an approved fire resistant party wall or walls extending from the basement, cellar, or ground floor to a roof along the divided lot line. 
111.  Transitional zone: Refer to section 75.1.5. 
112.  Travel trailer: A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses which is not more than eight feet in body width and is of any weight provided its body length is less than 32 feet. 
113.  Travel trailer park: Any parcel of land on which are temporarily parked one or more travel trailers for a period of less than 30 days. 
114.  Wall: A barrier, intended to prevent unwarranted intrusion, made of a type of masonry construction such as brick, concrete block, stone, etc. 
115.  Yard: A space on the same lot with a main building, such space being open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
116.  Yard, front: An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of the building and the street line. Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of the main building and shall not project into a required front yard. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
117.  Yard, rear: An open space on the same lot with the main building, such space being unoccupied except possibly by an accessory building and extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building projected to the side lines of the lot. On all corner lots the rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
118.  Yard, side: An open, unoccupied space, on the same lot with a main building, situated between the side line of the building and the adjacent side line of the lot extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. If no front yard is required, the front boundary of the side yard shall be the front line of the lot and if no rear yard is required, the rear boundary of the side yard shall be the rear line of the lot. On corner lots, the side yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its greatest dimension. 
119.  Yard sale: The sale or trading of used clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, baked good or other food items, antiques, or similar goods or merchandise where said inventory was not originally obtained with the intent to resell. Yard sales will be subject to section 95 of this Code. 
(Amd. of 10-11-2005; Amd. of 4-11-2006; Amd. of 2-12-2008) 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Use requirements by districts, § 71 et seq.; other requirements by districts, § 81 et seq. 

Section 41. - Division of the county into districts. 
For the purpose of this resolution, the county is hereby divided into the following types of districts; 
R-AG—Agricultural Residential District 
RR-1—Rural Residential District 
R-1—Low Density Residential District 
R-2—Medium Density Residential District 
R-3—High Density Residential District 
MH—Mobile Home Residential District 
C-H—Highway Commercial District 
C-1—Neighborhood Service Commercial District 
C-2—General Commercial District 
M-1—Wholesale and Light Industrial District 
M-2—General Industrial District 
PUD—Planned Unit Development District 
AH—Airport Hazard Special District 
FW—Floodway Special District 
Section 42. - Intent of districts. 
In order to protect the character of existing neighborhoods; to prevent excessive density of population in areas which are not adequately served with water, sewerage facilities, and fire protection; to ensure that adequate and suitable areas will be available in the county to provide housing for a growing population, and to protect residential areas from the blighting effects of the traffic, noise, odors, and dust generated by commercial and industrial activity; to provide for and accommodate growth and expansion of commercial and industrial activities; to prevent blight and slums and to promote orderly growth and development by grouping similar and related uses together and by separating dissimilar and unrelated uses; and in order that the various other purposes of this article may be accomplished, there are hereby established within the county the abovementioned mentioned zoning districts, identified as follows: 
42.1. R-AG Agricultural residential district. This district is established to protect rural areas against the blight and depreciation which can result from premature development; to encourage the development of rural areas in a coordinated and orderly manner; to protect the use of land adjoining roads passing through the rural portions of the county against strip development which can lead to traffic congestion and traffic hazards; and for other purposes. 
42.1a. RR-1 Rural residential district. This district is established to protect rural areas against the blight and depreciation which can result from premature development; to encourage the development of rural areas in a coordinated and orderly manner; to protect the use of land adjoining roads passing through the rural portions of the county against strip development which can lead to traffic congestion and traffic hazards; to have a slightly higher density than the R-AG district; and for other purposes. 
42.2. R-1 Low density residential district. The intent of this district shall be to maintain dwelling unit density to not more than two dwelling units per net acre of residential land in order to protect the property in this district from the depreciating effects of more densely developed residential uses. 
42.3. R-2 Medium density residential district. The intent of this district shall be to maintain dwelling unit density to not more than five dwelling units per net acre of residential land n order to protect the property in this district from the depreciating effect of more densely developed residential uses. 
42.4. R-3 High density residential district. The intent of this district shall be to maintain dwelling unit density to not more than ten dwelling units per net acre of residential land in order to protect the property in this district from the depreciating effects of more densely developed residential uses. 
42.5. MH Mobile home residential district. The intent of this district shall be to provide adequate locations and densities for mobile home parks, individual mobile homes, and other uses permitted by these regulations within this district. 
42.6. C-H Highway commercial district. The intent of this district shall be to provide a commercial district designed to serve the automobile, its passengers, and highway users rather than individuals who use an automobile as a convenience to perform necessary daily and weekly personal needs. The district is intended to be restricted to state and federal highways which may also have other business districts located on them. 
42.7. C-1 Neighborhood service commercial district. The intent of this district shall be to provide convenient shopping facilities consisting of convenience goods and personal services in neighborhood market areas of/from 1,000 to 4,000 people. 
42.8. C-2 General commercial district. The intent of this district shall be to provide community shopping facilities consisting of a wide variety of sales and service facilities at locations that will be accessible to all shoppers of the county and to provide locations for uses not permitted in other commercial districts. 
42.9. M-1 Wholesale and light industrial district. The intent of this district shall be to create and protect areas for those industrial uses which do not create excessive noise, odors, smoke, and dust and which do not possess other objectionable characteristics which might be detrimental to surrounding neighborhoods or to the other uses permitted in this district. 
42.10. M-2 General industrial district. The purpose of this district shall be to create and protect areas in which industries which are not permitted in an M-1 district can be permitted. 
42.11. PUD Planned unit development district. The purpose of planned unit development regulations is to offer developers the benefits of efficiency, economy, and flexibility by encouraging unified development of large sites while deriving for the county the advantages of improved appearance, compatibility of uses, optimum service by community facilities and better handling of vehicular access and circulation. Review of the development plan by the planning commission assures that such large-scale developments are consistent with the objectives of the county's comprehensive plan. 
42.12 AH Airport hazard special district. This district is composed of lands and structures located within the flight approach areas or navigable airspace of any active airport. The regulations are intended to prevent the development of high residential densities of the concentration of large numbers of persons in those areas endangered by low flying aircraft in the process of landing or taking off and to protect flying aircraft by limiting the height of buildings and trees. 
42.13 FW Floodway special district. The FW district is established to meet the needs of several watercourses to carry abnormal flows of water during times of flooding; to prevent encroachment into the district which will increase flood levels and flood damage; and to prevent loss of life and excessive damage to property in the area of the greatest flood hazard 
Section 43. - Incorporation of the zoning map. 
Said districts are bounded as shown on the sectional atlas property maps contained in one volume entitled, "Official Zoning Map of the Unincorporated Area of Peach County, Georgia" and certified by the clerk hereinafter called "Official Zoning Map" or simply "map," and which, with all notations, references including dates of amendments, and other information shown thereon is hereby made a part of this resolution. Said map shall be made a public record and shall be kept permanently in the office of the zoning enforcement official, where said map shall be accessible to the general public. 
Section 44. - Map amendment. 
If, in accordance with provisions of this resolution, changes are made in the district boundaries or other information portrayed on the official zoning map, changes shall be made on the map within seven days after the amendment has been approved by the county commission. A notation, certified by the county clerk, shall be entered on the map at the time any change is made, which shall include the date of the amendment and a numerical entry referring to the application on file with the county clerk which states a brief description of the nature of the changes. No amendment to this resolution which involves matter portrayed on the map shall become effective until after such change, with appropriate date and notation, has been made on said map. 
Section 45. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
45.1. Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines, land lot lines, centerlines of streets highways, alleys, or railroads, shorelines, streams, reservoirs or other bodies of water, or civil boundaries and they shall be construed to follow such lines. 
45.2. Where district boundaries are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways, or railroads, or rights-of-way of the same, or the centerline of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or said lines extended, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the official zoning maps. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning maps. 
45.3. Where a district boundary line, as appearing on the official zoning map, divides a lot which is in single ownership on January 9, 1973, the use classification of a larger portion may be extended to the remainder by the county commission at the request of the owner of said property without recourse to amendment procedure. 
45.4. Where a public road, street, or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulation applicable to the property to which it is reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street or alley. 
45.5. In case the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the county commission upon application shall determine the location of the boundary. 
Section 46. - Comprehensiveness of zoning districts. 
The purpose of this resolution and the accompanying map is to place all portions of the unincorporated area of Peach County in zoning districts. Should any area appear either by reference to the maps or by interpretation to be inadvertently or otherwise omitted from a classification district, that area or areas are hereby placed in an R-1 single-family [low density] residential district and shall be subject to all the regulations pertaining thereto until such time as the planning commission and the county commission can determine its proper zoning district classification. 
ARTICLE V. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 
Except as hereinafter provided: 

Section 51. - Use. 
After January 9, 1973, no building or land shall be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or altered, unless in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is or is to be located. No more than one principal use per lot shall be permitted except as provided herein. 
Section 52. - Building heights. 
No building or structure shall be erected, moved or altered after January 9, 1973, so as to exceed the height limit that is specified in section 82 herein for the district in which it is located, except for the following buildings and structures: 
52.1. Churches, schools, hospitals, sanitariums and other public and semipublic and public utility buildings. There shall be no restriction on the height on such buildings, provided the front, side, and rear yards required in the district in which such building is to be located shall be increased an additional one foot for each one foot that the building exceeds the maximum height permitted in the district. 
52.2. Barns, silos, grain elevators, or other farm structures; belfries, cupolas and domes; monuments; water towers; transmission towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks; flag poles; radio towers, masts and aerials. 
52.3. Bulkheads, watertanks, and scenery lofts and similar structures provided that such structures shall not cover more than 25 percent of the total roof area of the building on which such structures are located. 
52.4. None of these exceptions to height limits shall apply to signs or outdoor advertising signs or poster panels, which shall be subject to all height limitations of the district in which they are located. 
Section 53. - Lots. 
No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, front, side, or rear yard, inner or outer court, lot area per family, or other requirements of these regulations are not maintained. No building shall be constructed after January 9, 1973, on a lot which does not have a minimum frontage of 30 feet on a street. This section shall not apply when a portion of the lot in question is acquired for public purpose. 
53.1. All lots in any R-AG or RR-1 district on a road with open ditches shall have a minimum lot frontage of the right-of-way, provided that the building line setback is not more than 100 feet from the front property line. However, any lot submitted for approval by itself in an R-AG or RR-1 district and not on a previously approved subdivision which is five acres or more with one dwelling may be approved if there is fee simple ownership access to a county road which fronts at least 30 feet on said county road. Said access shall not be included in the main body of the lot for purposes of determining lot size; and shall be at least 30 feet wide at all points. 
Section 54. - Yards and other spaces. 
No part of a yard or open space, or loading space, or off-street parking space about any building, required for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this resolution shall be included as part of a yard, or off-street parking, or loading space, or open space similarly required for another building. Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed, except for the ordinary projections of sills, cornices, buttresses, ornamental features, chimneys, flues, and eaves, provided such projections shall not extend more than two feet beyond the yard area requirements. 
Section 55. - Densities. 
No building shall be erected, moved, or altered after January 9, 1973, so as to accommodate or house a greater number of families than is specified in the regulations herein for the district in which the building is or is to be located. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 61. - Nonconformities. 
Within the districts established by this resolution or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this resolution was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this resolution or future amendments. It is the intent of this resolution to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this resolution that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
61.1. Incompatibility of nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses are declared by this resolution to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which such use is located. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after January 9, 1973, by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition or replacement by other uses of a nature which would be generally prohibited in the district in which such use is located. 
61.2. Avoidance of undue hardship. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this resolution shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this resolution and upon which actual building construction has begun. 
61.3. Single nonconforming lots of record. A single lot of record which does not meet the requirements for area or width or both that are applicable in the district existing at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this resolution may be used or sold for the erection of those buildings and accessory buildings necessary to carry out the permitted uses in that district, provided: 
61.3.1. Yard dimensions and lot coverage requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located; 
61.3.2. Variance for yard dimensions and lot coverage requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board of zoning appeals as provided for in section 114; 
61.3.3. Locational requirements of accessory buildings and uses are met as provided for in section 93.1; 
61.3.4. Parking space requirements for all districts are met as provided for in section 62.2; 
61.3.5. Such lot must not have continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership; 
61.3.6. In residential districts, buildings shall be limited to single-family detached dwellings. 
61.4. Nonconforming lots of record in combination. If two or more lots or a combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this resolution and it all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this resolution and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this resolution, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with a width or area below the requirements stated in this resolution. 
61.5. Nonconforming uses of land. Where on January 9, 1973, lawful uses of land exist which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this resolution, the uses may be continued, so long as they remain otherwise lawful, provided: 
61.5.1. No such nonconforming uses shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this resolution; 
61.5.2. No such nonconforming uses shall moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such uses at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this resolution; 
61.5.3. If any such nonconforming uses of land are voluntarily discontinued for a period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the district in which such land is located; and 
61.5.4. No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
61.5.5. If any such nonconforming uses of land are occupied by temporary, mobile or portable structures, which are moved for any reason for any period of time, no other, structure may be constructed on or moved onto said property until the use is made to conform with these regulations. 
61.6. Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this resolution that could not be built under the terms of this resolution by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height yards, its location on the lot, bulk, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
61.6.1. No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity; 
61.6.2. Should such nonconforming structure or a nonconforming portion of the structure be destroyed by any means to the extent of more than 50 percent of its current replacement value it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this resolution; 
61.6.3. Should such structure be voluntarily moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which located after it is moved. 
61.7. Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in combination. If lawful use involving individual structures, of a structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this resolution that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this resolution, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful; subject to the following provisions: 
61.7.1. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this resolution in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed voluntarily moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located; 
61.7.2. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed; 
61.7.3. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this resolution, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; 
61.7.4. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination is voluntarily discontinued or abandoned for more than six months (except when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except, in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; 
61.7.5. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure to the extent of more than 50 percent of its current replacement value shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
61.8 Repairs and maintenance. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs including remodeling, or repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
Section 62. - Off-street automobile parking. 
Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided on every lot on which any permitted use is established in accordance with this resolution. 
62.1. General requirements. For the purpose of this resolution the following general requirements are specified: 
62.1.1 The term "off-street parking space," shall mean a space at least ten feet wide and 20 feet in length with a minimum net area of 200 square feet, excluding area for egress and ingress and maneuverability of vehicle. 
62.1.2. Parking spaces for all uses shall be located on the same lot with the main buildings to be served, except as provided below: 
62.1.2.1. If an off-street parking space cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the board of zoning appeals may permit (as a special exception) such space to be provided on other off-street property, provided such space lies within 400 feet of an entrance to the principal building and provided that such space is located within a zoning district which permits the principal use. Such vehicle parking space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not there after be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
62.1.2.2. The required number of parking spaces for any number of separate uses may the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that up to one-half of the parking space required for an existing church whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at nights or on Sundays. 
62.1.3. An area reserved for off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of this resolution shall not be reduced in area changed to any other use unless the permitted use which it serves is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent parking space is provided to the satisfaction of the board of zoning appeals. 
62.1.4. Off-street parking existing on January 9, 1973, in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use. 
62.2. Parking space requirements for all districts. Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley, and shall be equal to the minimum requirements for the specific land use set forth. 

 
62.3. Site requirements. All off-street parking, except that for one-family and two-family dwellings, shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
62.3.1. All such parking areas shall be hard surfaced with concrete or plant bituminous material and shall be maintained in a dustproof condition and a good stand of grass shall be maintained on the remainder of the lot. 
62.3.2. Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that light is reflected away from adjacent properties. 
62.3.3. The parking lot shall be adequately drained. 
62.3.4. A buffer shall be provided along those lot lines of the. parking area which abut residential districts. 
62.3.5. A raised curb of at least six inches shall be erected along all parking and drive areas except for driveway openings. 
Section 63. - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall be provided as hereinafter required by this resolution. 
63.1. Size of off-street loading spaces. Each off-street loading space shall have minimum dimensions of 14 feet in height, 12 feet in width and 55 feet in length. However, upon sufficient demonstration that a particular loading space will be used exclusively by smaller trucks, the board of zoning appeals may reduce the minimum size. 
63.2. Connection to street or alley. Each required off-street loading space shall have direct access to a street or alley or have a driveway which offers satisfactory ingress and egress for trucks. 
63.3. Floor area over 10,000 square feet. There shall be provided for each hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building or similar use requiring the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise, and having a floor area of more than 10,000 square feet, at least one off-street loading space (not necessarily a full space if shared by an adjacent establishment) so located as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street, or alley. 
[ 63.4 Reserved. ] 
63.5. Bus and trucking terminals. There shall be provided sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loaded at the terminal at any one time. 
63.6. Location of off-street loading spaces. All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building which they are intended to serve, or on an adjacent lot when shared with the use occupying said adjacent lot. 
63.7. Permanent reservation. Area reserved for off-street loading in accordance with the requirements of this resolution shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which is served is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent loading space is provided and approved by the board of zoning appeals. 
Section 64. - Control of curb cuts and vision clearance. 
The requirements for controlling curb cuts and maintaining vision clearance shall be as follows: 
64.1. Curb cuts. No curb cut shall exceed 50 feet in length, nor shall curb cuts be closer than 20 feet to an intersection of two streets measured along the curbline. 
64.2. Vision clearance. In all use districts, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, marquee, or other obstruction to vision, between the heights of 2½ and ten feet from the ground level shall be permitted within 25 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets or railroad lines, or of a street intersection with a railroad line. 
Section 65. - Classification of streets. 
All streets and roads in the unincorporated area of Peach County are hereby divided into the following classes as shown on the major thoroughfare plan adopted by the county commission and on record in the office of the county clerk: 
65.1. Expressways. A street designed for fast, continuous movement of all types of traffic, with control over access to abutting property and the spacing of street intersections. 
65.2. Arterial. A street designed for rapid, continuous movement of all types of traffic but with less control over the access points from streets and adjacent property than expressways. 
65.3. Collector street. A street designed to carry traffic with relatively little interruption and at moderate speeds between local, service streets and arterials, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
65.4. Minor street. A local service street intended to provide direct access to abutting property. Examples of such streets are: 
65.4.1. Cul-de-sac. A service street having one end open to traffic, with the other end permanently terminated by turnaround. 
65.4.2. Marginal access street. A street generally parallel and adjacent to expressways, arterials, or connector streets, for the purpose of providing access to abutting properties and of separating highspeed from local traffic. 
Section 66. - Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles. 
Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, boat, camping, and hauling, shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the following requirements: 
66.1. No more than one commercial vehicle per dwelling shall be permitted; and in no case shall a commercial vehicle containing explosives, gasoline, or liquified petroleum products be permitted. The board of zoning appeals may grant a special exception to the terms of this provision based upon the following: 
66.1.1. The commercial vehicles were parked or stored on said residential lot prior to January 9, 1973. 
66.1.2. The owner or operator of said commercial vehicles does not have an alternate parking space. 
66.1.3. The commercial vehicles are not parked within a public street right-of-way on which no parking is allowed. 
66.1.4. The commercial vehicles are parked on residential lots in R-AG, R-1, R-2, R-3, and MH zones. 
66.1.5. The location of said commercial vehicles creates no adverse safety hazards. 
66.2. Travel trailers, hauling trailers, or boat trailers shall be permitted if parked or stored behind the front yard building line. 
66.3. A travel trailer shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area except in a travel trailer park authorized under this resolution. 
Section 67. - Screening and lighting. 
67.1. In any commercial or industrial district, any operation not conducted within a building, such as drive-in businesses, outdoor recreation, outdoor storage of materials, and outdoor servicing activities, shall be enclosed by a wall or fence of solid appearance or tight evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height where necessary to conceal such areas or facilities from a residential districts adjoining or facing across a street in the rear or on the side of the principal building or use. 
67.2. In any district where reference is made requiring adequate screening of a specified operation, such screen shall be a wall or fence of uniform material, solid in appearance or tight evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height. 
67.3. Outdoor lighting of all types shall be directed so as to reflect away from all residential dwellings, and shall be so situated as not to reflect directly into any public rights-of-way. 
Section 68. - Minimum distance between buildings. 
The following minimum distances between buildings shall be required unless otherwise specified within this resolution: 
68.1. The minimum distance between main multifamily buildings located on the same lot or parcel shall be: 
68.1.1. Front to front arrangement\40 feet 
68.1.2. Front to rear arrangement\50 feet 
68.1.3. Rear to rear arrangement\30 feet 
68.1.4. Side to side arrangement\20 feet 
68.1.5. All other combinations\20 feet 
Section 69. - Only one principal building or use upon any lot. 
69.1. Every building or use erected or established shall be located upon a lot, as defined in this resolution, and, except as provided in this resolution, there shall be no more than one principal building or use upon any lot. 
ARTICLE VII. - USE REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Establishment of districts, § 41 et seq.; other requirements by districts, § 81 et seq. 

Section 71. - Residential districts. 
71.1. R-AG Agricultural residential district. Within an R-AG district, the following uses are permitted: 
71.1.1. Single-family dwellings with a minimum lot size of five acres. 
71.1.2. Accessory buildings and uses when located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure and customarily incident thereto and provided the requirements in section 93 are met. 
71.1.3. Fallout shelters provided the requirements of section 94 are met. 
71.1.4. Home swimming pool provided the location is not closer than ten feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence of at least four feet in height and provided approval from the county health department has been obtained. 
71.1.5. Tenant dwellings, and one-family dwellings for members of the immediate family of the landowner, when located on the same lot or tract as the principal residence, on the basis of one residence structure for each five acres in addition to the minimum lot area required for the principal residence provided the principal residence and the one-family dwellings are located such that the lot may be subdivided in accordance with the subdivision regulations of this resolution, and subject to the requirements of this district. 
71.1.6 Agricultural, forestry and livestock production of a commercial nature, except poultry production, provided that the operation is conducted on a tract of land not less than five acres in area, and that no structure containing livestock and no storage of manure, offensive odor or dust-producing substance shall be located within 200 feet of a property line; provided, however, any such structure existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be allowed to extend to the existing building line, but no nearer the property line than any existing portion of such structure. 
Density of poultry houses is to be determined by a study by the zoning enforcement official. 
A one-mile radius from the "zone of influence" of a community is required. The use of the wind rose principle with a windshed of one mile is to be considered. The orientation of the long axis is dependent upon the direction of the prevailing wind with the narrow end pointing towards the direction of the prevailing wind. 
Management Plan 
The grower or owner shall prepare a management plan based on the "Management Guidelines for Poultry Facilities," describing the operational practices necessary to control nuisances such as flies, rodents, feathers, dust, and odors. This plan shall be reviewed and approved by the health department prior to the issuance of permits by the planning and zoning office. 
Notice 
Within ten days after the issuance of a poultry facility permit, the county shall send a notice to all property owners within 0.5 miles of the proposed facility. The purpose of the notice is to inform the owners that the county has issued a permit for a poultry facility. The notice shall include the name and telephone number of the poultry facility operator. 
SEE WINDSHED DIAGRAMS EXPLAINED IN SYMPOSIUM: POULTRY WASTE, COOPERATIVE EXTENSION SERVICE, UNIVERSITY OF ARKANSAS. 
71.1.7. Temporary or portable sawmills (not exceeding 12 months) for the cutting of timber on adjacent land and provided no stationary machine operation is located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
71.1.8. Sale of products and commodities raised on the premises, provided that no structure for such sales shall be closer than 25 feet to either the front or side property lines. 
71.1.9. Riding stables and academies, provided that no structure, pen or corral housing animals shall be closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
71.1.10. Public and private structures, pipelines, pumping stations and buildings, provided installation is properly screened as required in section 67. No office shall be permitted and no equipment shall be stored on the site unless approved by the board of zoning appeals as a special exception under these regulations. 
71.1.11. Neighborhood convenience stores selling only the following: 
1.  Groceries 
2.  Nonprescription drugs 
3.  Sporting goods 
4.  Books, magazines, newspapers 
5.  Hardware 
6.  Notions 
7.  Beer and wine to be consumed off the premises, 
provided that no building for such purposes is located within 50 feet of any property line and that located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector they are street. 
71.1.12. Churches and related accessory buildings, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
71.1.13. Home occupations, provided the requirements in section 95 are met. 
71.1.14. Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers and day care homes. 
71.1.15. Public and private schools and libraries. 
71.1.16. Cemeteries, provided they are located abutting a paved county, state or federal highway. 
71.1.17. Clubs, private and public, including golf and country clubs, fishing clubs, gun clubs, and other recreational facilities, all of which shall he on a noncommercial basis, provided that no building for such purposes is located within 100 feet of any property line. 
71.1.18. Airplane landing fields including flight strips and helicopter ports and accessory facilities. 
71.1.19. Radio or television transmission stations. 
71.1.20. Quarries and strip mining operations subject to the requirements of the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968 (O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.) and provided that all operations are screened from the view of adjoining roads and properties. 
71.1.21. Individual manufactured homes designed for single family occupancy, provided that: 
(1)  No such home is located within 500 feet of the right-of-way of a state highway or within 500 feet of any property zoned R-1. 
(2)  The home shall have a minimum width of 16 feet. 
(3)  Any home in excess of 16 feet in width shall have a minimum roof overhang (eave) of eight inches. 
(4)  All roof surfaces shall be covered with asphalt, fiberglass shingles, wood shakes, clay tiles, slate, or similar materials. 
(5)  The exterior siding shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, or stone; and shall be comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in site-built dwellings. 
(6)  The home shall be placed on a permanent foundation, either slab or pier, which meets the requirements of the International Residential Code and/or any other applicable codes as adopted as a part of this resolution. 
(7)  The home shall be completely underpinned except for proper ventilation and access openings. The home shall be underpinned with masonry materials, finished concrete, or similar materials manufactured for the purpose of underpinning as approved by the building inspector. Installation shall be in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes as required by the State of Georgia. 
(8)  Utility meters shall be mounted to the home, unless otherwise approved by the building inspector. Axles, tongues, and all other transporting equipment and towing apparatus shall be removed before occupancy unless otherwise approved by the building inspector. 
(9)  The home shall be installed in accordance with the O.C.G.A. 8-2-160 et. seq., and the rules promulgated thereunder. 
(10)  The home shall be comparable in assessed value and aesthetics to dwellings in the surrounding area (within 300 feet). The home shall further be compatible in size, exterior siding material and roof material. 
(11)  [Reserved.] 
(12)  The home shall have a minimum roof pitch ratio of 3:12 (three to twelve) which means having a pitch equal to at least three inches of vertical height (rise) for every 12 inches of horizontal run. 
(13)  The home shall have a permanent landing installed at each doorway. The landing at the front door shall have a minimum area of 120 square feet. All other landings shall have a minimum area of 80 square feet. Steps shall be attached to all landings and must lead to ground level. All landings and steps shall be completely underpinned with the same materials as the home. Landing and step construction must meet the requirements set forth in the International Residential Code. 
(14)  The home shall be oriented on the lot so that the long axis is parallel to the street on which the lot fronts. 
(15)  A minimum of 18 inches of crawl space shall be maintained under the entire home. 
(16)  a certificate of occupancy will not be issued until all provisions of section 71.1.21 have been complied with. 
71.1.22. Sanitariums, rest homes, hospitals, and animal kennels. 
71.1.23. Signs as provided in section 97. 
71.1.24. Solid waste landfills will only be permitted in the R-AG district as a special exception. In addition to regulations contained in the present document, the licensee must have written approval from the Georgia Department Natural Resources and must comply with all other state and federal regulations pertaining to the operation of a solid waste landfill. 
71.1.25. Within the R-AG district, the following uses may he permitted as special exceptions in accordance with the provisions of section 115: 
(1)  Junkyards, provided the following provisions are met: 
(a)  No such operation, including the required screening, shall be permitted to locate closer than 300 feet to any residence and no storage of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, discarded material, or salvageable machinery and vehicles shall be closer than 50 feet to any, side or rear lot line, nor closer than 200 feet to any public road except for completely enclosed buildings. 
(b)  All such operations shall be completely enclosed by a buffer or wall having a minimum height of six feet, but in no case less than such a height as will effectively screen all operations from view. Driveways shall be enclosed from gates which screen from view all storage of junk in the area. 
(c)  The number of vehicular driveways permitted on any single road frontage shall be limited to one per 500 feet with a maximum of 30 feet driveway width. 
(d)  All dismantled parts shall be placed at least 18 inches above ground in neat racks to prevent rats from harboring under scrap. The area under the racks shall be regularly cleaned by mowing or raking. 
(e)  Any scrap left after salvaging parts shall be removed from the premises and not allowed to accumulate and rust away. 
(f)  Any building used to store or dismantle parts shall be completely enclosed if in front of the screen. No salvageable vehicles shall be allowed to be parked outside the screened area. 
(g)  Used cars held for sale must be in running order and moved out within six months. Any such used car lot shall be fenced with a six-foot woven wire fence and screened from any adjoining residential district but shall be allowed without frontage screening. 
(h)  Only one caretaker's residence or mobile home shall be allowed on any one junkyard. 
(i)  Any application for a certificate of occupancy for a junkyard shall (1) meet the requirements of subsection (1)(b) above and (2) contain a topographic map of the land so that the drainage capabilities of the property may be determined if questioned. 
(2)  Garages, bodyshops, carpentry shops and other trade shops when operated by the owner resident of the property provided the following provisions are met: 
(a)  Not more than one nonfamily member is employed. 
(b)  All work is performed in a completely enclosed building. 
(c)  The building is located behind the residence and is not closer than 50 feet from any property line nor closer than 300 feet from the nearest adjoining residence. 
(d)  Any outside storage of vehicles shall be screened in accordance with section 67.2. 
(e)  Uses, processes, or equipment employed shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise or vibration. 
(3)  Motocross motorcycle racetracks, provided that the track is located at least 3,000 feet from the nearest residence and 6,000 feet from the nearest church; that all concession stands, parking lots, and spectator stands are adjacent to the track; that sanitary restroom facilities with running water and septic tanks are provided and approved; and that the track is serviced by an approved public road. No permit will be issued without the approval of the planning commission. 
(4)  Restaurants, cafeterias, grills, and lunch counters having a size under 6,000 square feet (but not including nightclubs, bars, taverns, drive-in restaurants, or curb-service establishments). 
(5)  Signs as provided in section 97. 
71.1.61 Poultry production of a commercial nature, provided that: (1) No structure for housing or feeding poultry shall be located on a tract of less than 30 acres, upon which not more than two poultry houses containing up to an aggregate of 40,000 square feet may be constructed. For each additional 20,000 square feet (or fraction thereof) poultry house to be constructed, an additional five acres shall be required; (2) No structure for housing or feeding poultry and no stockpile of manure, lagoon or other structure for the storage or disposal of poultry waste shall be located within 1,000 feet of the nearest residence or public meeting place or within 300 feet of the nearest property line; (3) All birds shall be kept in a structure, pen or fenced area; (4) All plans and operations must comply with the provisions of section 99 of this ordinance and with federal, state and county laws, ordinances and regulations. 
71.1.3. RR-1 districts: Within the RR-1 districts, the following uses are permitted: 
71.1.3.1. All uses permitted in R-AG districts. 
71.1.3.2. No new RR-1 districts shall be created which would constitute acute spot zoning. No petition to rezone from R-AG to RR-1 zone shall be considered unless it is for more than five consecutive lots and a plat accompanies the petition. 
71.1.3.3. Class II streets shall be mandatory for all new streets. 
71.1.3.4. Within the RR-1 district, the following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance with the provisions of section 115: All uses permitted by special exception in R-AG districts, as specified in section 71.1.25. 
71.2. R-1 Low density residential districts. Within the R-1 low density residential district, the following uses are permitted: 
71.2.1. Single-family dwelling (but not including manufactured homes or mobile homes). 
71.2.2. Accessory buildings and uses when located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure and customarily incident thereto and provided the requirements in section 93 are met. 
71.2.3. Fallout shelters, provided the requirements in section 92 are met. 
71.2.4. Home swimming pool, provided the location is not closer than ten feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence of at least four feet in height, and provided approval from the county health department has been obtained. 
71.2.5 Agricultural, forestry and livestock, production of a commercial nature, except poultry production, provided that the operation is conducted on a tract of land not less than ten acres in area, and that no structure containing livestock and no storage of manure, offensive odor or dust-producing substance shall be located within 200 feet of a property line. All animals (except those generally recognized as pets) shall be kept in a structure, corral, or chattel. 
71.2.6. Churches and related accessory buildings, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
71.2.7. Golf, swimming, tennis or country clubs, publicly and privately owned and operated community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks, and recreation areas, provided that no building for such purposes is located within 200 feet of any property line. 
71.2.8. Home occupations, provided the requirements in section 95 are met. 
71.2.9. Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers and day care homes. 
71.2.10. Public and private schools and libraries excluding business and trade schools. 
71.2.11. Public utility structures and buildings, provided installation is properly screened as required by section 67 and is required for service of the immediate area. No office shall be permitted and no equipment shall be stored on the site. 
71.2.12. Signs as provided in section 97. 
71.2.51 Poultry production of a commercial nature, provided that: (1) No structure for housing or feeding poultry shall be located on a tract of less than 30 acres, upon which not more than two poultry houses containing up to an aggregate of 40,000 square feet may be constructed. For each additional 20,000 square feet (or fraction thereof) poultry house to be constructed, an additional five acres shall be required; (2) No structure for housing or feeding poultry and no stockpile of manure, lagoon or other structure for the storage or disposal of poultry waste shall be located within 1,000 feet of the nearest residence or public meeting place or within 300 feet of the nearest property line; (3) All birds shall be kept in a structure, pen or fenced area; (4) All plans and operations must comply with the provisions of section 99 of this ordinance and with federal, state and county laws, ordinances and regulations. 
71.3. R-2 Medium density residential district. Within the R-2 district, the following uses are permitted: 
71.3.1. All uses permitted in R-1 district. 
71.3.2. Two-family dwellings (duplex). 
71.3.3. Townhouses, provided the requirements in section 92 are met. 
71.3.4. Cemeteries as provided for in section 98. 
71.3.5. Individual manufactured homes designed for single family occupancy, provided that: 
(1)  No such home is located within 500 feet of the right-of-way of a state highway or within 500 feet of any property zoned R-1. 
(2)  The home shall have a minimum width of 16 feet. 
(3)  Any home in excess of 16 feet in width shall have a minimum roof overhang (eave) of eight inches. 
(4)  All roof surfaces shall be covered with asphalt, fiberglass shingles, wood shakes, clay tiles, slate, or similar materials. 
(5)  The exterior siding shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, or stone; and shall be comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in site-built dwellings. 
(6)  The home shall be placed on a permanent foundation, either slab or pier, which meets the requirements of the International Residential Code and/or any other applicable codes as adopted as a part of this resolution. 
(7)  The home shall be completely underpinned except for proper ventilation and access openings. The home shall be underpinned with masonry materials, finished concrete, or similar materials manufactured for the purpose of underpinning as approved by the building inspector. Installation shall be in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes as required by the State of Georgia. 
(8)  Utility meters shall be mounted to the home unless otherwise approved by the building inspector. Axles, tongues, and all other transporting equipment and towing apparatus shall be removed before occupancy unless otherwise approved by the building inspector. 
(9)  The home shall be installed in accordance with the O.C.G.A. 8-2-160 et. seq., and the rules promulgated thereunder. 
(10)  The home shall be comparable in assessed value and aesthetics to dwellings in the surrounding area (within 300 feet). The home shall further be compatible in size, exterior siding material and roof material. 
(11)  [Reserved.] 
(12)  The home shall have a minimum roof pitch ratio of 3:12 (three to twelve) which means having a pitch equal to at least three inches of vertical height (rise) for every 12 inches of horizontal run. 
(13)  The home shall have a permanent landing installed at each doorway. The landing at the front door shall have a minimum area of 120 square feet. All other landings shall have a minimum area of 80 square feet. Steps shall be attached to all landings and must lead to ground level. All landings and steps shall be completely underpinned with the same materials as the home. Landing and step construction must meet the requirements set forth in the International Residential Code. 
(14)  The home shall be oriented on the lot so that the long axis is parallel to the street on which the lot fronts. 
(15)  A minimum of 18 inches of crawl space shall be maintained under the entire home. 
(16)  A certificate of occupancy will not be issued until all provisions of section 71.3.5 have been complied with. 
71.4. R-3 High density residential district. Within the R-3 district, the following uses are permitted: 
71.4.1. All uses permitted in an R-2 district. 
71.4.2. Multifamily dwellings. 
71.4.3. Boarding[houses] and roominghouses. 
71.4.4. Hospitals, sanitariums, clinics, convalescent or nursing homes. 
71.4.5. Clubs and lodges. 
71.4.6. Individual manufactured homes designed for single family occupancy, provided that: 
(1)  No such home is located within 500 feet of the right-of-way of a state highway or within 500 feet of any property zoned R-1. 
(2)  The home shall have a minimum width of 16 feet. 
(3)  Any home in excess of 16 feet in width shall have a minimum roof overhang (eave) of eight inches. 
(4)  All roof surfaces shall be covered with asphalt, fiberglass shingles, wood shakes, clay tiles, slate, or similar materials. 
(5)  The exterior siding shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, or stone; and shall be comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in site-built dwellings. 
(6)  The home shall be placed on a permanent foundation, either slab or pier, which meets the requirements of the International Residential Code and/or any other applicable codes as adopted as a part of this resolution. 
(7)  The home shall be completely underpinned except for proper ventilation and access openings. The home shall be underpinned with masonry materials, finished concrete, or similar materials manufactured for the purpose of underpinning as approved by the building inspector. Installation shall be in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes as required by the State of Georgia. 
(8)  Utility meters shall be mounted to the home unless otherwise approved by the building inspector. Axles, tongues, and all other transporting equipment and towing apparatus shall be removed before occupancy unless otherwise approved by the building inspector. 
(9)  The home shall be installed in accordance with the O.C.G.A. 8-2-160 et. seq., and the rules promulgated thereunder. 
(10)  The home shall be comparable in assessed value and aesthetics to dwellings in the surrounding area (within 300 feet). The home shall further be compatible in size, exterior siding material and roof material. 
(11)  [Reserved.] 
(12)  The home shall have a minimum roof pitch ratio of 3:12 (three to twelve) which means having a pitch equal to at least three inches of vertical height (rise) for every 12 inches of horizontal run. 
(13)  The home shall have a permanent landing installed at each doorway. The landing at the front door shall have a minimum area of 120 square feet. All other landings shall have a minimum area of 80 square feet. Steps shall be attached to all landings and must lead to ground level. All landings and steps shall be completely underpinned with the same materials as the home. Landing and step construction must meet the requirements set forth in the International Residential Code. 
(14)  The home shall be oriented on the lot so that the long axis is parallel to the street on which the lot fronts. 
(15)  A minimum of 18 inches of crawl space shall be maintained under the entire home. 
(16)  A certificate of occupancy will not be issued until all provisions of section 71.4.6 have been complied with. 
71.5. MH Mobile home residential district. Within an MH district, the following uses are permitted: 
71.5.1. All uses permitted in an R-1 district. 
71.5.2. Individual manufactured homes designed for single family occupancy on individual lots of record, provided that the following stipulations are met: 
(1)  No such home is located within 500 feet of the right-of-way of a state highway or within 500 feet of any property zoned R-1. 
(2)  The home shall have a minimum width of 16 feet. 
(3)  Any home in excess of 16 feet in width shall have a minimum roof overhang (eave) of eight inches. 
(4)  All roof surfaces shall be covered with asphalt, fiberglass shingles, wood shakes, clay tiles, slate, or similar materials. 
(5)  The exterior siding shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, or stone; and shall be comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in site-built dwellings. 
(6)  The home shall be placed on a permanent foundation, either slab or pier, which meets the requirements of the International Residential Code and/or any other applicable codes as adopted as a part of this resolution. 
(7)  The home shall be completely underpinned except for proper ventilation and access openings. The home shall be underpinned with masonry materials, finished concrete, or similar materials manufactured for the purpose of underpinning as approved by the building inspector. Installation shall be in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes as required by the State of Georgia. 
(8)  Utility meters shall be mounted to the home unless otherwise approved by the building inspector. Axles, tongues, and all other transporting equipment and towing apparatus shall be removed before occupancy unless otherwise approved by the building inspector. 
(9)  The home shall be installed in accordance with the O.C.G.A. 8-2-160 et. seq., and the rules promulgated thereunder. 
(10)  The home shall be comparable in assessed value and aesthetics to dwellings in the surrounding area (within 300 feet). The home shall further be compatible in size, exterior siding material and roof material. 
(11)  [Reserved.] 
(12)  The home shall have a minimum roof pitch ratio of 3:12 (three to twelve) which means having a pitch equal to at least three inches of vertical height (rise) for every 12 inches of horizontal run. 
(13)  The home shall have a permanent landing installed at each doorway. The landing at the front door shall have a minimum area of 120 square feet. All other landings shall have a minimum area of 80 square feet. Steps shall be attached to all landings and must lead to ground level. All landings and steps shall be completely underpinned with the same materials as the home. Landing and step construction must meet the requirements set forth in the International Residential Code. 
(14)  The home shall be oriented on the lot so that the long axis is parallel to the street on which the lot fronts. 
(15)  A minimum of 18 inches of crawl space shall be maintained under the entire home. 
(16)  A certificate of occupancy will not be issued until all provisions of section 71.5.2 have been complied with. 
A variance may be permitted by planning and zoning to allow manufactured homes in MH zoning districts that were created prior to the year 2005. Such variance should be granted only when the manufactured home proposed to be located therein is compatible with existing manufactured housing units in said zoning district as to width, size, roof pitch, exterior siding materials, foundation and underpinning, exterior porch size and construction. 
In the event a variance is granted to allow a manufactured home in a MH zoning district that was created prior to the year 2005, then and in that event: 
(1)  The home shall be installed in accordance with the O.C.G.A. 8-2-160 et seq., and the rules promulgated there under. 
(2)  The home shall be completely underpinned except for proper ventilation and access openings. Installation shall be in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes as required by the State of Georgia. 
(3)  [Reserved.] 
(4)  The home shall have a landing installed at each doorway. All landings must have a minimum area of 24 square feet. Steps must be attached to each landing and must lead to ground level. All landings and steps must meet the requirements set forth in the International Residential Code. 
(5)  The manufactured home must be oriented on the lot so that the long axis is parallel to the street. 
71.5.3. Mobile home parks as provided in section 91.2 and additional permitted uses as follows: 
71.5.3.1. Service and auxiliary buildings located and specifically designed to serve only the residents of one mobile home park, not to include automobile or mobile home repair facilities of any type. 
71.5.3.2. Mobile home park management office and maintenance storage for tools, equipment, and supplies used in maintaining a mobile home park. 
71.5.3.3. Residence for the exclusive use of a watchman, caretaker, owner, or manager of a mobile home park. 
71.5.3.4. Recreation, assembly and laundry facilities for the exclusive use of the mobile home park residents and their guests. 
71.5.3.5. Sale of alcoholic beverages with alcoholic content not more than 21 percent for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007; Amd. of 10-11-2005; Amd. of 4-11-2006; Amd. of 11-9-2010, eff. 1-1-2011) 
Section 72. - Commercial districts. 
72.1. C-H Highway commercial district. 
72.1.1. Required conditions. All business, servicing, storage, or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible; for example, off-street loading; automobile parking for customers while on the premises; miniature golf courses; and the sale of automobile fuel at service stations. Uses, processes, or equipment employed shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise or vibration. 
72.1.2. Permitted uses. Within the C-H highway commercial district, the following uses are permitted: 
72.1.2.1. Automobile service stations, provided the requirements in section 96 are met. 
72.1.2.2. Amusement enterprises, such as miniature and par 3 golf, golf driving ranges, skating rinks, and similar enterprises, but excluding "go-kart" type miniature auto racing tracks. 
72.1.2.3. Motels and hotels which shall contain a minimum lot area of 40,000 square feet, if attached to a public sewer, or a larger minimum lot area requirement as determined by the county health department if not attached to a public sewer. 
72.1.2.4. Signs as provided in section 97. 
72.1.2.5. Automobile repair garage, mechanical and bodyshops, provided all operations are conducted in a building which shall not have any openings, other than a stationary window, within 100 feet of a residential district and which shall not store or otherwise maintain any parts or waste material outside such buildings. 
72.1.2.6. Bus stations. 
72.1.2.7. Restaurant's, including drive-in establishments, provided that when such a drive-in establishment abuts a residential district, it shall be separated from such district by a six-foot high masonry wall and having no light shining directly into residential districts. 
72.1.2.8. Truck terminals, provided that acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet are provided for trucks entering and leaving the site and that the truck traffic so generated will not create a safety hazard or unduly impede traffic movement. 
72.1.2.9. Theaters, including drive-in theaters, provided that acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet in length are provided for the use of vehicles entering or leaving the theater and the volume or concentration of traffic will not constitute a safety hazard or unduly impede highway traffic movements, and provided the screen is not visible from any expressway, freeway, arterial or collector street located within 2,000 feet of such screen. 
72.1.2.10. Travel trailer parks provided the requirements in section 91.1 are met. 
72.1.2.11. Public utilities such as electrical substations, telephone exchanges, and similar uses. 
72.2. C-1 Neighborhood service commercial district. 
72.2.1. Required conditions. 
72.2.1.1. All sales, business, servicing, storage, or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible, for example, off-street loading, automobile parking for customers while on the premises, and the sale of automobile fuel at service stations. No more than 20 percent of floor space is to be used for storage. 
72.2.1.2. Uses, processes, or equipment employed shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise, or vibration. 
72.2.1.3. No sale of beer or wine for consumption on the premises, except with meals. 
72.2.1.4. Products to be sold only at retail. 
72.2.1.5. No sale, display, or storage of secondhand merchandise except as incidental to sale of new merchandise. 
72.2.1.6. Sale of alcoholic beverages with alcoholic content not more than 21 percent for consumption off the premises. 
72.2.2. Permitted uses. Within the C-1 district, the following uses are permitted: 
72.2.2.1. Retail business involving the sale of merchandise on the premises, in stores having a size under 6,000 square feet (except that grocery stores may have a size larger than 6,000 square feet, but not exceeding 13,000 square feet) limited to: 
a.  Art and/or camera store. 
b.  Book, magazine, newspaper store. 
c.  Candy store. 
d.  Clothing store. 
e.  Delicatessen. 
f.  Drugstore or pharmacy. 
g.  Florist shop. 
h.  Fruit, nut and/or vegetable store. 
i.  Gift or curio shop. 
j.  Grocery store. 
k.  Hardware store. 
l.  Hobby and/or toy store. 
m.  Household furnishings store (but not a furniture store). 
n.  Jewelry store. 
o.  Notion, five- and ten-cent general or variety store. 
p.  Paint store. 
q.  Record shop. 
r.  Sporting goods store. 
72.2.2.2. Business involving the rendering of a personal service or the repair and servicing of small equipment, limited to: 
a.  Appliance, radio, or television repair shop. 
b.  Bank, savings and loan association, personal loan company. 
c.  Barbershop, beauty shop or combination thereof. 
d.  Bicycle repair shop. 
e.  Dressmaker, seamstress, tailor. 
f.  Dry cleaning self-service and/or laundry self-service facility. 
g.  Furniture repair or upholstering (but not furniture manufacturing). 
h.  Insurance agency. 
i.  Jewelry and watch repair. 
j.  Locksmith or gunsmith. 
k.  Medical, dental, or chiropractic office, clinic, and/or laboratory. 
l.  Office for governmental, business, professional, or general purposes (but no storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises is permitted except emergency vehicles). 
m.  Photographic studio. 
n.  Real estate agency. 
o.  Secretarial and/or telephone answering service. 
p.  Shoe repair shop. 
q.  Studio offering instruction in art, music, dancing, drama, or similar cultural activity. 
72.2.2.3. Private or semiprivate club, lodge, union hall or social center. 
72.2.2.4. Church, synagogue, or other place of worship. 
72.2.2.5. Off-street commercial parking lot. 
72.2.2.6. Publicly owned and operated building, facility, or land (but overnight storage of vehicles or equipment other than emergency vehicles on the premises is not permitted). 
72.2.2.7. Kindergarten, playschools, day care centers, and day care homes. 
72.2.2.8. Theaters, but not including drive-in theaters. 
72.2.2.9. Accessory buildings and uses when located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure and customarily incident thereto, provided the requirements in section 93 are met. 
72.2.2.10. Automobile service stations, provided the requirements in section 96 are met; but not including automotive repair garages or sales. 
72.2.2.11. Sale of alcoholic beverages with alcoholic content not more than 21 percent for consumption off the premises. The intent of this section is to permit sale of beer or wine in a grocery or other store to be taken home. 
72.2.2.12. Signs as provided for in section 97. 
72.2.2.13. Fallout shelters subject to the provisions of section 94. 
72.2.2.14. Restaurants, cafeterias, grills, and lunch counters having a size under 6,000 square feet (but not including nightclubs, bars, taverns, drive-in restaurants, or curb service establishments). 
72.2.2.15. Public utility substation or other installation, provided that such use is adequately screened as required by section 67, and there is neither commercial operation nor storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises. 
72.2.2.16. Bakery, provided that goods baked on the premises are sold only at retail on the premises. 
72.2.2.17. Dry cleaning or laundry establishment, provided that any laundering, cleaning, or pressing done on the premises involves only articles delivered to the premises by individual customers. 
72.2.2.18. Meat, fish, and/or poultry shop, provided that no slaughtering is done on the premises. 
72.2.2.19. Pets shop, provided all animals are housed within the principal building such that no sound is perceptible beyond the premises. 
72.3. C-2 General commercial district. 
72.3.1. Required conditions. 
72.3.1.1. All business, servicing, storage, or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible, for example, off-street loading, automobile parking for customers while on the premises, miniature golf courses, and the sale of automobile fuel at service stations. 
72.3.1.2. Uses, processes, and equipment employed shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise, or vibration. 
72.3.1.3. Off-street parking shall not require backing or maneuvering into the right-of-way of a public street. 
72.3.2. Permitted uses. Within the C-2 general district, the following uses are permitted: 
72.3.2.1. All uses permitted in a C-1 district. 
72.3.2.2. Wholesale uses requiring less than 10,000 square feet of floor area for storage. 
72.3.2.3. Automobile repair garage, mechanical and bodyshops, provided all operations are conducted in a building which shall not have any opening other than a stationary window, within 100 feet of a residential district and which shall not store or otherwise maintain any parts or waste material outside such buildings. 
72.3.2.4. Drive-in or curb service restaurants. 
72.3.2.5. Stores that sell beer and wine. 
72.3.2.6. Drive-in theaters, provided that acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet in length are provided for the use of vehicles entering or leaving the theater and the volume or concentration of traffic will not constitute a safety hazard or unduly impede highway traffic movement, and provided that the screen is not visible from any controlled access thoroughfare, arterial, or major collector street located within 2,000 feet of such screen. 
72.3.2.7. Any retail business or commercial use in which there is no processing or treatment of materials, goods, or products (except for merchandise for sale on the premises, or as otherwise provided for herein), including: 
a.  General farming equipment and horticulture sales. 
b.  Furniture, home furnishing, office furniture and equipment. 
c.  Antique shop. 
d.  Automobile, travel trailer, farm equipment and implements, and mobile home sales (new and used) which need not be enclosed, but any mechanical or body repair must be conducted entirely within a structure which shall not have any opening other than a stationary window, within 100 feet of a residential district and provided further that all vehicles on a used vehicle or equipment sales lot must be in operating condition at all times. 
e.  Produce sales and farmers' markets 
f.  Travel trailer parks and campgrounds. 
72.3.2.8. Golf, swimming, tennis or country clubs, privately owned and operated, community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks, and recreational areas. 
72.3.2.9. Public utility structures and buildings, including electric and natural gas substations, telephone exchanges, radio and television stations, and similar structures for the storage of supplies, equipment or service operations when properly screened as required in section 67. 
72.3.2.10. Bus, truck, and railroad terminal facilities. 
72.3.2.11. Places of assembly, including auditoriums, stadiums, coliseums and dancehalls. 
72.3.2.12. Private schools and libraries. 
72.3.2.13. Motels, hotels and apartment hotels boarding[houses] and roominghouses. 
72.3.2.14. Food locker plant renting lockers for the storage of food, including sale of retail, delivery, and cutting package of meats but not including slaughtering. 
72.3.2.15. Printing, blueprinting, book binding, photocopying, lithography, and publishing establishments. 
72.3.2.16. Undertaking or mortuary establishments and ambulance services. 
72.3.2.17. Hospitals, clinics, sanitariums, convalescent or nursing homes. 
72.3.2.18. Commercial parking garage or lots, provided no entrance or exit is on the same side of the street and within the same block as an elementary school and that curb breaks are limited to two for each 100 feet of street frontage, each not to exceed 30 feet in width and not located closer than 20 feet to a street intersection. 
72.3.2.19. Temporary uses, including sale of Christmas trees, tents for revivals, carnivals, church bazaars, sale of seasonal fruit and vegetables from roadside stands, but such use shall not be permitted for a period to exceed two months in any calendar year. 
72.3.2.20. Veterinary hospital, kennel, or clinic provided any structure used for such purpose shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any residential district. 
72.3.2.21. Amusement enterprises, including the provision of public entertainment privately owned skating rinks, par 3 golf, and golf driving ranges. 
Section 73. - Wholesale and industrial districts. 
73.1. M-1 Wholesale and light industrial district. Within the M-1 wholesale and light industrial district, the following uses are permitted: 
73.1.1. Ice plants. 
73.1.2. Automobile laundry or car wash, provided that a paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting entrance to the washing process sufficient to contain a number of vehicles (at 200 square feet per vehicle) equal to one-third of the practical hourly capacity of the washing machines and in addition that curb breaks shall be limited to two, each not to exceed 30 feet in width and located not closer than 20 feet to an intersection. 
73.1.3. Contractor's storage and equipment yards when located entirely within a building or fenced area as required in section 67. 
73.1.4. Building and lumber supply establishments, provided the entire storage area is properly screened as required in section 67, or for a greater height as required to adequately screen such areas, and that any machine operations shall be conducted entirely within a building which shall not have any opening, other than a stationary window, within 100 feet of a residential district. 
73.1.5. Establishments for manufacture, repair, assembly or processing including: 
a.  Confectionery manufacture. 
b.  Clothing and garment manufacture. 
c.  Laboratories for testing materials, chemical analysis, and photography processing. 
d.  Manufacture and assembly of scientific, optical, and electronic equipment. 
e.  Manufacture of musical instruments and parts. 
f.  Manufacture of souvenirs and novelties. 
g.  Manufacture of toys, sporting goods, and athletic goods. 
73.1.6. Wholesale warehouses. 
73.1.7. Bottling works for soft drinks. 
73.1.8. Truck terminals, provided that acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet are provided for trucks entering or leaving the site and that the truck traffic so generated will not create a safety hazard or unduly impede traffic movement. 
73.1.9. Auto auctions. 
73.1.10. Trade shops including sheet metal, roofing, upholstering, electrical, plumbing, venetian blind, cabinetmaking and carpentry, rug and carpet cleaning, and sign painting, provided that all operations are conducted entirely within a building which shall not have any opening, other than stationary windows, within 100 feet of any residential district. 
73.1.11. Food processing plants, such as bakeries, meat packers, fish houses, and poultry houses. 
73.1.12. Frozen dessert and milk bottling, distribution, and processing plants. 
73.1.13. Any other establishments for the manufacture, repair, assembly, or processing of materials similar in nature to those listed in this section which are not objectionable by reason of smoke, dust, odors, bright lights, noise, or vibration, or which will not contribute to the congestion of traffic. 
73.2. M-2 General industrial district. Within the M-2 industrial district, the following uses are permitted: 
73.2.1. All permitted uses in M-1 wholesale and light industrial district. 
73.2.2. Agriculture, forestry, livestock and poultry processing, provided that the operation is conducted on a tract of land not less than ten acres in area, and that no structure containing poultry or livestock and no storage of manure or odor or dust producing substance or use shall be located within 200 feet of a property line. All animals (except those generally recognized as pets) shall be kept in a structure pen, or corral. 
73.2.3. Dwelling, including a manufactured home, for the exclusive use of a watchman or caretaker when located on the same tract as the industrial use and subject to all dimensional and area requirements of the R-3 multi-family (high density) residential district; provided that no such home is located within 500 feet of the right-of-way of a state highway. 
73.2.4. Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, repair, and servicing of any commodity or product, subject to the performance standards for nonresidential uses given in section 99. 
73.2.5. Outside aboveground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil or other inflammable liquids or gases but not when located within 500 feet of any residential district. 
73.2.6. Within the M-2 district, the following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance with the provisions of section 115: 
All uses permitted by special exception in R-AG and RR-1 districts as specified in section 71.1.25. The following additional use may be permitted by special exception in the M-2 district: 
1.  Stock car racetracks (for use by automobiles, trucks, tractors, motorcycles and other motorized vehicles) provided that the following provisions are met: 
a.  No such operation, including the required screening, shall be permitted to locate closer than 3,000 feet from the nearest residence and 6,000 feet from the nearest church. 
b.  All concession stands, parking lots and spectator stands are adjacent to the track. 
c.  Sanitary restroom facilities with running water and septic tanks are provided and approved. 
d.  That the track is serviced by a public road. 
e.  All necessary state and federal permits, if any, have been issued. Any storage of petroleum products in underground storage tanks must conform to the regulations and permitting procedures of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division and other applicable regulations. 
f.  No damaged vehicles shall be stored on site for more than seven days. 
g.  Hours of operation shall be limited to daylight hours. 
h.  The site shall conform to the landscaping requirements given below which supersede the provisions of section 67.1 and section 67.2. The objective of the landscaping requirements is to provide a screen to enhance esthetic appeal, control or direct vehicular and pedestrian movement, reduce glare, and buffer noise. 
i.  The facility shall be enclosed by a wall or solid fence of not less than six feet in height. 
a.  Necessary private utilities and/or access drives may be allowed through a wall or solid fence, subject to the review and approval of the county staff. 
ii.  The wall or solid fence shall be surrounded on the outside by a 50-foot landscaped, screening buffer. Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. Species are to be compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, the vegetarian buffer should grow to a height of six feet minimum within two years of planting. 
a.  Minimum height of plant material at installation is to be five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
b.  Buffers should be regularly maintained by the property owner(s) to ensure that the above objectives and standards are met. 
c.  When topography and existing conditions allow, the required 50-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
d.  Necessary private utilities and/or access drives may be allowed through, over, or across a landscaped buffer, subject to the review and approval of the county staff. 
iii.  No permit will be issued without the approval of the planning commission. 
(Res. of 1-14-1996; Amd. of 10-11-2005; Amd. of 4-11-2006) 
Section 74. - PUD planned unit development district. 
Within the PUD planned unit development district, the following uses are permitted: 
74.1. Any use permitted in the R-1 [low density] residential district except that any public use shall serve only the residents of the PUD district. 
74.2. Two-family dwelling (duplex). 
74.3. Townhouse, provided that such uses comply with the requirements for townhouses as set forth in section 92. 
74.4. Individual multifamily dwellings (apartments). 
74.5. Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks, provided that the PUD district is located in an MH (manufactured home residential) district; and provided that no such home is located within 500 feet of a state highway. 
74.6. Accessory uses, such as private garages and parking areas. 
74.7. Retail and services uses limited to the following: grocery, confectionery, bakery, newspaper, drug, or hardware store, or barber, beauty, radio-TV repair, laundry pickup or laundromat, watch repair or shoe repair establishment, or doctor, dentist, or similar professional office, provided that: 
a.  Only business signs are permitted and no neon or directly illuminated sign shall be used either on the exterior or in windows, and all signs shall be attached flat to the face of the building; 
b.  Off-street parking and loading requirements as indicated in article VI are met; 
c.  Retail and service uses are designed for the service and convenience of the population living within the PUD. No more than five percent of the total floor space in the project shall be used for retail or service establishments. 
(Amd. of 10-11-2005; Amd. of 4-11-2006) 
Section 75. - Special districts. 
75.1. AH Airport hazard district. It is hereby established that an airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of the Perry-Fort Valley Airport and property or occupants of land in its vicinity, and also if the obstruction type, in effect reduces the size of the area available for the landing, take-off, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the Perry-Fort Valley Airport and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared: 
[ 75.1.1. Declarations. ] 
75.1.1.1. That the creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance and an injury to the region served by the Perry-Fort Valley Airport. 
75.1.1.2. That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, or the general welfare of the unincorporated area of the county that the creation or establishment of airport hazards be prevented; and 
75.1.1.3. That the prevention of these hazards should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation. 
75.1.2. Superimposed district. This district is superimposed over other existing districts, and the special requirements of this district shall apply in addition to the requirements of the use district within which a specific property is located. 
75.1.3. Permitted and conditional uses. All permitted and conditional uses of the use district which is superimposed by the (AH) airport hazard district shall be allowed as regulated by the requirements of such district, except those uses listed in section 75.1.4. 
75.1.4. Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the (AH) airport hazard district within the area of runway approach surfaces: 
75.1.4.1. Churches, schools, lodges, clubs, theaters, and other places of public assembly. 
75.1.4.2. Multifamily dwellings. 
75.1.4.3. Hospitals and institutions. 
75.1.4.4. Any other similar uses where concentrations of persons are customary. 
75.1.5. Airport zones. There are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land laying within the approach zones, transitional zones, horizontal zones, and conical zones as they apply to this particular airport. Such zones are shown on the Perry-Fort Valley Airport Hazard Zoning Map consisting of one sheet prepared by Lowe Engineers and dated July 1972, which is on file in the office of the county clerk. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
75.1.5.1. Approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
75.1.5.2. Transitional zones. These zones are hereby established as the area beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and upward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. 
75.1.5.3. Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is hereby established by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and the transitional zones. 
75.1.5.4. Conical zone. The conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical zone does not include the precision instrument approach zones and the transitional zones. 
75.1.6. Airport zone height limitations. Except as otherwise provided in this resolution, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or be maintained in any zone created by this resolution to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
75.1.6.1. Approach zones. Slopes upward one foot vertically for each 34 feet horizontally beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
75.1.6.2. Transitional zones. Slopes upward one foot vertically for each seven feet horizontally beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and approach zones, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 418.0 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same level elevation as the approach zones, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. 
75.1.6.3. Horizontal zone. One hundred fifty feet above the airport elevation or height of 568 feet above mean sea level. 
75.1.6.4. Conical zone. Slopes upward one foot vertically for each 20 feet horizontally beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
75.1.6.5. [More restrictive limitation to prevail.] Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. 
75.1.7 Use restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this resolution, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this resolution in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, take-off, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
75.1.8. Nonconforming uses. 
75.1.8.1. Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this resolution shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of January 9, 1973, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to January 9, 1973, and is diligently prosecuted. 
75.1.8.2. Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Perry-Fort Valley Airport Authority to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the Perry-Fort Valley Airport Authority. 
75.1.9. Permits. 
75.1.9.1. Future uses. No material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted, or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. 
75.1.9.1.1. However, a permit for a tree or structure of less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond a horizontal distance of 4,200 feet from each end of the runway except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features would extend above the height limit prescribed for the respective zone. 
75.1.9.1.2. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired with sufficient particulars to determine whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. 
75.1.9.2. Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on January 9, 1973, or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. 
75.1.9.3. Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the zoning enforcement official of Peach County determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
75.1.9.4. Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this resolution, may apply to the board of zoning appeals for a variance from such regulations. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, and relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this resolution. 
75.1.9.5. Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this resolution and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the Perry-Fort Valley Airport Authority at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard. 
75.2 FW Floodway district. 
75.2.1. Permitted uses. Within the FW district, open type public uses are permitted without restriction, and the following uses are permitted provided no such use shall be permitted within 500 feet of an established residential zone. 
75.2.1.1. Agricultural uses including farming, grazing, the raising of livestock, nurseries, etc. 
75.2.1.2. Storage of materials and equipment not subject to major damage by flood waters. 
75.2.1.3. Circus, carnival, or similar transient amusement enterprises, provided such uses do not remain more than two months out of a year. 
75.2.1.4. Private recreation facilities such as driving ranges, drive-in theaters, [and] skeet shooting. 
75.2.1.5. Open pit mining, quarries, and sand and gravel pits. 
75.2.1.6. Accessory uses not requiring the building of a structure. 
75.2.2. District boundaries. The boundaries of the floodway district shall correspond to the boundaries of zone A on the flood hazard boundary map of Peach County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Said map shall be kept permanently in the office of the zoning enforcement official, where said map shall be accessible to the general public. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OTHER REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Establishment of districts, § 41 et seq.; use requirements by districts, § 71 et seq. 

Section 81. - Minimum lot area, lot width, and maximum lot coverage.[4] 
81.1. Table of requirements by district and use. Within the zoning districts listed herein, the following requirements shall apply: 

 
1 The developer of townhouses in an R-2 zone is required to set aside an additional 6,000 square feet of common open space for each dwelling unit. This area cannot be used for any other purpose except as open space. 
2 The developer of townhouses in an R-3 zone is required to set aside an additional 4,000 square feet of common open space for each dwelling unit. This area cannot be used for any other purpose except as open space. 
* One-half acre minimum per state DHR. 

 
(Res. of 6-14-1990; Amd. of 10-11-2005; Amd. of 4-11-2006) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Does not apply to lots of record. 

Section 82. - Minimum setbacks and maximum building heights. 
82.1. Within the zoning districts listed herein, the following minimum setback requirements shall apply: 

 
MINIMUM OPEN AREA: 

 
*For corner lots, front yard requirements shall be met for both intersecting streets. 
a Reserved. 
;sup\sup;For townhouse developments, required only for ends of the townhouse grouping. 
c Required only when rear lot line is a residential district boundary, a continuous buffer shall be required along this line. 
d Side yards are not mandatory, however, if provided, they must meet the minimum side yard as indicated. 
e When commercial districts are adjacent to a residential district a buffer shall be provided by the developer of the commercial use. 
82.2. Where the right-of-way width of an unpaved county-maintained street or road is less than 80 feet, the front yard setback for all uses shall be increased by one-half foot for every one foot the existing right-of-way is deficient in meeting the 80-foot requirement. 
(Res. of 6-14-1990; Res. of 3-9-1994) 
ARTICLE IX. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Section 91. - Mobile homes, campgrounds, and travel trailer parks. 
91.1. Travel trailer parks and campgrounds. In any district where travel trailer parks are permitted, the applicant must submit a layout of the park subject to the following conditions: 
91.1.1. No travel trailer park shall be located except with direct access to a county, state, or federal highway, with minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet for the portion used for entrance and exit. No entrance or exit shall be through a residential district, or shall require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district. 
91.1.2. The minimum lot area per park shall be three acres. 
91.1.3. Space in travel trailer parks may be used by travel trailers, provided they meet any additional laws and resolutions of Peach County. 
91.1.4. Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, laundry facilities, and other uses and structures customarily incidental to the operation of a trailer park are permitted as accessory uses in any district in which trailer parks are allowed, provided: 
(1)  Such establishments and the parking area primarily related to their operations shall not occupy more than ten percent of the area of the park. 
(2)  Such establishments shall be restricted in their use to occupants of the park. 
(3)  Such establishments shall present no visible evidence of their commercial character which would attract customers other than occupants of the park. 
91.1.5. No space shall be so located that any part intended for occupancy for sleeping purposes shall be within 50 feet of the right-of-way line of any freeway, expressway, or collector street, or within 30 feet of the right-of-way of any minor street. 
91.1.6. In addition to meeting the above requirements, the travel trailer park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval of the county health department. 
91.2. Mobile home parks. In any district where mobile home parks are permitted, the applicant shall submit to the zoning enforcement official a layout of the park subject to the conditions of this section. The zoning enforcement official shall submit to the planning commission one copy of the mobile home park plan for its review and recommendations. The zoning enforcement official shall base his decision to issue the necessary permits, as required by this resolution, on the recommendation of the planning commission. 
91.2.1. The following minimum standards shall apply to each mobile home space or stand: 
(1)  Minimum size: 6,000 square feet for mobile homes on individual septic tanks 5,000 square feet for mobile homes on a centralized system approved by the county health official. 
(2)  Minimum width at mobile home: 60 feet for mobile homes on individual septic tanks; 50 feet for mobile homes on an approved centralized system. 
(3)  Minimum depth: 100 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard: ten feet. 
(5)  Minimum front yard: 30 feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear yard: ten feet. 
(7)  Minimum frontage on streets in park: 30 feet. 
91.2.2. The following minimum standards shall apply to each mobile home park: 
(1)  Minimum lot area per park: five acres. 
(2)  Minimum lot width for the portion used for entrance and exit shall be 50 feet. 
(3)  No mobile home shall be located closer than 30 feet to the right-of-way line of any roadway within the park, nor shall they be located closer than 50 feet to the right-of-way line of any street adjacent to the park. 
91.2.3. The minimum number of spaces completed and ready for occupancy before the first occupancy is permitted shall be ten spaces. 
91.2.4. No mobile home shall be admitted to any park unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of any additional laws, ordinances and resolutions of the county. 
91.2.5. Convenience establishments of a commercial nature, including store, laundry and dry cleaning agencies, and beauty shops and barbershops, may be permitted in mobile home parks, provided that such establishments and the parking areas primarily related to their operations: 
(1)  Shall not occupy more than ten percent of the area of the park; 
(2)  Shall be subordinate to the residential use and character of the park; 
(3)  Shall be located, designed, and intended to serve frequent trade or service needs of persons residing in the park; 
(4)  Shall present no visible evidence of their commercial character from any portion of any residential district outside the park. 
91.2.6. The following minimum standards shall apply to streets within each mobile home park: 
91.2.6.1. General. Streets shall be provided on the site where necessary to furnish principal trafficways for convenient access to mobile home stands and the other important facilities on the property. 
91.2.6.2. Definition. Streets located within mobile home parks shall be classified as minor or major streets. Major streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the system of streets and highways outside the mobile home park. Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to mobile home stands. 
91.2.6.3. Recognition of existing facilities. The street system shall be designed to recognize existing easements, utility lines etc., which are to be preserved; and to permit connection to existing facilities where necessary for the proper functioning of the drainage and utility systems. 
91.2.6.4. Circulation. The street system shall provide convenient circulation by means of minor streets and properly located major streets. Closed ends of dead-end streets shall be provided with an adequate paved vehicular turning circle at least 70 feet in diameter. 
91.2.6.5. Pavement widths. Pavements shall be of adequate widths to accommodate the contemplated parking and traffic load in accordance with the type of street. 
91.2.6.5.1. All entrance streets and other major streets with guest parking: 40 feet minimum. 
91.2.6.5.2. Major streets with no parking: 22 feet minimum. 
91.2.6.5.3. Minor street with parking on one side: 30 feet minimum. 
91.2.6.5.4. Minor or cul-de-sac street with no parking: 22 feet minimum. 
91.2.6.5.5. One-way minor street with no parking (generally acceptable only if less than 500-foot total length and serving less than 25 mobile home stands): 11 feet minimum. 
91.2.6.6. Alignment and gradient. Streets shall be adapted to the topography and shall have suitable alignment and gradient for traffic safety, satisfactory surface water and groundwater drainage, and proper functioning of sanitary and storm sewer systems. 
91.2.6.7. Intersections. Street intersections should generally be at right angles. Offsets at intersections and intersections of more than two streets at one point should be avoided. 
91.2.6.8. Extent of improvements. The street improvements shall extend continuously from the existing improved street system to the site. They shall provide suitable access to the mobile home stand and other important facilities on the property, adequate connections to existing or future streets at the boundaries of the property, and convenient circulation for vehicles. 
91.2.6.9. Grading. Streets shall be graded for their full width to provide suitable finish grades for pavement and any sidewalks with (1) adequate surface drainage and (2) convenient access to the mobile home stands and other important facilities on the property. 
91.2.6.10. Edging. Pavements and surfacing other than cement concrete shall be protected at the edges by suitable means where necessary to prevent ravelling of the wearing surface and shifting of the pavement base. 
91.2.6.11. Subgrade. The subgrade shall be well-drained, uniformly graded, and compacted. 
91.2.6.12. Flexible pavement. The pavement shall be flexible, as follows: a. Where a pavement base is necessary, it shall be a minimum of four inches thick and composed of crushed stone, gravel, or other appropriate durable material compacted to the maximum practical density. b. The wearing surface shall be of bituminous concrete and minimum of 1½ inches thick compacted to the maximum practical density. 
91.2.6.13. Rigid pavement. Where Portland cement concrete is used, it shall not be less than five inches thick on the prepared subgrade, constructed in accordance with accepted practices, with expansion joints where driveways and walks abut each or the curb. 
91.2.7. The following minimum standards shall apply to parking spaces in mobile home parks: 
91.2.7.1. Numbers. Car parking spaces shall be provided in sufficient number to meet the needs of the occupants of the property and their guests without interference with normal movements of traffic. Such facilities shall be provided at the rate of at least one car space for each mobile home lot plus an additional car space for each four lots to provide for guest parking, for two-car tenants, and for delivery and service vehicles. 
91.2.7.2. Location. Required car parking spaces should be located for convenient access to the mobile home stands. Usually one car space should be located on each lot and the remainder located in adjacent parking bays. 
91.2.7.3. Size. [The following are size dimensions of parking spaces:] 
a.  Width: 10 feet. 
b.  Length: 20 feet. 
91.2.8. Solid waste facilities in each mobile home park shall be in compliance with the comprehensive solid waste plan for Peach County and all subsequent laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the county commission pursuant to said plan. All mobile home park owners shall be responsible for removal of all solid waste from their park(s) to a county-approved collection point or county landfill. 
91.2.9. In addition to meeting the above requirements, the mobile home park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval from the county health department. 
91.2.10. Operator to maintain records. Every operator of a mobile home park within the limits of Peach County, Georgia, shall maintain records showing the given name and last name of each adult occupant of a mobile home located within the mobile home park so operated, and such operator shall maintain such records in a current manner so that at all times such records shall accurately reflect the name of each such actual adult occupant. 
91.2.11. Same: Description. The records required by section 91.2.10 may be maintained in one or more alternative fashions, as follows: 
(a)  If the mobile home park has an office located at the site of the park, the records prescribed may be maintained in said office, provided that the records shall be available for reference by any person legitimately entitled thereto including but not limited to law enforcement officials, 24 hours a day. 
(b)  If the mobile home park does not have an office open 24 hours a day, then and in such event, the records required hereby shall be maintained in the office of the Sheriff of Peach County, Georgia. 
(c)  The records need not be maintained in any particular form so long as they disclose the information required hereby. The records may consist of a plat of the mobile home park showing the lots by number upon which are listed the names of the adults occupying said lot, or the records may consist of a list of names of the occupants of the mobile home park alphabetically with an indication of the lot number upon which the mobile home occupied by them may be found or it may be a listing of lots by number showing the names of the adult occupants thereof. At a minimum, however, the records shall be such as will enable one inspecting them to determine the given and last names of every adult occupant of every mobile home in the park with a reference to the number of the lot upon which the mobile home occupied by them is located. 
91.2.12. Lot numbers. To make the foregoing provisions effective, every operator of every mobile home park within the limits of Peach County, Georgia, shall devise a system of numbering the lots in the mobile home park operated by him in such manner that the lots are consecutively numbered in such fashion as will permit one seeking the location of a lot to find it with relative ease and through means of a sign on each lot or other similar device, each lot shall be identified by number so that a person traversing the thoroughfares of the mobile home park by automobile will be able to identify any lot by number. Lot numbers shall be three inches or more in height. 
91.2.13. No mobile home permit or relocation permit shall be valid unless in an approved park or unless application and zoning compliance certificate has been approved by the Peach County zoning enforcement official and the Peach County Health Officer. 
91.2.13.1. Each year every owner of a mobile home subject to taxation under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq. shall return the mobile home for taxation and shall pay the taxes due on the mobile home at the time the owner applies for the mobile home location permit, or at the time of the first sale or transfer of the mobile home after December 31, or on May 1, whichever occurs first. If the owner returns such owner's mobile home for taxation prior to the date that the application for the mobile home location permit is required, such owner shall apply for the permit at the time such owner returns the mobile home for taxation. Such payment shall renew the decal, and the owner shall obtain a decal for the current year and shall affix the current year decal to the mobile home so as to be visible from the road or street. 
91.2.13.2. No mobile home shall be moved from Peach County to another county or to another location within Peach County until it has been returned for taxes in the county in which it is located on the first day of January of the year in which it is moved. 
91.2.13.3. Each year every owner of a mobile home which is eligible for homeowners exemption is required to make a return with the tax commissioner and obtain a decal to be affixed to the mobile home indicating that the mobile home has been returned for taxation. Any replacement mobile home to replace one returned for taxation must be treated as a new installation moving into Peach County and obtain a permit before occupancy. 
91.2.13.4. Any person who fails to obtain a decal and display it on the mobile home shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 in magistrate court, except that upon receipt of proof of purchase of a decal prior to the date of issuance of a summons, the owner of the mobile home shall be fined $25.00. 
91.2.14. Sample permit. 

Section 92. - Townhouses. 
Within the district permitting townhouses including the planned unit development district, the following requirements shall apply: 
92.1. No more than ten or fewer than three continuous townhouses shall be built in a row with approximately the same (but staggered) front line. 
92.2. No side yard is required except that on corner and interior lots the end of the building in any townhouse grouping shall conform to the side yard requirements of that district. 
92.3. Not more than 40 percent of the lot area shall be occupied by buildings. 
92.4. Insofar as practicable, off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks; and no off-street parking space shall be more than 140 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it intends to serve. Maneuvering incidental to parking shall take place entirely within the townhouse complex. 
92.5. All townhouse complexes shall be required to tie into the public sanitary sewer system. Other means of wastewater disposal shall be permitted. 
92.6. All other requirements within the district in which the townhouses are located shall prevail. 
92.7. In group development projects involving townhouses, and in all townhouse projects, additional common open space shall be provided as required under section 81.1. No buildings, parking, storage, or other use shall be made of this open space. 
92.8. Provision for the maintenance of all common parking, open access, and other spaces and areas shall be included in the deed restriction of the properties. 
Section 93. - Accessory and temporary building. 
93.1. Accessory buildings. The location of accessory buildings and uses in residential districts must meet the following requirements: 
93.1.1. Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, a substantial part of one wall of the accessory building shall be an integral part of the main building or such accessory building shall be attached to the main building in a substantial manner by a roof, and therefore such requirements applicable to the main building shall be applicable to the accessory building. 
93.1.2. A detached accessory building in which flammable materials are stored shall not be closer than 20 feet to the main building nor closer than ten feet to the lot line. No accessory building can be so situated to interfere with or restrict minimum light, air and health standards as determined by the health official. 
93.1.3. A detached accessory building, not more than two stories in height, may be constructed on not more than 30 percent of the rear yard. 
93.1.4. No detached accessory building may be located on the front yard of a lot or closer than five feet to the side or rear lot lines. 
93.2. Temporary buildings. A single mobile home or other temporary building may be used as an office in a subdivision by a developer, a temporary residence during construction, or for other special purposes for a period of one year (365 days) upon written approval from the zoning enforcement official. 
Section 94. - Fallout shelters. 
Fallout shelters are permissible as principal or accessory uses and structures in any district, subject to the following conditions: 
94.1. If any portion of the structure extends above the ground, that portion above the ground must comply with the yard and lot coverage regulations of the district in which it is located, and the site plan for such shelter must be approved by the building inspector. 
94.2. If the structure is completely underground, it need not comply with yard requirements or percentage of lot coverage requirements. 
94.3. A fallout shelter, underground or aboveground, shall be confined to a side or rear yard and shall not be located in the front yard between the main building and the street on which it fronts. 
94.4. Fallout shelters may contain or be contained in other structures or may be constructed separately. 
94.5. Fallout shelters may be used for any permissible use in the district where situated. 
Section 95. - Home occupations. 
95.1. Special requirements. Home occupations, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements prior to the issuance of a zoning compliance permit for a home occupation: 
95.1.1. The applicant must be the owner of the property on which the home occupation is to be located, or must have written approval of the owner of the property if the applicant is a tenant. 
95.1.2. The home occupation shall be operated only by the members of the family residing on the premises, and no article or service shall be sold or offered for sale except as may be produced by members of the immediate family residing on the premises. 
95.1.3. The home occupation shall be restricted to the main building only and shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the floor area within said building. 
95.1.4. The home occupation shall not generate excessive traffic or produce obnoxious odors, glare, noise, vibration, electrical disturbance, or radioactivity or other conditions that will be a nuisance to the surrounding area. 
95.1.5. Any business sign placed on the premises shall not be larger than two square feet in sign area, unlighted and fixed flat to a wall. 
95.1.6 Home occupations shall not include yard sales, garage sales, or flea markets. 
95.2. Expiration. A permit for home occupations shall expire under the following conditions: 
95.2.1. Whenever the applicant ceases to occupy the premises for which the home occupation [permit] was issued, no subsequent occupant of such premises shall engage in any home occupation until he shall have been issued a new permit after proper application. 
95.2.2 Whenever the holder of such a permit fails to exercise the same for any period of six consecutive months. 
95.3 Yard sales/garage sales. For the purpose of this section, the term yard sale/garage sale shall mean the sale or trading of used clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, baked goods or other food items, antiques, or similar goods or merchandise. Said yard sale/garage sale shall not be allowed as a home occupation, but shall be allowed under the following conditions: 
95.3.1. Said yard sales/garage sales shall be allowed up to two times in a 12-month period of time, with each event not lasting more than 48 hours. 
95.3.2. Said yard sales/garage sales shall not include the selling of inventory purchased, received on consignment, or by donation with the intent to resell. 
95.3.3. Signs for temporary yard sales/garage sales shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  On-premise signs shall be limited to one per parcel and a maximum area of three square feet. 
(b)  Similar off-premise signs for directional purposes, not exceeding three square feet in area, may be allowed near street intersections on private property with the consent of the property owner. These signs shall not be erected in a public right-of-way. 
(c)  All signs must be removed within 24 hours of the close of the sale. 
95.4. Flea markets. For the purpose of this section, the term "flea market" shall mean the ongoing sale or trading of new or used clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, baked goods or other food items, antiques, or similar goods or merchandise on a commercially zoned lot or parcel of land within the county. Said individual or individuals operating a flea market shall be subject to the occupational tax ordinance and will be subject to the following regulations. 
95.4.1. Flea markets shall not be allowed as a home occupation. 
95.4.2. Such events shall be subject to health, zoning, or other regulatory ordinances as may effect. 
95.4.3 Said flea market shall be conducted completely within an enclosed building. 
95.4.4. Said flea market may include the selling of inventory obtained by purchase, on consignment, or by donation with the intent to resell. 
(Amd. of 2-12-2008) 
Section 96. - Automobile service stations. 
Within the districts permitting automobile service stations, the following requirements shall apply: 
96.1. Location. The property on which an automobile service station is located shall not be within 100 feet of any residential district, or any property containing a school, public playground, church, hospital, public library, or institution for children or dependents. 
96.2. Site requirements. An automobile service station shall have a minimum frontage on the primary street of 120 feet and a minimum area of 12,000 square feet. All buildings shall be set back 40 feet from all street right-of-way lines and all canopies shall be set back 15 feet from all street right-of-way lines except in the C-H district in which these setbacks shall be 80 feet and 30 feet respectively. 
96.3. Access to site. Vehicular entrances or exits at an automobile service station: 
96.3.1. Shall not be provided with more than two curb cuts for the first 120 feet of street frontage or fraction thereof. 
96.3.2. Shall contain an access width along the curbline of the street of not more than 40 feet as measured parallel to the street at its narrowest point and shall not be located closer than 20 feet to a street intersection or closer than ten feet to the adjoining property. 
96.3.3. Shall not have any two driveways or curb cuts any closer than 20 feet at both the right-of-way line and the curb or edge of the pavement along a single street. 
96.4. Gasoline pump islands. All gasoline pump islands shall be set back at least 15 feet from the right-of-way line, or where a future widening line has been established, the setback line shall be measured from such line; and where pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the right-of-way line, the pump island shall be located not less than 30 feet back of the right-of-way line. In the C-H district all pump islands shall not be located closer than 30 feet to the street right-of-way; when the pumps are perpendicular to the right-of-way the pump island shall be 60 feet from the right-of-way line. 
96.5. Off-street parking. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces are required with an additional off-street parking space for each lubrication and wash bay. 
96.6. Other site improvements. In addition to the above requirements, the following additional site improvements shall be adhered to: 
96.6.1. A raised curb of at least six inches in height shall be erected along the street property lines, except for driveway openings. 
96.6.2. A solid fence buffer or wall six feet in height shall be erected along all adjacent property lines facing any residential lot. 
96.6.3. Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that it is deflected away from adjacent properties. 
96.6.4. Signs, whether permanent or temporary, shall not be placed within the public right-of-way and shall be arranged so that they do not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. 
96.6.5. All drives and parking, storage, and service areas shall be paved and curbed, and a good stand of grass shall be maintained on the remainder of the lot. 
96.6.6. All commercial or rental vehicles parked at the premises shall be parked behind the front building line. 
96.7. Storage of inflammable products. Outside aboveground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquified petroleum gas, oil or other inflammable liquids or gases shall be prohibited at any automobile service station in all zoning districts. 
Section 97. - Signs. 
The provisions of this section shall govern the location, size, setback, and the height of sign in each of the use districts established in this resolution in order to insure [ensure] safe construction, light, air, and open space to reduce hazards at intersections, to prevent the accumulation of trash, and to protect property values of the entire community. In addition, the provisions set forth in the building code adopted by the county commission, all revisions and amendments thereto, shall also be adhered to. 
97.1. General provisions. 
97.1.1. All types of signs, except outdoor advertising signs and political advertising, shall be allowed without a permit in all zoning districts where they are permitted uses. 
97.1.2. All outdoor advertising signs shall be subject to the same side yard and height limitations imposed upon buildings or structures in the use district in which said sign is located, except as otherwise provided herein. 
97.1.3. For the purpose of computing sign area, both sides of a "V-type" or double-faced outdoor advertising sign shall be considered as one sign. 
97.1.4. Rooftop outdoor advertising signs or sign structures shall not extend above the maximum building height in any zone. Rooftop outdoor advertising signs or sign structures shall not extend beyond or overhang any exterior wall of the building upon which secured. 
97.1.5. No outdoor advertising sign or sign structure shall be placed upon any street or highway right-of-way. 
97.1.6. No outdoor advertising sign or sign structure shall be located in such a manner as to materially impede the view of any street or highway intersection; or in such a manner as to materially impede the view of the intersection of a street or highway with a railroad grade crossing, as required in section 64.2 of this resolution. 
97.1.7. No outdoor advertising sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. 
97.1.8. No portion of any outdoor advertising sign shall be less than ten feet above the level of a sidewalk or other pedestrians thoroughfare, nor shall be less than 16 feet above the level of a public driveway, alley, or street. 
97.2. Signs other than outdoor advertising signs as permitted uses. Signs for the purpose of conveying information, knowledge, or ideas to the public about a subject directly relating to the premises on which it is located shall be permitted in the following zoning districts, provided the specified requirements are adhered to: 
97.2.1. R-AG, RR-1, R-2, R-3 and MH residential districts. 
97.2.1.1. A single non-illuminated professional or announcement sign per lot not exceeding 32 square feet in area and attached wholly to a building. 
97.2.1.2. "For Sale" or "For Lease" signs not exceeding four square feet in area are allowed for a period of 90 days. 
97.2.1.3. Permanent signs not exceeding 12 square feet in area identifying subdivisions of ten or more lots, or church bulletin boards not exceeding 18 square feet in area. 
97.2.1.4. Signs for temporary yard sales/garage sales shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  On-premise signs shall be limited to one per parcel and a maximum area of three square feet. 
(b)  Similar off-premise signs for directional purposes, not exceeding three square feet in area, may be allowed near street intersections on private property with the consent of the property owner. These signs shall not be erected in a public right-of-way. 
(c)  All signs must be removed within 24 hours of the close of the sale. 
97.2.2. C-1 Commercial district. 
97.2.2.1. Professional or announcement signs having not more than 12 square feet of area. 
97.2.2.2. Signs pertaining to the sale or lease of property upon which it is located. 
97.2.2.3. Principal use identification signs limited to 40 square feet in area. 
97.2.3. C-2 Commercial districts. 
97.2.3.1. Professional or announcement signs having not more than 12 square feet of area. 
97.2.3.2. Signs pertaining to the sale or lease of property upon which it is located. 
97.2.3.3. One sign or billboard pertaining to the principal use of a building on the lot for each lot with 100 feet or less of lot frontage with one additional sign for each additional 100 feet or less of lot frontage under single ownership, provided said sign shall not exceed 400 square feet in area per structure facing. Where two signs, each not exceeding 200 square feet in area per structure facing, are supported by the same sign structure, one above the other, they shall be considered as a single sign. 
97.2.4. M-1 and M-2 Wholesale and industrial districts. One sign or billboard pertaining to the principal use of a building on the lot for each lot with 75 feet or less of lot frontage with one additional sign for each additional 75 feet or less of lot frontage under single ownership, provided said sign shall not exceed 400 square feet in area per structure facing. Where two signs, each not exceeding 200 square feet in area per structure facing, are supported by the same sign structure, one above the other, they shall be considered as a single sign. 
97.3. Outdoor advertising signs as permitted uses. For the purpose of this resolution, the state law (O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq.) governing outdoor advertising adjacent to any state-aid road which is also a part of the interstate or primary systems of highways is hereby made a part of this resolution and shall govern the placement and maintenance of signs in addition to the following provisions. Whenever this resolution is at variance with the state law the most restrictive shall govern. 
97.3.1. R-AG, R-1, R-2, R-3, and MH residential districts, all PUD districts, and C-1 commercial districts. No outdoor advertising signs are permitted. 
97.3.2 C-2 Commercial districts. Outdoor advertising signs such that the total sign area, including the sign area of all signs other than outdoor advertising signs, shall not exceed 1,500 square feet of display are on any one lot. The distance between each outdoor advertising sign on a state highway of county maintained road shall be one-half mile, and no outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted within one-half mile of any zoning district in which outdoor advertising signs are prohibited. Said distance shall be measured from the sign to the nearest point of a district boundary. The distance between each outdoor advertising sign on an interstate highway shall be determined by the Interstate Sign Ordinance. 
97.3.3 M-1 and M-2 Wholesale and industrial districts. Outdoor advertising signs such that the total sign area, including the sign area of all signs other than outdoor advertising signs, shall not exceed 1,500 square feet of display area on any one lot. The distance between each outdoor advertising sign on a state highway or county maintained road, shall be one-half mile, and no outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted within one-half mile of any zoning district in which outdoor advertising signs are prohibited. Said distance shall be measured from the sign to the nearest point of a district boundary. The distance between each outdoor advertising sign on an interstate highway shall be determined by the Interstate Sign Ordinance. 
97.4. Signs prohibited in all districts. The following signs are prohibited in all use districts: 
97.4.1. Any sign erected or painted upon a sloping roof, fence, tree, standpipe, fire escape, or utility pole. 
97.4.2. Any sign which uses the word "Stop" or "Danger" prominently displayed and/or which is a copy or imitation of official traffic control signs. 
97.4.3. Any sign which contains flashing or intermittent red, green, or yellow illumination. 
97.5. Maintenance and removal of outdoor advertising signs and other sign structures. 
97.5.1. All outdoor advertising signs and other sign structures shall be kept in repair and in proper state off preservation. All unsafe signs must adhere to the provisions of the building code adopted by the county commission, including all revisions and amendments thereto. 
97.5.2. Outdoor advertising signs and other sign structures which are no longer functional, or are abandoned, shall be removed, or relocated at the owner's expense, in compliance with the provisions of this resolution within 30 days following disfunction. 
97.5.3. Any legally established nonconforming outdoor advertising sign or other sign structure shall be permitted without alteration in size or location, provided that the requirements of section 61 of this resolution are adhered to and provided that nothing herein shall prevent maintenance, repairing, partial or posting of legally established forming signs. 
97.5.4. In the event of the destruction, partial or complete, of an outdoor advertising sign or other sign structure, the owner thereof shall have the right to reconstruct, rebuild, renovate or repair said sign substantially to the same condition as before said destruction, provided the provisions of section 61 of this resolution are adhered to. 
97.6. Political advertising signs. Graphics pertaining to political campaigns or elections of any nature shall adhere to the following controls: 
97.6.1. A ground, wall, or projecting graphics may be erected or displayed on the property or building being used as a campaign or election headquarters, provided that these graphics adhere to the regulations as set forth in section 97.1 of this ordinance. 
97.6.2. R-AG, RR-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, and MH residential districts, all PUD districts and C-1 commercial districts. Temporary political advertisements during the normal campaign period for any election for public office provided: 
a.  Such signs shall be removed within 30 days after the primary, general or run-off election; 
b.  Only one sign may be placed on any lot; 
c.  No sign shall exceed four square feet in area; and 
d.  Only one permit per candidate shall be required; each applicant shall provide a listing of the locations of all eligible signs to the zoning enforcement official. 
97.6.3. Political advertising shall be allowed for a period of not more than 60 days before a duly authorized election date as established by applicable federal, state or local law and shall be removed within 30 days of the expiration of the election date. 
97.6.4. At no time will political graphics be allowed to be tacked, painted, posted, marked, or otherwise affixed on trees, fences, poles, or other like structures, or on rocks the ground itself or other natural features. 
97.6.5. A performance bond shall be required of each political candidate or his appointed representative at such time as a permit for political advertising signs have been, removed to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners, the funds shall be returned to the candidate or his appointed representative. 
(Amd. of 10-11-2005; Amd. of 4-11-2006; Amd. of 2-12-2008) 
Section 98. - Cemeteries. 
Within the districts permitting cemeteries, the following requirements shall apply: 
98.1. The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector or larger streets in the vicinity of such site. In addition, such site shall have direct access to a thoroughfare. 
98.2. Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than 20 acres. 
98.3. All structures shall be set back no less than 25 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
98.4. All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 25 feet from any property line or minor street right-of-way lines, and not less than 50 feet from any collector, arterial, expressway, or freeway right-of-way line. 
98.5. The entire cemetery property shall be landscaped and maintained. 
Section 99. - Performance standards for nonresidential uses. 
99.1. General requirements. The manufacturing, processing, fabrication, repair, and servicing of any commodity or product [shall be] subject to the following conditions: 
99.1.1. Any such use as determined by the zoning enforcement official that may be of noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odors, dust, smoke, gas, noise, or vibration shall be referred to the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
99.1.2. Prior to issuing a zoning compliance permit the applicant shall provide the zoning enforcement official with written approval of the nature, plans, and specifications of the said use from the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
99.1.3. All other requirements within the district in which these industrial activities can be located shall be met. 
ARTICLE X. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Section 101. - Height limits. 
Height limits provided herein may be exceeded only as provided for in section 52 of these regulations. 
Section 102. - Planned unit development. 
Permitted uses for a planned unit development district is [are] established in section 74 of this resolution. Use, area, bulk, and height requirement provisions for review of plans and other requirements shall be determined by the procedures set forth in this section. 
102.1. General conditions. Any area may be rezoned as a planned unit development district if the following conditions are met: 
102.1.1. More than one principal land use or separate land uses which would not otherwise be permitted to locate within the same zoning district are proposed for development on a parcel under single or multiple ownership or management. 
102.1.2. The area is not located within an M-2 general industrial district. 
102.1.3. Exceptions or variations to the site, dimensional changes in standards requirements of this resolution are being sought. 
102.2. Specific requirements. In order to qualify for a planned unit development district zoning classification, a proposed development must first meet each of the following specific requirements: 
102.2.1. The site utilized for the proposed development must contain an area of not less than 20 acres. 
102.2.2. The site must have a minimum width between any two opposite boundary lines of 450 linear feet and must adjoin or have direct access to at least one arterial, or collector street. 
102.3. Procedure for approval of a planned unit development district. The filing of a plan for a planned unit development shall constitute a request for an amendment to this resolution and shall meet the requirements for amendments specified in this resolution. In addition, the following regulations shall apply: 
102.3.1. Two copies of a preliminary site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission. 
102.3.2. The planning commission shall review the proposals prior to submitting a recommendation to the county commission. The planning commission may make reasonable additional requirements including, but not limited to, utilities, drainage, landscaping, and maintenance thereof, lighting, signs and advertising devices, screening, accessways, curb cuts, traffic control, height of buildings and setback of buildings to protect adjoining residential lots or uses, or to protect the PUD from adjacent uses. 
102.3.3. Approval by the county commission subsequent to a public hearing constitutes creation of the planned unit development district. 
102.3.4. Following approval by the county commission a final site plan in the form of a final plat shall be recorded in accordance with the provisions of this section prior to issuance of a building permit for construction of any improvements within the PUD. 
102.4. Preliminary site plan required. The preliminary site plan which accompanies an application for approval of a PUD shall show the following: 
102.4.1. The proposed title of the project and the name of the engineer, architect, designer, or landscape architect, and the development. 
102.4.2. The north point, scale, and date; the scale of the site plan shall be as follows: 
a.  For projects containing 50 acres or more, not more than 100 feet to one inch. 
b.  For projects containing less than 50 acres, not more than 50 feet to one inch. 
102.4.3. Existing zoning and zoning district boundaries and proposed changes in zoning. 
102.4.4. The boundaries of the property involved, the location of all existing easements, section lines, and property lines, existing streets, buildings, and other existing physical features in or adjoining the project. 
102.4.5. The location and sizes of existing and proposed sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground facilities in or near the project. 
102.4.6. The location and character of construction of proposed streets, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances and exits, loading areas (including numbers of parking and loading spaces), and outdoor lighting systems. 
102.4.7. The location of proposed lots, setback lines, and easements, and proposed reservations for parks, parkways, playgrounds, school sites, and open spaces. 
102.4.8. The location and height of all proposed main and accessory buildings and structures. 
102.4.9. Location, height and material of all fences, walls, screens, planting and landscaping. 
102.4.10. Proposed location, intended use, and character of all buildings. 
102.4.11. Location, character, size and height and orientation of proposed signs. 
102.4.12. A location map showing the position of the proposed development in relationship to the surrounding area. 
102.4.13. A tabulation of [the] total number of acres in the project, gross and net, and the percentage thereof proposed to be devoted to different dwelling types, commercial uses, other nonresidential uses, off-street parking, streets, parks, schools, and other public and private reservations. 
102.4.14. A tabulation of the total number of dwelling units of various types in the project and the overall project density in dwelling units per acre, gross and net, as required [by] district regulations. 
102.4.15. A general description of the proposal, stating the purpose and goals of the development and the design features incorporated for meeting these goals. 
102.4.16. A detailed legal description of the location of the site. 
102.4.17. A discussion of the proposed standards for development, including restrictions on the use of the property density standards and yard requirements and restrictive covenants. The planning commission may establish additional requirements for the preliminary site plan and in special cases may waive a particular requirement if, in its opinion, the inclusion of that requirement is not essential to a proper decision on the project. 
102.5. Final plat required. A final plat shall be recorded prior to submission of an application for a building permit. The plat shall comply with all laws, regulations, ordinances and resolutions governing the approval of subdivisions and, in addition, shall show all the features required on the preliminary site plan. A plat of development shall be recorded regardless of whether a subdivision is proposed. At least one of the final site plan maps shall include topographical contour lines at intervals of no less than five feet. 
102.6. Review standards. The planning commission shall review plans for proposed planned unit developments for conformity with the comprehensive plan. Specifically, the proposed plan shall meet the following conditions: 
102.6.1. The plan shall provide for appropriate relationships between uses around the boundaries and uses within the PUD and shall indicate in written form those measures which would be taken to insure [ensure] that adjacent property will not be adversely affected, and the PUD will be similarly protected. 
102.6.2. The plan shall conform to the purpose of this resolution as stated in article I. 
102.6.3. Access to all developed property shall be sufficient to provide for an acceptable level of fire protection. 
102.7. Miscellaneous provisions. 
102.7.1. Amendments and additions. Amendments or additions to an approved plan or to the boundaries of a PUD shall be accomplished subject to the same regulations and procedures applicable to a new application. 
102.7.2. Deed restrictions. The planning commission may require filing of deed restrictions to help carry out the intent of this resolution and specifically the intent of the PUD district. 
102.7.3. Violations. The violation of any provision of the plan as submitted under the provisions provided herein shall constitute a violation of this resolution subject to the same penalties as established in article XII. 
102.8. Site design requirements. 
102.8.1. Location of district. A PUD district may be established in any existing district except an M-2 general industrial district. 
102.8.2. Site design, general. The proposed development must be designed so as to produce an environment of stable and desirable character not out of harmony with its surrounding neighborhood. The review by the planning commission shall consider the following design elements: 
102.8.2.1. Privacy. Personal and individual privacy shall be maintained and balanced with the provision of public and common areas. 
102.8.2.2. Variety. Interest and variety shall be sought, by means of street design and changes in mixtures of building types, heights, facades, setbacks, planting, or size of open space. The design should be harmonious as a whole and not simply from street-to-street. 
102.8.2.3. Traffic and parking. No through or commercial traffic should be permitted; streets should not be straight for long distances, but should curve so as to discourage fast movement of traffic; group parking area should be screened as defined in section 67, so that the vehicles are substantially hidden from the street. 
102.8.2.4. Lot area and lot width, general. Minimum lot area and lot width requirements may be increased by the county health department when the said department determines that an increased area or width is necessary for health reasons. 
102.8.3. Site design, detail. 
102.8.3.1. Open space. At least 20 percent of the gross area of the site should be retained in open space. 
102.8.3.2. Lot size and lot width. 

 
1 Only permitted when connected to a public or community sewerage system. 
102.8.3.3 Minimum setbacks. 

 

 
a For only townhouse developments, no side yard is required for interior townhouse units in a townhouse development; ten feet side yard setbacks are required for ends of the townhouse grouping when the end units are located on an interior lot. 
;sup\sup;Where the rear property line is directly adjacent to a residential lot, a continuous buffer shall be required along the full length of the rear property line. This buffer shall be of the type and material specified in section 67.2. 
c Side yard setbacks shall be not less than 25 feet where the side yard property line is directly adjacent to a residential lot, but where the side yard is adjacent to a retail or service use lot, no side yard is required provided that the structures involved are to have a common or party wall or to have no space between their walls. If there is to be a space between the walls of adjacent retail or service structures, a side yard setback of no less than five feet shall be required. 
102.8.3.4. Building coverage. The total ground area occupied by buildings and structures shall not exceed 30 percent of the total ground area of the planned unit development. Building coverage is defined as the land area covered by dwelling balconies, porches, and other architectural projections, but not including roof overhangs, open balconies and uncovered porches. 
102.8.3.5. Building heights. Height of particular buildings shall not be a basis for denial or approval of a plan; provided any structures in excess of 35 feet shall be designed and platted to be consistent with the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property and the efficiency of existing public services and facilities. 
102.8.3.6. Density of housing types. A maximum of 30 percent of the dwelling units located in a PUD district may be two-family dwellings, townhouses, and multifamily dwelling units. 
102.8.3.7. Density of retail and service uses. No more than five percent of the floor space of the total floor space in the PUD development shall be used for retail or service establishments. 
102.8.3.8. Street standards. All streets located in PUD districts proposed to be located in C-1, C-2, and R-2 districts shall be Class I streets; all streets located in PUD districts proposed to be located in R-AG, R-CD, R-1 and R-MH districts shall be Class II streets. Streets located in a mobile home park portion of the PUD development shall meet the requirements of section 91.2.6. No Class III streets shall be allowed. 
102.8.3.9. Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be as required in sections 62 and 63. 
102.8.3.10. Mobile home parks in a PUD district. Mobile home parks proposed to be located in a PUD development shall meet the regulations as provided for in section 91.2.2. herein. 
Section 103. - Yard requirements. 
Yard requirements shall be modified subject to the following conditions: 
103.1. On double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each street. 
103.2. Whenever a rear property line of a lot abuts upon an alley, one-half of the alley width shall be considered as a portion of the required rear yard. 
103.3. An unroofed porch may project into a required front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet. 
Section 104. - Access to public streets. 
Access to public streets shall be maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
104.1. Each principal use shall be located on a lot or parcel which provides frontage on a public street having a right-of-way of not less than 30 feet. 
104.2. Any additional dwelling shall have access to a public street by means of a passageway open to the sky at least 15 feet in width. 
Section 105. - Front and side yard setbacks for dwellings. 
The setback requirements of this resolution for side yards on corner lots and/or front yards shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on developed lots located wholly or in part, 100 feet on each side of such lot and within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same streets as such lot, is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback on such lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the existing developed lot. 
ARTICLE XI. - ZONING ADMINISTRATION 

Section 111. - Duties and powers of the zoning enforcement official. 
The zoning enforcement official shall be the building official of Peach County, Georgia, or any public official of the county designated by the county commission whose duties and powers are as follows: 
111.1. The zoning enforcement official is authorized and empowered on behalf and in the name of the county commission to work with the planning commission and to administer and enforce the provisions of this resolution to include receiving applications, presenting applications at the planning commission meetings, inspecting premises, issuing certificates of zoning compliance, building permits, certificates of occupancy for uses [and] structures which are in conformance with the provisions of this resolution. 
111.2. The zoning enforcement official does not have the authority to take final action on applications or matters involving variances, nonconforming uses, or other exceptions which this resolution has reserved for public hearings before the board of zoning appeals and the county commission. 
111.3. The zoning enforcement official may approve plats of proposed subdivisions of five lots or less where the plat is in conformity with this resolution. Any additional lots above in number out of the original parcel of land within a 36-month period of time from the original approval by the zoning enforcement official shall require the plats to be submitted to the planning commission for approval that the same is in conformity with the resolution and the requirements for subdivisions pursuant to this resolution. The original five or less lots created from the original parcel of land shall be considered a part of any further subdivision of the original parcel. 
111.4. The zoning enforcement official shall keep records of all and any permits, including zoning compliance permits and certificates of occupancy issued and all submitted subdivision plats with notations of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all sketches and plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be made as a public record. 
(Amd. of 10-11-2005; Amd. of 4-11-2006) 
Section 112. - Permits and certificates. 
Permits and certificates shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions: 
112.1. Building and zoning compliance permit. The zoning enforcement official shall issue a zoning compliance permit, which may be incorporated into the building permit issued under the building code, for any permitted use of land, construction or structural alteration, provided such proposed use of land or structure, or structural alteration is in conformance with the provisions of this resolution. 
112.1.1. An application for a building permit or a mobile home permit where a septic tank must be installed shall be accompanied by two copies of a dimensional sketch or a to-scale plan, signed by the owner, or his authorized agent, to include as a minimum the following: lot dimensions with property line monuments located thereon; shape, size, height, uses, and a percolation test or septic tank permit location of the buildings proposed to be erected, demolished, altered, or moved, and of any buildings already on the lot; yard dimensions and the use of structure, including the number of dwelling units within each structure, where appropriate; easements (private and public); watercourses; fences; street names and street right-of-way lines; and such other information regarding abutting property as directly affects the application. 
112.1.2. Each permit shall be conspicuously posted and displayed on the premises described in the permit during the period of construction or reconstruction. 
112.1.3. If the proposed excavation, filling, construction, or movement set forth in said sketch or plan is in conformity with the provisions of this resolution and other appropriate codes and regulations of Peach County then in effect, the zoning enforcement official shall sign and retain one copy of the zoning compliance permit and one copy of the sketch or plan for his records. 
112.1.4. If the sketch or plan submitted describes work which does not conform to the requirements of this resolution, the zoning enforcement official shall not issue a zoning compliance permit, but shall return one copy of the sketch or plan to the applicant along with a signed refusal and shall cite the portions of this resolution with which the submitted sketch or plan does not comply. The zoning enforcement official shall retain one copy of the sketch or plan and two copies of the refusal. 
112.1.5. Any zoning compliance permit shall automatically expire six months from the date of issuance if the person, firm, or corporation to which the certificate or permit was issued has not clearly demonstrated that the permit is being exercised for the purpose for which it was issued, or if the work so authorized is suspended or discontinued for a period of one year. 
112.2. Certificate of occupancy. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the zoning enforcement official in accordance with the following provisions: 
112.2.1. Certificate of occupancy required. A certificate of occupancy is required in advance of occupancy of use of: 
(1)  A building erected after January 9, 1973; 
(2)  A building altered after January 9, 1973, so as to affect height, or side, front or rear yards; or 
(3)  A change of type of occupancy or use of any building on premises. 
112.2.2. Issuance of certificate of occupancy. The zoning enforcement official shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of land or building, as stated on the application for such certificate and signed thereto by the owner or his appointed agent, is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this resolution and if the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan submitted for the zoning compliance permit. 
112.2.3. Denial of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this resolution or unless the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan upon which the zoning compliance permit was issued. 
Section 113. - Establishment of the board of zoning appeals. 
The board of zoning appeals of the unincorporated area of Peach County, Georgia, is hereby established. 
113.1. Membership. The board of zoning appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the county commission for overlapping terms of five years. 
13.1.1. Initial appointment. The initial appointment of the board of zoning appeals shall be as follows: two members for one year; two members for two years; and one member for three years. 
113.1.2. Vacancies. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be removable for cause by the county commission upon written charges and after public hearing thereon. 
113.1.3. Public offices held. No member shall hold any public office; however, one member appointed may be a member of the planning commission. 
113.2. Rules of procedure. The board of zoning appeals shall observe the following procedures: 
113.2.1. Said board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this resolution and state law for the conduct of its affairs. 
113.2.2. Said board shall elect one of its members, other than a member of the planning commission, as chairman, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. Said board shall also appoint a vice-chairman and secretary. 
113.2.3. The meetings of said board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as said board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
113.2.4. Except as otherwise provided by law, all meetings of said board shall be open to the public. 
113.2.5. Said board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the county clerk and shall be a public record. 
Section 114. - Duties and powers of the board of zoning appeals. 
The board of zoning appeals shall have the following duties and powers: 
114.1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement decision, or determination made by the zoning enforcement official, or other administrative official, in the enforcement of this resolution. 
114.2. To hear and decide special exceptions of the terms of this resolution upon which said board is required to pass under this resolution. 
114.3. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this resolution as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this resolution will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this resolution shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of [zoning] appeals that: 
114.3.1. There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; and 
114.3.2. The application of this resolution to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
114.3.3. Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
114.3.4. Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this resolution. 
114.4. No variance or special exception shall be granted for a use of any land or building or structure that is prohibited by this resolution or that is not permitted by this resolution. 
114.5. The following criteria shall be applied by the board of zoning appeals in evaluating and deciding any application for special exceptions. No application for special exceptions shall be granted by the board of zoning appeals unless satisfactory provisions and arrangements have been made concerning each of the following factors, all of which are applicable to each application: 
114.5.1. Adequacy of the size of the site for the use contemplated and whether or not adequate land area is available for the proposed use including provision of all required yards, open space, off street parking, and all other applicable requirements of the zoning district in which the use is proposed to be located; 
114.5.2. Compatibility of the proposed use with adjacent properties and land uses and with the other properties and land uses in the district; 
114.5.3. Adequacy of public services, public facilities, and utilities to serve the use contemplated; 
114.5.4. Adequacy of the public street on which the use is proposed to be located and whether or not there is sufficient traffic-carrying capacity for the use proposed so as not to unduly increase traffic and create congestion in the area; 
114.5.5. Whether or not existing land uses located along access routes to the site will be adversely affected by the character of the vehicles or the volume of traffic generated by the proposed use; 
114.5.6. Ingress and egress to the subject property and to all proposed buildings, structures, and the uses thereon, with particular reference to pedestrian and automotive safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in the event of fire other emergency; 
114.5.7. Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of noise, smoke, odor, dust, or vibration generated by the proposed use; 
114.5.8. Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of the hours of operation of the proposed use; 
114.5.9. Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of the manner of operation of the proposed use; 
114.5.10. Whether or not the proposed plan is otherwise consistent with the requirements of the zoning district classification in which the use is proposed to be located; 
114.5.11. Whether or not the proposed use is consistent with the policies of the comprehensive land use plan; 
114.5.12. Whether or not the proposed plan provides for all required buffer zones and transitional buffer zones where required by the regulation of the district in which the proposed use it to be located; 
114.5.13. Whether or not there is adequate provision of refuse and service areas; 
114.5.14. Whether the length of time for which the special land use permit is granted should be limited in duration; 
114.5.15. Whether or not the size, scale, and massing of proposed building are appropriate in relation to the size of the subject property and in relation to the size, scale and massing of adjacent and nearby lots and buildings; 
114.5.16. Whether the proposed plan will adversely affect historic buildings, sites, districts, or archaeological resources; 
114.5.17. Whether the proposed use satisfies the requirements contained within the supplemental regulation for such special land use permit; 
114.5.18. Whether or not the proposed building as a result of its proposed height will create a negative shadow impact on any adjoining lot or building. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2003, § 114.5) 
Section 115. - Procedure for requesting a hearing before the board of zoning appeals. 
Requests for a hearing before the board of zoning appeals for an administrative review, special exception, or a variance shall observe the following procedures: 
115.1. An application must be submitted in writing to the zoning enforcement official from whom the appeal is taken and to the board of [zoning] appeals with notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
115.2. An application shall be accompanied by an acceptable site plan with such reasonable information shown thereon as may be required by the zoning enforcement official. Such site plan shall include, as a minimum, the following: lot dimensions with property line monuments located thereon; location and size of existing and proposed structures; yard dimensions and the use of structures; easements (private and public), watercourses; fences; street names and street right-of-way lines; and such other information regarding abutting property as directly affects the application. 
115.3. The zoning enforcement official shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question one or more signs, each of which shall not be less than 12 square feet in area and shall contain information as to the proposed change and the date and time of the public hearing, and the cost of each shall be paid by the applicant prior to the public hearing. 
115.4. The board of zoning appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals or other matters referred to said board, give at least 15 but not more than 45 days' public notice thereof as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within 45 days from the date of such public hearing. 
115.5. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning enforcement official certifies to the board of zoning appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that, by the reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the said board or by a court of record, on application, on notice to the official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
115.6. In exercising the powers granted the board of zoning appeals in section 114 of this resolution, the said board may, in conformance with the provisions of this resolution, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify, the orders, requirements, decisions, or determinations of the zoning enforcement official, and to that end shall have all the powers of the zoning enforcement official and may issue or direct the issuance of a zoning compliance permit. 
115.7. A property owner, or his appointed agent, shall not initiate action for a hearing before the board of zoning appeals relating to the same parcel of land more often than once every 12 months without specific approval by the board of zoning appeals. 
115.8. Any petition for a hearing before the board of zoning appeals may be withdrawn prior to action thereon by said board at the discretion of the person, firm, or corporation initiating such a request upon written notice to the secretary of said board. 
115.9. Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning appeals may apply for a writ of certiorari by petition to the superior court as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE XII. - PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Required subdivision improvements, § 151 et seq. 

Section 121. - Platting authority. 
The Peach County Planning Commission shall be the official platting authority. 
121.1. General application. Any person proposing to subdivide land within the unincorporated areas of the county shall submit to the planning commission preliminary and final plats of the proposed subdivision which shall conform to all the requirements set forth in these regulations. 
121.2. Preliminary plat approval required prior to construction. No subdivider shall proceed with any construction work on a proposed subdivision before obtaining preliminary plat approval from the planning commission, as certified thereon. 
121.3. Recording of final plat required prior to sale of lot. No subdivider shall sell or negotiate to sell any lot in a proposed subdivision by reference to or exhibition of or by any other use of a plat of such subdivision, until such plat has been given final approval by the planning commission, as certified thereon, and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Peach County. 
121.4. Legal status of public street required. No land dedicated as a public street shall be accepted, opened, or improved, nor shall any utilities or other facilities be installed therein, unless such street shall have been accepted or opened as, or otherwise shall have received the legal status of, a public street prior to January 9, 1973, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a plat approved by the planning commission or on a plat made and adopted by the planning commission; provided, however, that the county commission may locate and construct or may accept any other street, if the resolution or other measure for such approval be [is] first submitted to the planning commission for its review and comment. 
121.5. Access to public street required. No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the unincorporated areas of the county, unless such lot has access to a street which shall have been accepted or opened as, or otherwise shall have received the legal status of, a public street; provided, however, that private streets and other private accessways may be approved under the terms of these rules and regulations in community unit plans, group development plans, PUD developments, condominium projects, apartment projects, townhouses, commercial developments, shopping centers, or other developments. 
Section 122. - Preapplication review. 
Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the jurisdiction of the commission is proposed, the subdivider may, at his discretion, consult early and informally with the zoning enforcement official for advice and assistance. The subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. If the tract of land is not to be initially subdivided in its entirety, the subdivider shall provide sketch plans for the entire tract and indicate the proposed unit divisions or staged development boundaries. 
The zoning enforcement official shall return within 15 days the submitted sketch plans to the subdivider and shall inform the subdivider where the plans do not comply with the regulations set forth in this resolution. No fee shall be charged for the preapplication review and no formal application shall be required. 
Section 123. - Procedure for preliminary plat approval. 
Prior to the cutting or grading of any street or the making of any street improvements or the installation of utilities, the subdivider shall submit to the commission a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure: 
123.1. Application for preliminary plat approval. Following any preapplication review of the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the zoning enforcement official, not less than 14 nor more than 30 days prior to the next regular meeting of the commission, a letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat, and eight copies of the preliminary plat and other documents, as specified in section 123 herein. The zoning enforcement official shall then distribute to the members of the planning commission and to the county health department one copy each of the preliminary plat and maintain one copy for his file. 
123.2. Review of preliminary plat. The zoning enforcement official shall check the plat for conformance to the rules and regulations set forth in this document. The county health department shall review the proposed method of sewage disposal, water supply, and stormwater runoff for the subdivision and express its written approval, disapproval, or approval subject to listed modifications to the zoning enforcement official before the first regular meeting of the commission following submission of the preliminary plat. Failure of the county health department to notify the zoning enforcement official of its findings before the first regular meeting of the commission following submission of the preliminary plat, without due cause, as determined by the planning commission, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed subdivision by the county health department. 
123.3. Hearing on preliminary plat. Notice of time and place of hearing shall be sent to the name and address of the subdivider which is on the preliminary plat. This notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail to said name and address not less than five days before the date of hearing. The planning commission shall hold a hearing on the preliminary plat at the first regular meeting of the planning commission following submission of the preliminary plat for review. The zoning enforcement official shall present to the planning commission, at the hearing on the preliminary plat, his findings, negotiations, and recommendations and the findings of the county health department. 
123.4. Preliminary approval. Following the hearing of the preliminary plat and other related material, the commission may issue a certificate of preliminary approval noting the conditions of such approval on four copies of the preliminary plat with one copy being returned to the subdivider, one copy to the county health department, one copy to the zoning enforcement official, and one copy to be added to the records of the commission. Approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat. It indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. 
123.5. Expiration time. Preliminary approval shall expire and be of no further effect 12 months from the date of the preliminary approval unless the time is extended by the commission. 
123.6. Disapproval. Following the hearing on the preliminary plat and other related material, the commission may find reasons detrimental to the public safety, health, and general welfare, or in conflict with adopted plans of the commission, which require the disapproval of the preliminary plat. A statement of the reasons for disapproval shall be made on three copies of the preliminary plat with one copy being returned to the subdivider, one copy to the county health department, and one copy being added to the records of the commission. The applicant may reapply for preliminary plat approval in accordance with section 123.1 herein. 
123.7. Automatic approval. Failure of the commission to act on the preliminary plat within 30 days after submission thereof shall be deemed to be approval of the plat and a certificate of preliminary approval shall be issued by the commission on demand, provided, however, that the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
Section 124. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
124.1. Scale. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than 100 feet to one inch. 
124.2. Sheet size. The preliminary plat shall be drawn in ink on suitable permanent reproducible material. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet, it may be shown in sections on more than one sheet with an index map drawn at a reduced scale. 
124.3. Ground elevations. The preliminary plat shall show ground elevations, based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, or of the U.S. Geological Survey, with a contour interval of five feet (or less if determined necessary by the planning commission). 
124.4. Existing conditions to be provided on preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
a.  Title ("preliminary plat"), numerical scale, graphic scale, north arrow, indicating both magnetic and true north, date, inscription stating "Not for Final Recording." 
b.  A vicinity map showing the location of the tract with approximate distances to obvious geographical locations. 
c.  Present tract designation according to official records, title under which proposed subdivision is to be recorded with names and addresses of owners and any mortgagor or holder of an encumbrance on the property to be subdivided, name and address of subdivision designer, notation stating acreage to be subdivided, benchmarks, certification of registered land surveyor, date of survey. 
d.  Zoning district classification of the proposed subdivision and of adjoining properties. 
e.  Deed record names and addresses of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
f.  Other conditions on adjacent land—character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences. 
g.  Boundary lines, bearings and distances; a legal description of the tract proposed to be subdivided according to the records in the office of the clerk of superior court of Peach County. The legal description may be submitted as a separate document if desired. 
h.  Existing easements—location, width, and purpose. 
i.  Existing streets on and adjacent to the tract—name, right-of-way width; roadway width. 
j.  Utilities on and adjacent to the tract—location, size, and invert elevation of sanitary and storm sewers; location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles; if water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the street, indicate the direction and distance to and size of nearest ones, showing invert elevation of sewers (if use of public sewers is proposed). 
k.  One soil percolation test hole per acre where the subdivision is not to be served by a public sewer system and other subsurface and soil conditions studies of the tract as specified by the county health department or the planning commission. 
l.  Other conditions on the tract—wooded areas, tree masses, major rock outcroppings, houses, barns, shacks, all watercourses, marshes, swamps, and land subject to flood as determined from past history of floodings, and other significant features. 
m.  In case of resubdivision, a copy of existing plat with proposed changes superimposed thereon. 
n.  For proposed subdivisions greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, the preliminary plat shall include elevation data for the 100-year flood, i.e., the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
124.5. Proposed conditions to be provided on preliminary plat. 
a.  Layout of streets showing right-of-way and roadway widths, road names or designations, grades and cross sections. 
b.  Other rights-of-way or easements; location, width, purpose, and ownership. 
c.  Layout of all lots, including minimum building setback lines, approximate lot dimensions, utility easements with width and use on all lots, lot numbers and block numbers, and a listing of lot areas (which may be submitted as a separate document). 
d.  Preliminary plan of any sanitary sewers with grades, service, pipe sizes, and points of discharge, together with certified copy of all load design factors and computations. 
e.  Preliminary plan of storm drainage system with grade, pipe size, and location of outlet, together with certified copy of all drainage areas, design factors, and computations. 
f.  Preliminary plan of water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants, valves, and all appurtenances. 
g.  Designation of all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use, together with their purpose and limitations or conditions of such reservations or dedications, if any. 
h.  Draft of proposed deed restrictions or protective covenants (if any) to be imposed. 
i.  Sites, if any, for multiple-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings. 
124.6. Certificate of preliminary approval. A certificate of preliminary approval of the preliminary plat by the commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
In that all the requirements of preliminary approval have been fulfilled (and with consideration to any conditions noted below), this subdivision plat was given preliminary approval by the Peach County Planning Commission on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . The preliminary approval does not constitute approval of the final plat. This certificate of preliminary approval shall expire and be null and void on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 

 
NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING 
124.7. Installation of site improvements. After receiving a certificate of preliminary approval by the commission, the subdivider may then proceed to grade the streets and install all improvements required under this regulation and any other applicable regulations of the county. In lieu of the completion of all improvements prior to submission of the final plat, the subdivider may post a performance bond or cashier's check with the county in an amount equal to the cost of providing such improvements, providing for and assuring to the board of commissioners the actual construction and installation of such improvements within the period of time specified by the planning commission and stated in the bond. 
Section 125. - Final plat procedure. 
After completion of the physical development of the subdivision or the posting of a performance bond or cashier's check to guarantee the same, the subdivider shall submit to the commission a final plat in accordance to the following procedure: 
125.1. Application for final plat approval. Within 12 months (or within such additional time as may be granted by the commission) after approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may submit to the zoning enforcement official not less than 14 [n]or more than 30 days prior to the next regular meeting of the commission, a letter requesting review and approval of the final plat, an original tracing drawn on suitable reproducible material and printed copies of the final plat, and other documents as specified in section 125 herein. The zoning enforcement official shall distribute to the members of the planning commission and to the county health department one copy each of the final plat and maintain one copy for his file. 
125.2. Review of the final plat. The zoning enforcement office shall check the plat for conformance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat, and with regulations of this resolution. The county health department shall review the final plat and transmit its written approval, disapproval or approval subject to certain indicated conditions to the zoning enforcement official before the first regular meeting of the commission following submission of the final plat. 
125.3. Hearing on the final plat. Notice of time and place of hearing shall be sent to the name and address of the subdivider which is on the final plat. This notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail to said name and address not less than five days before the date of hearing. The planning commission shall provide a hearing on the final plat at the first regular meeting of the planning commission following submission of the final plat for review. The zoning enforcement official shall present to the planning commission, at the hearing on the final plat, his written findings and recommendations and the written findings of the county health department. 
125.4. Planning commission approval. The commission may give final approval, provided the final plat is the same as that granted preliminary approval by the commission and that all conditions specified by the commission and specified herein have been met; and shall sign a certificate of approval on all plats with the original plat being filed by the planning commission, upon receipt of necessary filing fees, with the clerk of the superior court of Peach County. In addition, one copy of the plat shall be returned to the subdivider for his records, a certified reproducible sent to the county clerk, one copy to the zoning enforcement official, one copy to the county health department, and one copy being added to the records of the commission. 
a.  The planning commission shall have the certified original reproducible of the final plat presented to the clerk of the superior court of Peach County, Georgia, to be recorded. The planning commission shall provide the subdivider with the subdivision map book number and page number in which the subdivision has been recorded by the clerk of the superior court. The cost of such recording shall be paid by the subdivider and shall be deposited with the planning commission prior to such recording. 
b.  After the final plat of the subdivision has been recorded, then all lots shown on such subdivision shall be entitled to all privileges and services available to other subdivisions within the county. 
125.5. Commission disapproval. The commission may find the final plat in conflict with the tentatively approved preliminary plat or with this resolution requiring the disapproval of the final plat. A statement of the reasons for disapproval shall be placed on three prints of the final plat with one copy being returned to the subdivider, one copy to the county health department, and one copy being added to the records of the commission. No certificate of approval shall be given. The original plat and the additional copies shall be returned to the subdivider. The final plat may be resubmitted as a new application for final plat approval for hearing after the corrections noted by the commission are made. 
125.6. Automatic approval. Failure of the commission to act on the final plat within 30 days after submission thereof shall be deemed to be approval of the plat, and a certificate of final approval shall be issued by the commission on demand, provided, however, that the subdivider may waive this requirement in writing and consent to an extension of time. 
Section 126. - Final plat specifications. 
126.1. Conformance with the preliminary plat. The final plat shall conform to the conditions of the tentatively approved preliminary plat. 
126.2. Original tracing specifications. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn on suitable permanent reproducible material. The scale shall be 100 feet to the inch on sheets 18 inches by 24 inches with a 1½-inch border on the top, bottom, and right sides and a two-inch border on the left side. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, it may be shown in sections on more than one sheet with an index map at a reduced scale. 
126.3. Additional specifications. The final plat shall contain the following information: 
a.  Primary control points and benchmarks with necessary descriptions and locations of such control points, including all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data necessary for proper location. 
b.  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements, and property lines of residential lots and other sites with sufficient data to determine readily and to reproduce on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, and building line, whether curved or straight. This shall include but not be limited to the radius; length of arc; internal angles, and bearings of the tangents and tangent distances for the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets. All dimensions shall be given to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and all angles shall be given to the nearest minute. 
c.  Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way. 
d.  Location, dimensions, and purpose of any easements. 
e.  Number or letter to identify each lot and block. 
f.  Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots are dedicated or reserved. 
g.  Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites. 
h.  Location and description of monuments and markers. 
i.  Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land. 
j.  Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record, name, date, and number. 
k.  Title, numerical scale, graphic scale, north arrow, and date. 
l.  Location map showing site in relation to obvious geographical localities. 
m.  A complete listing of the deviations from the conditionally approved preliminary plat made by the subdivider. 
n.  Certification by the county clerk that the developer has complied with one of the following alternatives: 
1.  "All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of the county subdivision regulations and other applicable regulations," or 
2.  "A security bond or cashier's check has been approved and accepted by the county in sufficient amount to assure the completion of all required improvements in accord with the requirements of the county subdivision regulations and other applicable regulations." 
o.  Protective covenants or deed restrictions, if any, shall be placed directly on the final plat or attached thereto in form for recording. 
p.  Notation of the necessary certifications shall be placed on the final plat as specified below in section 126.4—126.8. 
126.4. Surveyor's certification. A signed certification by a registered land surveyor certifying to the accuracy of the survey and the plat shall be placed on the final plat as follows: "In my opinion this plat is a correct representative of the land platted and has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards and requirements of law and has been calculated for closure by latitudes and departures and is found to be accurate within one foot in ____________ feet." 

 
126.5. Owner's certification. A signed certification of ownership shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"Owner's Certification: 
State of Georgia, County of Peach 
The undersigned certifies that he is the owner of the land shown on this plat and acknowledges this plat and allotment to be his free act and deed and dedicates to public use forever all areas shown or indicated on this plat as streets, alleys, easements, or parks." 

 
126.6. Health department certification. A signed certification of the Peach County Health Department shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"I certify that the general lot layout shown on this plat has been approved by the Peach County Health Department for development with ____________ ." 

 
The blanks in the above certification statement shall be completed by the director of the health department, or his representatives, so as to indicate whether approval is based upon the use of individual sewerage systems, individual water supplies, a community sewerage system, a community water supply, or a combination thereof. 
126.7. Certificate of approval by the county. A signed certification of the county shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"We certify that the owner, or his agent, has completed the construction and installation of the streets, drainage, utilities, and other improvements in accordance with the Regulations of Peach County, Georgia, and the requirements of the Peach County Planning Commission." 

 
126.8. Additional technical information required. The planning commission may require technical information showing "as-built" conditions in addition to that submitted on the final plat. Such information may include: 
(a)  Final profiles of grades for streets. 
(b)  Final plans of sanitary sewers with grade, pipe sizes, and point of discharge. 
(c)  Final plan of storm drainage system with grade, pipe sizes, and location of outlets. 
(d)  Final plan of water supply system with pipe sizes, location of hydrants, and valves. 
(e)  Final conditions of any information shown on the preliminary plat. 
ARTICLE XIII. - GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF DESIGN[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Design standards, § 141 et seq. 

Section 131. - Suitability of land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, and erosion, as determined by the planning commission, and any land deemed by the planning commission to be unsuitable for development shall not be platted for any uses as may continue such conditions or increase danger of health, safety, life, or property unless steps are taken to eliminate the above-mentioned hazards. 
Section 132. - Access. 
132.1. Every subdivision and every lot within such subdivision shall be served by publicly dedicated street, except as herein provided. 
132.2. When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
132.3. No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
Section 133. - Conformance to the master comprehensive plan. 
133.1. All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the master comprehensive plan and development policies in effect at the time of submission to the planning commission. 
133.2. All highways, streets, and other features of the master comprehensive plan shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the comprehensive plan. In subdivisions related to or affecting any state or federally numbered highway, the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation may be required by the planning commission. 
133.3. Where features of the comprehensive plan (other than minor streets and collector streets) such as school sites, parks, arterial streets, major thoroughfares, and other public spaces are located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, or when these features have not been anticipated by the comprehensive plan and planning policy, but are considered essential by the planning commission, such features shall be dedicated or in lieu of dedication shall be reserved by the subdivider. Whenever such reserved land, or any portion thereof, is not acquired, optioned, or condemned by the appropriate public agency within a one-year period from the date of recording the subdivision, the subdivider may claim the original reservation, or portion thereof, and cause it to be subdivided in a manner suitable to the subdivider, subject to the provisions of these rules and regulations. 
133.4. The planning commission may waive the above-mentioned platting and reservation requirements of section 133.2 and section 133.3, whenever the public body responsible for land acquisition executes a written release stating that such a planned feature is not being acquired. 
133.5. Whenever the plat proposes the dedication of land to public use and the planning commission or the appropriate agency finds that such land is not required or suitable for public use, the planning commission may either refuse to approve said plat or it may require the rearrangement of lots to include such land. 
Section 134. - Zoning and other regulations. 
Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in zoning regulations, building code, or other official regulations or resolutions, the most restrictive shall apply. 
Section 135. - Planned unit development. 
135.1. The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified in the case of a plan and program for a planned unit development which is not divided into customary lots, blocks, and streets, which, in the judgment of the planning commission, provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air, and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, provided zoning density standards for the entire tract are not exceeded, and which also provides such covenants or other legal procedures as will assure [ensure] conformity to and achievement of the plan. Plans for such developments shall be submitted to and approved by the planning commission, whether or not such plat is to be recorded, and no building permits shall be issued until such approval has been given. 
135.2. No plans for a planned unit development or a community unit plan shall be reviewed or approved by the commission before the developer's site has been zoned to allow such use. 
Section 136. - Modifications. 
136.1. Modifications of the provisions set forth in these rules and regulations may be authorized by the planning commission in specific cases when, in its opinion, undue hardships may result from strict compliance; provided any such determination shall be based fundamentally on the fact that unusual topographical and other exceptional conditions require such modifications, and that the granting of the modifications will not adversely affect the general public or nullify the intent of these regulations; provided further that any such modification granted by the planning commission shall be made in writing to the subdivider and also made a part of the planning commission's records and the plat. 
136.2. Application for any modifications must be filed in writing with necessary supporting documents with the planning commission by the subdivider and shall explain in detail the reasons and facts supporting the application. 
Section 137. - Name of subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision, except in the case where the subdivision is a section or part of a larger contiguous subdivision being developed by the same subdivider in phases, sections or stages. In this case, the name of the overall subdivision can be used for each phase, stage or section, but the phase, stage or section number must also be included as part of the name. 
ARTICLE XIV. - DESIGN STANDARDS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— General principles of design, § 131 et seq. 

Section 141. - Required design standards. 
The design standards set forth in this article shall be observed in all plats which are required to be approved by the planning commission, except that standards for improvements shall be applicable only to those plats for which improvements or improvement plans are required as a condition of plat approval. 
Section 142. - Streets. 
142.1. The arrangements, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the major thoroughfare plan for the county and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
142.2. Where such is not shown in the major thoroughfare plan for the county, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
a.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width; or 
b.  Conform to a plan for a neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions made continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
142.3. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
142.4. Where a subdivision contains a dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac, the planning commission may require the subdivider to provide a temporary vehicle turnaround within the right-of-way, when the planning commission considers such to be necessary for effective traffic circulation. 
142.5. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, double frontage lots with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property lines, deep lots with rear service drives, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
142.6. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or industrial purpose in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
142.7. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
a.  Expressways: 200 feet. 
b.  Arterial streets and highways: 100 feet. 
c.  Collector streets: 80 feet. 
d.  Minor streets: 
(1)  60 feet (residential). 
(2)  70 feet (commercial and industrial). 
e.  Cul-de-sac and loop streets: 60 feet. 
f.  Culs-de-sac turnaround (diameter): 100 feet. 
g.  Marginal access or frontage roads: 40 feet. 
h.  Alleys, service drives, or private drives: 22 feet. 
142.8. A proposed subdivision that includes a platted street that does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of this resolution shall provide for the dedication of additional right-of-way along either one or both sides of said street so that the minimum right-of-way required by this resolution can be established. If the proposed subdivision abuts only one side of said street, then a minimum of one-half of the required extra right-of-way shall be dedicated or reserved by such subdivision. 
142.9. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle less than 75 degrees. Detailed designs of intersections may be required. 
142.10. Curbline radius of street intersections shall be at least 22 feet and where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, the planning commission may require a greater radius. 
142.11. Right-of-way radius at street intersections shall parallel the curbline radius. 
142.12. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 200 feet shall not be permitted. 
142.13. Cul-de-sac streets shall be designed so that the maximum desirable length shall be 600 feet and in no case shall exceed 800 feet in length, measured from the nearest through street, including circular turnaround, unless excepted by the planning commission as provided for under section 136 herein. 
142.14. Alleys or service drives may be required on any lots to be used for multiple-family. 
142.15. Half-streets shall be prohibited. 
142.16. Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys, or public grounds shall not be permitted unless approved by the planning commission as being in accordance with the provisions of section 142.5. 
142.17. Minimum street standards table. 
MINIMUM STREET STANDARDS 

 
1 Commercial and Industrial 
2 Residential Cul-de-Sac 
3 No Curb and Gutter 
4 Curb and Gutter with on-street parking 
5 Geometric design standards of the State Department of Transportation of Georgia shall represent minimum requirements and each project shall be reviewed on its own merits. 
142.18. Typical roadway cross sections below. 

(Res. of 6-13-2000, exhibit A) 
Section 143. - Blocks. 
143.1. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
a.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
b.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions unless a planned unit development is contemplated. 
c.  Needs for convenience access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic. 
d.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
143.2. In general, residential blocks shall not be greater than 1,200 feet in length, or less than 600 feet in length. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, the planning commission may, when existing or proposed public gathering places so justify, require public crosswalks across the block. 
143.3. Residential blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots, except where fronting on expressways and arterials or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the planning commission may require and/or approve a single tier of lots. 
Section 144. - Lots. 
144.1. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines. Each lot shall abut upon a public street, except as herein provided. 
144.2. The size, shape, and orientation of every lot shall be subject to approval of the planning commission for the type of development and use contemplated. No lot shall be more than four times as deep as it is wide at the building setback line, unless excepted by the planning commission as provided by section 136 herein. 
144.3. Every residential lot shall conform to the minimum dimension and area requirements of the zoning regulations, provided that every lot not served by a public sewer or community sanitary sewage system and/or public water shall meet the dimension and area requirement of the health department. 
144.4. Building setback lines shall conform to front, rear and side yard building setback requirements of the zoning regulations. 
144.5. Double frontage, unless required by the planning commission, shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography, orientation, and property size. A planting screen reservation of at least ten feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, may be required along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
144.6. Corner lots shall, as required in the zoning regulations, have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. 
144.7. Lot remnants (lots below minimum area or width left over after subdividing tracts of land) shall be prohibited. Such remnant areas shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels. 
144.8. The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot with direct abutting access to an existing public street or to a street contained within the proposed subdivision. 
ARTICLE XV. - REQUIRED SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Procedures for subdivision plat approval, § 121 et seq. 

Section 151. - Monuments. 
Right-of-way and property line monuments shall be placed in each subdivision in accordance with the following: 
151.1. Right-of-way monuments. A concrete marker imbedded at least two feet into the ground shall be required at the intersection of the extended right-of-way lines of all street rights-of-way and at the beginning and end of all curves. Such concrete marker shall be at least four inches in diameter. The top surface of such concrete marker shall be level with the surface of the finished grade. 
151.2. Property line monument. An iron pin imbedded at least two feet into the ground shall be required at each lot corner and each point where the property line changes direction. Such iron pin shall be at least three-quarter inches in diameter. The top surface of such iron pin shall be approximately level with the ground surface. 
Section 152. - Special classification of streets for construction. 
All streets except expressways, arterials, and collectors shall be classified for construction purposes only as follows: 
152.1. Class I street. A Class I street shall be paved, curbed, and guttered in accordance with the specifications required herein. A Class I street shall be required for all streets in all zoning districts except R-AG districts, but may be so located if the subdivider so desires. Minimum right-of-way width requirements shall be as required in section 142.7 of this resolution. 
152.2. Class II street. A Class II street shall be paved in accordance with the State of Georgia, Department of Transportation standards and within the seasonal limitations imposed by the state department of transportation. No curbs and gutters shall be required. A Class II street shall be required as a minimum for all streets in R-AG districts. Minimum right-of-way width requirements for a Class II street shall be as required in section 142.7 of this resolution. 
(Res. of 6-13-2000) 
Section 153. - Additional street design requirements. 
153.1. Grades; horizontal curves, tangents, and sight distances. The following street design requirements shall be adhered to in addition to other requirements stated herein: 

 
153.2. Vertical curves. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of minimum length in feet equal to 15 times the algebraic difference in percent of grades for expressways, freeways, arterial, and collector streets, and one-half this minimum length for other streets. Profiles of all streets showing natural and finished grades drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet horizontally and one inch equals ten feet vertically may be required by the planning commission. 
Section 154. - Basic construction requirements for all classes of streets. 
154.1. Grading. All streets, roads, and alleys shall be graded by the subdivider to provide the necessary paving, roadway, drainage, and safety requirements. The preparation of the right-of-way before grading is started and the construction of cuts and fills shall be accomplished in accordance with the requirements herein and other specifications of the planning commission and the board of commissioners. 
154.2. Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system based on at least the 25-year rainfall frequency including necessary curb, pipes, culverts headwalls and ditches as appropriate by street class shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. 
154.3. Installation of utilities. After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied, all of the underground utilities—including, but not limited to, water mains, sewer mains, gas mains, and all service connections related thereto—shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the street. All driveways for houses to be built by the subdivider shall be cut and drained. Where the utility mains are off the pavement, the subdivider may elect to omit the installation of service connections, provided that at such time as these service connections are needed, they may be jacked across the street without breaking or weakening the existing pavement. 
154.4. Slopes and shoulder improvements. The minimum ratio for all fill or cut slopes shall be two to one, and the minimum width for all shoulders from back edge of the curb, if installed, shall be eight feet. All shoulders shall slope one-half inch to the foot. When all construction is completed, all slopes and shoulders shall be cleared from all rubbish and shall have a stand of perennial type grass to prevent undue, erosion, either by sprigging or seeding. 
Section 155. - Roadway surfacing and paving. 
For expressways, arterials, collectors, and Class I and Class II streets, the following minimum requirements shall be adhered to for the surfacing and paving of said streets: 
155.1. Pavement base. The pavement bases, not including the surface courses, shall be one of the following types and shall be of the following minimum thickness as designated for each street classification: 

 
The pavement bases shall be uniformly compacted to the required depth with at least 100 percent of the maximum dry density. The width of the base course shall be at least 24 inches wider than the paving. 
155.2. Thickness of pavement. The pavement shall be one of the following types and shall be designated for each street classification: 

 
* The 2¾ inches consists of 1½-inch binder and 1¼-inch surface. 
** The 3½ inches consists of two-inch binder and 1½-inch surface. 
155.3. Minimum pavement width. All minor residential streets paved after January 9, 1973, shall have a minimum pavement width of 27 feet from back of curb to back of curb, or 22 feet from edge of pavement to edge of pavement if no curb and gutters are installed. The outside pavement for a cul-de-sac turnaround shall be a minimum diameter of 80 feet. All other street width pavements shall be determined by the planning commission as required by the intended or desired street function. Minimum standards are provided in section 142.17. 
155.4. Pavement breaks for utility connections. When it is necessary for a subdivider, or any utility company, to break existing pavement for the installation of utilities, for drainage facilities, or for any other purpose, the subdivider, or utility company, shall be financially responsible for the repair of the pavement. The pavement shall be repaired in the following manner: There shall be a six-inch cutback of all paving to undisturbed soil, 95 percent compaction of subbase to be covered with four inches of concrete, and a two inch topping to match the existing street. 
155.5. Curbs and gutters. Either the regular six-inch or four-inch rollover concrete curbs and gutters with a minimum overall width of 24 inches shall be constructed on all residential Class I streets. Commercial and industrial Class I streets shall require the regular six-inch curb. Cement concrete valley gutter shall be permitted across minor residential streets at street intersections only when no storm sewers are available as determined by the planning commission. Valley gutters shall be at least six feet in width. Whenever driveway openings are provided for lots abutting the street, the driveway shall be six inches thick and a minimum of ten feet in width at the sidewalk or at the street right-of-way line. The driveway shall have a five-foot radius at the curbline for low density residential uses, and a ten-foot to 22-foot radius for all other uses. 
Section 156. - Installation of utilities. 
156.1. Water. Water mains for both domestic use and fire protection shall be properly connected with the public water system, or with an alternate water supply approved by the county health department. In subdivisions where the water mains are connected with an alternate water supply, the community water system shall be jointly owned by the property owners with an equal share to be assigned to each lot. The lines shall be constructed in such manner as to serve adequately all lots shown on the subdivision plat. The lines shall be installed in conformance with the technical standards as established by the planning commission. 
156.2. Sewer. A publicly connected sanitary sewer system shall be installed when the cost of installing such a system does not exceed 150 percent of the cost of installing septic tanks for all lots in the subdivision. Where lots cannot be economically connected with a sanitary sewer system, they must contain adequate area for the installation of approved septic tank and disposal fields approved by the county health department. All sewer facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia. 
156.3. Gas. When gas mains are connected to a gas distribution system, the lines shall be installed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots shown on the subdivision plats. The gas lines shall be constructed in conformance with the technical standards as established or specified by the planning commission. 
Section 157. - Sidewalks and street signs. 
157.1. Sidewalks. When provided or at the requirement of the commission and unless otherwise specified, sidewalks shall be four inches thick with a minimum width of four feet. A ten-foot grass planting strip shall be provided between the back of the curb and the sidewalk along collector and arterial streets, and a four-foot strip along minor streets. For Class II streets, the sidewalk shall be located on the right-of-way line side of the drainage ditch located parallel to the street. No planting strip shall be required between marginal access roads and sidewalks. All sidewalks shall slope one-fourth inch to the foot in the direction of the curb or street. 
157.1.1. Sidewalks shall be provided in the following types of subdivisions: 
a.  R-3 high density residential zones. 
b.  In all commercial zones. 
c.  In all subdivisions within one-half mile of a school or other facilities likely to attract pedestrian traffic at such a volume that the welfare of the public requires the installation of sidewalks. 
157.2. Location of street signs. All streets shall be designated by name on a metal street sign post approved by the planning commission with such metal post having name plates of metal set one above the other with a clearance from the ground of not less than seven feet. The post shall be so located as to be visible for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. At cross street intersections, two signposts shall be located diagonally across the intersection from each other. Only one street signpost shall be required at T-street intersections. 
Section 158. - Administrative procedures. 
The administrative procedures for installing the subdivision improvements required herein shall be as follows: 
158.1. When construction may begin. Construction and installation of any required public improvements as described herein shall not begin until the planning commission has given preliminary approval of the new subdivision. The subdivider shall then confer with the roads superintendent to determine the method and estimated cost of the construction and installation of the required improvements. 
158.2. Inspections and approval. During the construction and installation of the required public improvements, the roads superintendent shall from time to time make field inspections and supervise said work as predetermined and agreed upon by the roads superintendent and the subdivider. After completion of all the construction and installation of the required public improvements and if the said work has met the specifications as described herein, as determined by the roads superintendent, the zoning enforcement official shall notify the subdivider in writing of the approval of said work. 
158.3. Official acceptance by the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall officially accept the completed work on the construction and installation of required public improvements not less than one year from the date of the written acceptance by the zoning enforcement official, but not before approval by the planning commission of the final plat. 
158.4. Performance bond. If the subdivider does not wish to construct and install any or all of the required public improvements as described herein prior to submitting the subdivision plat to the planning commission for final approval, a performance bond shall be required, such bond being equal to the estimated cost of construction. When the work has been completed satisfactorily, the board of commissioners shall release 90 percent of the funds with a letter of approval to the subdivider. The remaining ten percent shall be placed in escrow for maintenance purposes. 
158.5. Maintenance of completed work. The subdivider shall maintain his completed work until the official acceptance by the board of commissioners as described above. The subdivider shall be required to sign a maintenance agreement with the board of commissioners. If a maintenance bond is posted by the subdivider, a bond equaling ten percent of the construction cost shall be required. During the maintenance period, the roads superintendent shall make final inspection and notify the subdivider and the bonding company of the cost of making necessary corrections and the cost of maintenance. These costs shall be deducted from the maintenance funds, and the subdivider charged with any costs above the amount of maintenance funds. If the work is acceptable at this time, the remainder of the maintenance funds shall he released to the subdivider. 
158.6. Subdivider's responsibility. The subdivider shall incur the cost of construction and installation of all required public improvements based on the following: 
a.  Streets. Incur the cost for the construction of streets up to 27 feet in surface width from back of curb to back of curb, or 22 feet in surface width from edge of surface to edge of surface if no curbs and gutters are installed. 
b.  Water and sewer systems. Incur the cost for the installation of all water and sewer systems which are required to serve the new subdivision and tie in with existing water and sewer systems based on the specifications set forth herein. 
c.  Sidewalks. Entire cost if provided. 
d.  Monuments. Entire cost. 
e.  Street signs. Entire cost. 
158.7. County commission responsibility. The county commission shall partially participate in sharing the cost of construction and installation of required public improvements for the following conditions: 
a.  Streets. Incur cost for any additional required pavement which is in excess of 27 feet for streets with curbs and gutters and in excess of 22 feet for streets without curbs and gutters, and any additional grading and paving related thereto. 
b.  Water and sewer systems. Incur not more than one-half the cost for any difference in the cost of the laying of oversized pipe and outfall systems which are needed in excess of the required water and sewer facilities needed to exclusively serve the new subdivision as determined by the planning commission. 
158.8. Property owner's responsibility. Whenever the county commission is petitioned by the property owners to upgrade a street to higher construction standards, the property owners shall then incur the entire cost for said improvements, based on the footage along the property line of each lot abutting the street which is being improved. 
158.9. Estimated costs for construction and installation. The current unit prices in effect at the time of submission of plans plus ten percent shall be used in determining the total estimated cost for construction and installation of required public improvements in new subdivisions. 
ARTICLE XVI. - PROCEDURE FOR REQUESTING AN AMENDMENT TO THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 

Section 160. - General. 
The county commission may, from time to time, after examination, review and hold a public hearing thereon, amend, supplement, or change the regulations contained herein or subsequently established. Proposals for amendments to these regulations, whether initiated by the county commission, the planning commission, or any person, firm, or corporation shall not be acted on until a public hearing has been held by the county commission as required by the procedures in this article. 
Section 161. - Amendments to the text of the regulations. 
When the county commission, planning commission, or any person, firm or corporation, desires to amend, supplement, or change the text of the zoning regulations contained herein, the following procedures shall be followed: 
161.1. An application must be submitted in writing to the zoning enforcement official describing the proposed amendment, supplement, or change. All applications shall be submitted no less than 15 days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission. 
161.2. The application shall be sent to the planning commission for review and recommendation, and said planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit a report to the county commission. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
161.3. Before enacting any amendment to the texts of these regulations, the county commission shall hold a public hearing thereon provided that at least 15 but not more than 45 days' legal notice has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
161.4. The county commission shall hold at public hearing at the earliest possible time under the time limits spelled out above to consider the proposed text amendment. The recommendations of the planning commission shall be read aloud into the minutes of the public hearing. The county commission shall take action on said proposed text amendment within 45 days from the date of their public hearing except in the case where their tentative action is not in accordance with the planning commission's certified recommendation. In such case, the county commission shall not make any change in or departure from the text, as recommended and certified by the planning commission, unless such change or departure is first resubmitted to the planning commission for an additional review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 30 days to resubmit its recommendation. If the planning commission does not resubmit its recommendation within 30 days, the county commission may proceed to take action on the amendments as it sees fit. Upon resubmission by the planning commission, the county commission shall hold a public hearing as described above and take final action on the request. 
161.5. Any petition for a text amendment may be withdrawn prior to action thereon by the county commission at the discretion of the person, firm, or corporation initiating such a request upon written notice to the clerk of the county. 
161.6. Any petition for a text amendment to the zoning regulations, unless said petition is initiated by the county commission or the planning commission, shall be accompanied by a fee as set by the board of commissioners.* 
* A check must accompany all requests for text amendment before the request can be officially accepted by the zoning department and application must be dated reflecting the same date. 
Section 162. - Zoning map amendments. 
When the county commission, planning commission, or any person, firm, or corporation desires to amend the official zoning map, the following procedures shall be followed: 
162.1. An application must be submitted in writing to the zoning enforcement official and must be accompanied with a site plan of the proposed use included in any petition for a zoning map amendment. Such site plan shall include buildings sited, parking areas, and egress and ingress into the proposed area, and shall include the existing land use on adjacent and surrounding properties. All applications shall be submitted not less than 15 days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission. 
162.2. The application shall be sent to the planning commission for review and recommendation, and said planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit a report to the county commission. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
162.3. The zoning enforcement official shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property or parcel of land involved in the zoning map amendment one or more signs, each of which shall not be less than 12 square feet in area, shall contain information as to the proposed change and the date and time of the required public hearing, and the cost of each sign shall be paid by the applicant prior to the public hearing. 
162.4. Before making a recommendation on any proposed amendment to the zoning map, the planning commission shall hold a public, hearing, thereon, provided that at least 15 but not more than 45 days' legal notice has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4, and a sign or signs have been posted on the property in question for at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. The planning commission shall keep minutes of the public hearing and submit said minutes to the board of commissioners with its recommendation. 
162.5. The board of commissioners shall take action on the proposed amendment at its first regular meeting following receipt of the planning commission's report. 
162.6. Any petition for a zoning map amendment may be withdrawn prior to action thereon by the planning commission at the discretion of the person, firm or corporation initiating such a request upon written notice to the zoning enforcement official. 
162.7. Any petition for a zoning map amendment may be withdrawn prior to action thereon by the county commission at the discretion of the person, firm or corporation initiating such a request upon written notice to the clerk of the county. 
162.8. Any petition for a map amendment to this resolution, unless said petition is initiated by the county commission or the planning commission, shall be accompanied by a fee as set by the board of commissioners, plus the cost of advertising for the required public hearings and the cost of the required signs. 
ARTICLE XVII. - ENFORCEMENTS AND REMEDIES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Legal status provisions, § 181 et seq. 

Section 171. - Penalties. 
A violation of any provision of this resolution shall be punished as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60, and every day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section 172. - Subdivision enforcement. 
172.1. The owner, or agent of the owner, of any land to be subdivided within Peach County, who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of, or by other use of a plat to subdivide such land before such plat has been approved by the commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Peach County, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance with section 161 of this resolution and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by law. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The county commission through an attorney, or other designated official, may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
172.2. No plat or plan of subdivision within Peach County shall be filed or recorded by a subdivider in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Peach County until it has been approved by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the secretary of the planning commission. The clerk of superior court shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision which does not have the approval of the planning commission. The filing of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the planning commission is hereby declared a misdemeanor in accordance with section 161 of this resolution and, upon conviction, the owner, or agent of the owner, is punishable as provided by law. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Enforcements and remedies, § 171 et seq. 

Section 181. - Conflict with other laws. 
Wherever the requirements of this resolution are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted statutes, rules, regulations, resolutions, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing higher standards, shall govern. 
Section 182. - Validity. 
Each phrase, sentence, paragraph, section or other provision of this resolution, or its application to any persons or circumstances, is severable from all other such phrases, sentences, paragraphs, sections and provisions or their application. Should any phrase, sentence, paragraph, section, or provision of this resolution be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect any other portion or provision of this resolution. 
Section 183. - Repealed resolutions. 
All resolutions and ordinances, or portions thereof, in conflict with this resolution shall be and the same are hereby repealed. 
Section 184. - Effective date. 
This resolution shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of its adoption by the county commission of Peach County. 
Recommended by the Peach County Planning Commission for adoption by the county commission on April 27, 1972. 
The provisions of this resolution were the subject of a properly advertised public hearing by the County Commission of Peach County on January 9, 1973. 
This resolution is approved and adopted this 9th day of January 1973. 
ATTEST: 

 
APPROVED AS TO LEGAL FORM AND SUFFICIENTLY: 

 
ARTICLE XIX. - STANDARDS FOR TOWERS AND WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 

Section 191. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article shall be: 
(a)  To provide for the appropriate location and development of towers and wireless telecommunications facilities in such locations as will promote the public safety and general welfare; 
(b)  To minimize, through proper siting, landscape screening, innovative camouflaging techniques, and careful design, the potential for visual incompatibility and the proliferation of towers; 
(c)  To promote and maximize the shared-use/co-location of new and existing towers and the use of alternative tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single use towers; 
(d)  To accommodate the increased demand for the development of towers and wireless telecommunications facilities; and 
(e)  To encourage the location of towers in non residentially developed and zoned areas. 
(f)  To consider public health, safety and welfare; 
(g)  To avoid damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000, § 1) 
Section 192. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the meanings given in this article: 
(a)  Alternative tower structures: shall include, but are not limited to, man-made structures such as clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, water towers, light poles, warehouses, factories, commercial buildings, multi-family buildings, and publicly used structures such as police and fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, and other structures that can be used for the mounting of antennas or serving the function of a tower. 
(b)  Antenna: shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
(c)  Co-location/shared use: shall mean the placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower. 
(d)  FAA: shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(e)  FCC: shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
(f)  Guy tower: shall mean a tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
(g)  Height: shall mean the vertical distance of any tower as measured from the bottom of the base of the tower at ground level to the highest point of such tower, not including any antennas or other attachments. 
(h)  Lattice tower: shall mean a tower that has open-framed supports on three or four sides and is constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
(i)  Monopole tower: shall mean a telecommunications tower constructed of a single pole, without guy wires or ground anchors. 
(j)  Tower: shall mean a vertical structure on which is or can be located one or more antennas, including but not necessarily limited to guy towers, lattice towers, and monopole towers. 
(k)  Camouflaged communication tower: shall mean a tower designed to unobtrusively blend into the existing surroundings and be disguised so as to not have the appearance of a communications tower. Such structures shall be considered communications towers and not spires, belfries, cupolas or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level for purposes of applying height limitations. It is recognized that due to their height such structures must be designed with sensitivity to elements such as building bulk, mossing and architectural treatment of both the tower and surrounding development. Camouflaged towers on developed property must be disguised to appear as either a part of the structure housing the principal use or an accessory structure that is normally associated with the principal use occupying the property. Camouflaged towers developed on the unimproved property must be disguised to blend in with the existing vegetation. An example of a camouflaged communications tower would be a tower that is constructed in the form and shape of a tree in order to appear to be part of a forested area, or a tower constructed to appear to be or to actually be a component of a bell or clock tower on sites with existing industrial or institutional development, or to be or appear to be a component of a church steeple on sites with existing churches. 
(l)  Communication tower: shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting communication (transmission or receiving) equipment, including but not limited to self supporting lattice towers, guy towers, and monopole towers. The term communication tower includes radio and television towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telecommunications towers, satellite fiberoptic towers, man-made trees (with accessory building/structures), and other similar structures. The term communication tower shall not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. No tower shall exceed 180 feet in height (including antenna) when freestanding, or 20 percent over the building height when placed on top of buildings. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000, § 2) 
Section 193. - Applicability. 
(a)  All new communication towers and communication antennas in Peach County shall be subject to the regulations and all other applicable regulations. For purposes of measurement, communications tower setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied irrespective of county and municipal jurisdictional boundaries. 
(b)  All communication towers and communication antennas legally existing as of the date of enactment of this article shall be considered permitted uses, allowed to continued their usage as they presently exist: provided however, anything other than routine maintenance including without limitation structural modifications including provisions for additional antennas or additional providers and/or new construction on an existing communication tower, shall comply with the requirements of this article with the exception of separation distances. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such existing towers. 
(c)  All government towers with public safety systems or equipment shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. However, private facilities and structures proposed for placement on governmentally owned property shall not be exempt. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000, § 3) 
Section 194. - Principal and accessory use. 
A tower and/or antenna is considered a principal use if located on any lot or parcel of land as the sole or primary structure, and is considered an accessory use if located on a lot or parcel shared with a difference existing primary use or existing structure. An existing use or structure on the same lot or parcel shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning district requirements including but not limited to set back, buffer and other requirements, the dimensions of an entire lot or parcel shall control, even though the antenna or tower may be located on a leased area within such lot or parcel. Towers that are constructed and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a non-conforming use or structure. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000, § 4) 
Section 195. - Inventory of existing sites. 
To facilitate the co-location of antennas, each applicant seeking to locate a new tower, alternative tower structure, or antenna, or to modify any such existing structure, shall provide to the county planning and zoning office an inventory of its existing towers or alternative tower structures. 
(a)  The inventory shall include all such structures that are within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; within a municipality located, in whole or in part, within Peach County; and within a one mile border of Peach County, and shall include specific information about the location (including latitude and longitude coordinates), height, design, tower type, and general suitability for antenna co-location of each tower, and other pertinent information as may be required by the county planning and zoning office may share such information with other applicants for a communications tower permit under this article or other organizations seeking to locate towers or antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority, provided, however, that the county planning and zoning office, is not sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000, § 5) 
Section 196. - Co-location or location on alternative tower structure required; exception. 
(a)  No new towers shall be permitted unless the applicant adequately demonstrates that neither an existing tower suitable for co-location nor a suitable alternative tower structure is available. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000, § 6) 
Section 197. - Zoning Districts. 
(a)  Permitted use. Subject to the requirements of this article, the following types of uses shall be permitted as a principal or accessory use in the following zoning districts: 
(1)  Lattice towers: shall be permitted as a principal or accessory use in Wholesale, Light Industrial, and General Industrial. 
(2)  Monopole towers: shall be permitted as a principal or accessory use in Highway Commercial, General Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial, Wholesale, Light Industrial, and General Industrial. 
(3)  The attachment of antennas and related equipment or appurtenances to an existing tower or suitable alternative tower structure shall be permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts. 
(b)  Conditional use. Subject to the requirements of this article, the following types of uses shall be conditionally permitted as a principal or accessory use in the following zoning districts: 
(1)  Guy towers: shall be conditionally permitted as a principal or accessory use in all zoning districts. 
(2)  Lattice towers: shall be conditionally permitted as a principal or accessory use in all zoning districts other than those districts in which lattice towers are permitted as a matter of right. 
(3)  Monopole towers: shall be conditionally permitted as a principal or accessory use in all zoning districts other than those districts in which monopole towers are permitted as a matter of right. 
(c)  Conditional use standards and procedures. The standards and procedures for granting or denying a conditional use request in The Comprehensive Land Development Resolution for the unincorporated area of Peach County, Georgia, shall be applicable to this article. In addition to the standards listed, the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners shall also consider the following standards in granting or denying a conditional use request for a tower: 
(1)  The feasibility of locating the tower in another zoning district in which the towers are a permitted use. 
(2)  The feasibility of co-locating the antenna(s) on an existing tower or alternative tower structure. 
(3)  The feasibility of utilizing a less obtrusive tower structure. 
(4)  The height of the proposed tower. 
(5)  Consistency with the general pattern of land development within the zoning district; 
(6)  Whether or not the proposed use is detrimental to the character of the area or neighborhood or would be consistent with the trends of development in the area or neighborhood; 
(7)  Consistency with the patterns of development consistency in the area; 
(8)  Potential adverse effects on existing traffic patterns, movements and intensity; 
(9)  Consistency with the county's master land use plan; 
(10)  Whether or not the proposed use can be designated to function effectively for its intended purpose without creating negative off-site impacts for adjoining parcels. 
(d)  Denial. Any decision by the planning and zoning commission or the board of commissioners that results in the denial of a request to place, construct or modify wireless telecommunications facilities shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000, § 7) 
Section 198. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size requirements for zoning districts shall not apply to towers. However, the site or parcel on which the tower is located shall be of sufficient size to meet the minimum setback requirements in this article. 
(b)  Minimum setback requirements. Towers shall be set back a minimum of a distance equal to the height of the tower from all habitable buildings or structures, public rights-of-way, and property lines of any adjacent property. Monopole towers shall not be located any closer than the height of the tower to any residence. Guy towers and lattice towers shall not be located any closer than 500 feet or three times the height of the tower, whichever is greater, to any residence. These setback requirements shall not apply to any building related to the operation or maintenance of the tower. 
(c)  Structural design. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is designed, constructed, and maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association (EIA), as amended from time to time. A tower must have the structural capacity to accommodate at least two other users comparable to the initial user. 
(d)  Maximum height. The maximum height of towers in all residential districts shall be 180 feet. In all zoning districts in which towers are permitted as a conditional use, the height of towers may be limited in granting the conditional use permit. 
(e)  Illumination. Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the zoning administrator, planning and zoning commission, or board of commissioners may review the available lighting alternatives approved by the FAA or any successor agency and require the alternative that would cause the least disturbance to surrounding property. This may include the requirement of a dual lighting system, vertical aiming, or such other FAA-approved measures as may be feasible to reduce the negative impact on the surrounding property. Additional expense shall not be a factor in determining feasibility. 
(f)  Color and markings. Unless otherwise required by the FAA or other applicable authority, all towers shall be unmarked and shall have either a galvanized finish or be painted a dull blue, gray, or black finish. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the zoning administrator may require the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances to be of a neutral color that is compatible with the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances as visually unobtrusive as possible. Camouflaged towers designed to look like trees shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(g)  Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate. For guy towers, each guy anchor shall also be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height with the fence line set back at least ten feet from the guy anchor. 
(h)  Landscaping. The visual impact of towers shall be mitigated through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of the tower and ancillary structures as follows: 
(1)  A landscaped buffer area a minimum of ten feet in width shall be maintained around the exterior of the security fencing. 
(2)  The landscaped buffer area shall consist of materials of the evergreen variety sufficient to provide screening that will minimize the visual impact of the tower. 
(3)  All required landscaping shall be properly maintained to ensure good health and vitality. 
(4)  The use of existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be credited as appropriate toward meeting landscaping requirements. 
(5)  Camouflaged towers designed to look like trees shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection. 
(6)  Applicants may submit for approval alternative landscaping plans that meet the purposes of this subsection to limit the visual impact of towers. In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether. 
(7)  The zoning administrator is authorized to grant any approvals and/or waivers contemplated by this subsection in zoning districts where towers are a permitted use. 
(i)  No advertising. Neither the tower nor the tower site shall be used for advertising purposes and shall not contain any signs for the purpose of advertising. Nameplates for the purpose of self-identification shall not be considered advertising. 
(j)  Federal and state requirements. All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal or state governments with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal or state agency. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000, § 8) 
Section 199. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Building permits. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity who has not made application for and obtained a building permit in accordance with this article to: 
(1)  Erect, construct in place, re-erect, or replace, any tower; 
(2)  Locate or co-locate any telecommunications facilities on or around a pre-existing tower for which a permit has not been obtained in accordance with this article, if such location or co-location involves the installation of equipment or appurtenances other than an antenna or antennas; or 
(3)  Locate any telecommunications facilities on an alternative tower structure, if such location involves the installation of equipment or appurtenances other than an antenna or antennas. 
Applications for building permits and informational submittals under this article shall be submitted to the zoning administrator or his designee and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on the file in the office of the clerk or the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Submittals. A complete application shall contain the following: 
(1)  A site plan or plans to scale specifying the proposed location and dimensions of the tower, the proposed lighting system (if any) and alternative lighting systems that would meet FAA approval, size of accessory buildings or uses, access, parking, fences, landscaping plans, existing and adjacent land uses, proposed distance of the tower from existing structures, buildings, overhead utility lines, public rights-of-way, and adjacent property lines, and utilities inventory indicating the locations of all drainage, power lines and any other items as impacting the proposed tower site. 
(2)  Photo simulations or renderings of the proposed tower illustrating the potential visual impact. 
(3)  A report from a licensed professional engineer, documenting the following: 
(A)  Tower height and design, including structural and technical engineering, and other pertinent factors governing the proposed tower design. A cross-section of the tower structure shall be included. 
(B)  Total anticipated structural capacity of the tower, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated. 
(C)  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower. 
(D)  Failure characteristics of the tower demonstration that the site, setbacks and separation from other uses are of adequate size or distance. 
(E)  If the application is for an antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances to be located or co-located on a pre-existing tower or located on an alternative tower structure, the engineer's report shall document that the pre-existing tower or alternative tower structure has the structural capacity to support the additional antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances. 
(F)  Certification that the tower and/or antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
(4)  Written documentation from the FAA that the FAA has determined that the tower and/or antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances is not identified as an obstruction and would not be a hazard to air navigation. 
(5)  If the application is for a new tower or towers, the applicant must reasonably demonstrate that no existing tower or alternative tower structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances. Such evidence may consist of any of the following: 
(A)  No existing towers or alternative tower structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(B)  Existing towers or alternative tower structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(C)  Existing towers or alternative tower structures do not have sufficient structural capacity to support applicant's proposed antenna(s) and related equipment appurtenances. 
(D)  The applicant's proposed antenna(s) would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna(s) on the existing towers or alternative tower structures, or the antenna(s) on the existing towers or alternative tower structures would cause electromagnetic interference with the applicant's proposed antenna(s). 
(E)  The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to utilize an existing alternative tower structure or to adapt an existing tower or alternative tower for utilization are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
(F)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and alternative tower structures infeasible. 
(6)  If the application is for a new tower, the applicant must submit a letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use. 
(c)  Informational submittals. Any person or entity co-locating an antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances on or around a tower for which a permit has already been issued shall submit the following for information only: 
(1)  The name of the person or entity co-locating on the tower. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the tower. 
(3)  The tower's permit number. 
(4)  The location of the tower. 
(5)  The remaining structural capacity of the tower. 
(6)  Certification that the antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
(d)  Independent expert review. If, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, an independent expert review of an application is warranted, the zoning administrator may engage a licensed professional engineer as an independent expert to review any of the materials submitted by an applicant and render an opinion regarding such concerns as structural integrity and the feasibility of alternate sites or co-location. Provided, however, that prior to seeking the review of an independent expert, the zoning administrator shall convey his concerns to the applicant in writing and allow the applicant a reasonable opportunity to address those concerns. If the applicant is unable to satisfactorily address the zoning administrator's concerns, the applicant shall be allowed a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed 30 days, in which to modify the application to alleviate the zoning administrator's concerns or withdraw the application altogether. If the applicant fails to so modify or withdraw the application within the required time, the zoning administrator may proceed to engage a licensed professional engineer to conduct the independent expert review and the expert's fee will be paid by the applicant. The expert's opinion shall not be necessarily be determinative, but shall be a significant factor to be considered in granting or denying the application. 
(e)  Forms. The zoning administrator is authorized to develop application forms to assist in providing the required information and facilitate the application process. 
(f)  Action on applications. The zoning administrator shall act on all applications for building permits for towers or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances within a reasonable time. Parties aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator may appeal the decision in accordance with The Comprehensive Land Development Resolution for the Unincorporated Area of Peach County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000, § 9) 
Section 200. - Public safety telecommunications. 
(a)  Towers erected by a governmental entity for police, EMS, 911 or other similar public safety telecommunications shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  If it is determined by the county that the proposed tower is situated in a location which will benefit the county's telecommunications systems, then the tower shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate the additional telecommunication equipment beneficial to the public system at a cost to the county no greater than the actual expense of the provider in so engineering and constructing the tower to meet the county's needs. 
(c)  Commercial telecommunications providers shall give priority to and make reasonable efforts to accommodate requests by governmental entities for tower space needed for public safety telecommunications provider shall reasonably demonstrate why it is not feasible to grant the request. 
(d)  If at any time it is determined that a tower or antenna owned or operated by a commercial wireless telecommunications provider is interfering with public emergency telecommunications, such tower or antenna shall immediately be modified to eliminate such interference. If the interference cannot be eliminated through modification, then the commercial provider shall discontinue the use of and remove the tower or antenna. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000, § 10) 
Section 201. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)  Any tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 180 consecutive days shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of the tower. The owner of an abandoned tower and the owner of the property where the abandoned tower is located shall be under a duty to remove such tower. If such tower is not removed within a reasonable time, not to exceed three months, after receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the governing authority may remove such tower and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The governing authority may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned towers are removed. Delay by the governing authority in taking action shall not in any way waive the governing authority's right to take action. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned tower wishes to use such abandoned tower, the owner must first apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article as if such tower were a new tower. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000, § 11) 
Section 202. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Warnings and citations. The zoning administrator, building inspector, or their designees may issue a warning citation for a violation of this article. A warning citation shall be sent via certified or registered mail to the person or entity who is responsible for the violation. Upon receipt of the warning citation, the person or entity shall have 60 days to correct or remove such violation, unless the citing official determines that the violation is an imminent hazard to the public, in which case the citing official may shorten the period of time in which the violation must be corrected or removed. If the violation is not corrected or removed within the required time period, then the person or entity shall be issued a citation for violation of this article. 
(b)  Fines. Any violation of this article resulting in a citation shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. In no event shall the fine imposed for a violation of this article be less than $500.00. 
(c)  Continuing violation. Each day any violation of this article continues may be considered a separate offense punishable by a separate fine. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000, § 12) 
Section 203. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  No liability. This article is remedial in nature and shall be construed to secure such beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare. This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the governing authority or any of its employees or agents any liability or responsibility for damages to any person or property in any way caused by or connected with a tower, antenna, or telecommunications facility governed by this article. Nor shall the governing authority or any of its employees or agents be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections, grants, denials, approvals, or permits conducted or issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(c)  Conflicting provisions. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and any other provisions of the Peach County Code of Ordinances, the provisions of this article shall govern and the other conflicting provisions shall be deemed repealed insofar as they would otherwise apply to the subject of this article. 
(d)  Effective date. This article shall take effect immediately upon adoption. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000, § 13) 
ARTICLE XX. - STANDARDS FOR SOLAR FARM FACILITIES 

Section 211. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article shall be: 
(a)  To provide for the appropriate location and development of solar farm facilities in such locations as will promote the public safety and general welfare; 
(b)  To minimize, through proper siting, landscape, screening and careful design; the potential for visual incompatibility of solar farm facilities; 
(c)  To accommodate an increased demand for the development of solar farm facilities; 
(d)  To encourage the location of solar farm facilities in non-residentially developed areas; 
(e)  To consider public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017, § 1, 5-9-2017) 
Section 212. - Definition. 
The term 'solar farm facility" shall be defined as an area of land which there are a number of photovoltaic solar panels exposed to radiation of heat from the sun and used for producing electricity as a utility-scale solar application. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017, § 2, 5-9-2017) 
Section 213. - Use in zoning districts. 
Subject to the requirements of this article, solar farm facilities shall be conditionally permitted as a principal use in R-AG (residential agricultural), RR-1 (rural residential), M-1 (wholesale and light industrial) and M-2 (general industrial) districts. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017, § 3, 5-9-2017) 
Section 214. - Conditional use standards and procedures. 
The standards and procedures for granting or denying a conditional use request in the comprehensive land development resolution for the Unincorporated Area of Peach County, Georgia shall be applicable to this article. In addition to the standards listed, the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners shall also consider the following standards in granting or denying a conditional use request for a solar farm facility: 
(a)  Consistency or compatibility with the general pattern of land development or lack thereof within the zoning district; 
(b)  Whether or not the proposed use is detrimental to the character of the area or neighborhood or would be consistent with the trends of development in the area or neighborhood; 
(c)  Consistency with the county's master land use plan; 
(d)  Whether or not the proposed use can be designated to function effectively for its intended purpose without creating negative off-site impacts for adjoining parcels. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017, § 3, 5-9-2017) 
Section 215. - Denial. 
Any decision by the planning and zoning commission or the board of commissioners that results in denial of a request to place or construct a solar farm facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017, § 4, 5-9-2017) 
Section 216. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size . The minimum lot size requirements shall be the same minimum lot size in that Zoning District which the proposed parcel is located. 
(b)  Minimum setback requirements . The minimum setback requirements shall be 50 feet from the right-of-way and 50 feet from all property lines. 
(c)  Maximum height . The maximum height shall be the same as the maximum height requirement in that zoning district which the proposed parcel is located. 
(d)  Security fencing . Solar farm facilities shall be completely enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height. Said fencing shall be screened. Access shall be provided through a locked gate. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017, § 5, 5-9-2017) 
Section 217. - Building permits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity who has not made application for and obtained a building permit in accordance with this article to erect or construct a solar farm facility. Applications for building permits under this article shall be submitted to the zoning administrator or his designee and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the clerk or the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017, § 6, 5-9-2017) 
Section 218. - Maintenance and upkeep. 
Solar farm facilities shall be maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. The operator of the facility shall maintain the facility, including all buffer screening, in compliance with the approved plans. The facility shall be kept free from weeds, dust, trash and debris. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017, § 7, 5-9-2017) 
Section 219. - Abandonment and removal. 
If a solar farm facility is removed, any earth disturbance as a result of the removal shall be landscaped in accordance with the Peach County Code of Ordinances. A solar farm facility is considered to be abandoned or defective if it has not been in operation for a period of 12 months. If abandoned, the facility shall be repaired or removed by the responsible party within the time period designated by the Peach County Zoning Administrator. 
Solar farm facilities shall be subject to the creation of a decommissioning plan at the time of conditional use permit approval. This plan shall include, at a minimum: 
(a)  Defined conditions upon which decommissioning will be initiated; 
(b)  Removal of all non-utility owned equipment conduits, structures, fencing, roads and foundations; restoration of property to condition prior to the facility development; 
(c)  The timeframe for completion of removal and decommissioning activities; 
(d)  Signed statement from the party responsible for completing the decommissioning plan acknowledging such responsibility. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017, § 8, 5-9-2017) 
ARTICLE XXI. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL ORDINANCE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 12, 2017, did not specify manner of inclusion, hence, codification as art. XXI, §§ 231—240 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 231. - Title. 
This article will be known as "Peach County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 12-12-2017, § I) 
Sec. 232. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
1.  Best management practices (BMPs) . These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
2.  Board . The board of natural resources. 
3.  Buffer . The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
4.  Certified personnel . A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
5.  Coastal marshlands . Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
6.  Commission . The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
7.  CPESC . Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
8.  Cut . A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
9.  Department . The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
10.  Design professional . A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
11.  Director . The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
12.  District . The Ocmulgee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
13.  Division . The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
14.  Drainage structure . A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
15.  Erosion . The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
16.  Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan . A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 234.C. of this article. 
17.  Fill . A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
18.  Final stabilization . All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
19.  Finished grade . The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
20.  Grading . Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
21.  Ground elevation . The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
22.  Land-disturbing activity . Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 233.5. 
23.  Larger common plan of development or sale . A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
24.  Local issuing authority . The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
25.  Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) . A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
26.  Natural ground surface . The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
27.  Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) . Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
28.  NOI . A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
29.  NOT . A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
30.  Operator . The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
31.  Outfall . The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
32.  Permit . The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
33.  Person . Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
34.  Phase or phased . Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
35.  Project . The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
36.  Properly designed . Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
37.  Roadway drainage structure . A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
38.  Sediment . Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
39.  Sedimentation . The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
40.  Soil and water conservation district approved plan . An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the soil and water conservation district. 
41.  Stabilization . The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
42.  State general permit . The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
43.  State waters . Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
44.  Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices . Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia . 
45.  Trout streams . All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov . Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
46.  Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures . Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
47.  Watercourse . Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
48.  Wetlands . Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2017, § II) 
Sec. 233. - Exemptions. 
This ordinance shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following 
1.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
2.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
3.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
4.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
5.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
6.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 234.C. of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
7.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
8.  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 or 10 of this section; 
9.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
10.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
11.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2017, § III) 
Sec. 234. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
A.  General provisions . Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this ordinance shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 234B. and C. of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES general permit. 
B.  Minimum requirements/BMPs . 
1.  Best management practices as set forth in section 234.B. and C. of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
2.  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
5.  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection C.15., 16. and 17., in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
C.  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2.  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
3.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9.  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
12.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 234.B.2. of this article; 
15.  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
16.  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
17.  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with O.C.G.A. Tit. 12, Ch. 5 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
D.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 234.B. and C. of this article. 
E.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2017, § IV) 
Sec. 235. - Application/permit process. 
A.  General . The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
B.  Application requirements . 
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Peach County without first obtaining a permit from the zoning administrator to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
2.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 235.C. of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 234.B. and C. of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
3.  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9), (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
4.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 234.C.15., 16. and 17. have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 235.B.6., have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
5.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
6.  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
C.  Plan requirements . 
1.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 234.B. and C. of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this ordinance. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
2.  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
D.  Permits . 
1.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
2.  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this ordinance, any variances required by section 234.C.15., 16. and 17. are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 235.B.6. are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
3.  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
4.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
5.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
6.  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 12-12-2017, § V) 
Sec. 236. - Inspection and enforcement. 
A.  The zoning enforcement officer will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this ordinance, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
B.  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
C.  The zoning enforcement officer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
D.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
E.  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
F.  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2017, § VI) 
Sec. 237. - Penalties and incentives. 
A.  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity . If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
B.  Stop-work orders . 
1.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this ordinance, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
2.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
3.  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
C.  Bond forfeiture . If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 235.B.6. The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
D.  Monetary penalties . 
1.  Any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this ordinance shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this ordinance under county ordinances approved under this ordinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2017, § VII) 
Sec. 238. - Education and certification. 
A.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
B.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
C.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
D.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2017, § VIII) 
Sec. 239. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
A.  Administrative remedies . The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Peach County Planning and Zoning Commission within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
B.  Judicial review . Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Peach County 
(Ord. of 12-12-2017, § IX) 
Sec. 240. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
A.  Effectivity . This article shall become effective on the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . 
B.  Validity . If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
C.  Liability . 
1.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this ordinance, nor the compliance with provisions of this ordinance shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
2.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
3.  No provision of this ordinance shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
ATTEST: 
____________  ;sigl; 
____________  ;sigl; 
(Ord. of 12-12-2017, § X) 
APPENDIX A - WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The county's water resource protection ordinance, adopted January 8, 2002, is not printed herein but is codified as article V of chapter 26 of the county's Code of Ordinances. 

APPENDIX B - GROUNDWATER WITHDRAWAL ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The county's groundwater withdrawal ordinance, adopted May 11, 2004, is not printed herein but is codified as article VI of chapter 26 of the county's Code of Ordinances. 

COMPARATIVE TABLE RESOLUTIONS AND ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the resolutions, ordinances and amendments of the county used in this publication. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the publication and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this publication, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 