THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF EMERSON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Al Pallone 
Mayor 
____________ 
Donnie Bagwell 
Ed Brush 
Gerald Earwood 
Vincent Wiley 
City Council 
____________ 
Kevin McBurnett 
City Manager 
____________ 
Keith Lovell 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Robbie Swords 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Emerson, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Rebecca Evans, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Todd Health, Assistant City Manager, and Mr. Keith Lovell, City Attorney, for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Emerson, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Emerson, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Emerson, Georgia. 2017. 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this subpart is the City Charter, being 2013 Ga. Laws (Act No. 320) page 4441. Amendments are shown in history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history indicates that the provisions are derived from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title of the act and enacting clause has been editorially omitted. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
The City of Emerson, in Bartow County, Georgia, is reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style Emerson, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Emerson, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this Charter; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, fire safety, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. title 48], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. To condemn property as granted to municipalities under the general laws of the State of Georgia, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 22] or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of this state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of stormwater and the establishment of a stormwater utility, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property, which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city, to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail, to provide for the use of pretrial diversion and any alternative sentencing allowed by law, or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, stormwater management, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties, and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(21)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 22] or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for, or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan and other employee benefit plans and programs for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials, and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors; to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; to license and tax professional fortunetelling, palmistry, and massage parlors; and to restrict adult bookstores to certain areas; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. The city council established in this Charter shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the city governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this Charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office. 
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. The term of office of each member of the city council shall begin on the first day of January immediately following the election of such member unless general law authorizes or requires the term to begin at the first organizational meeting in January or upon some other date. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of the election of the mayor or members of the city council. Each shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 45], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment if less than 24 months remain in the unexpired term, otherwise by an election as provided for in section 5.14 of this Charter and Titles 21 and 45 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. titles 21 and 45], or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(c)  Suspension. Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this Charter. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Holding other office; voting when personally interested. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to Title 50, Chapter 14 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.], concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which that person is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of that person or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to that person's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which that person is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which that person has a financial interest. 
(c)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that official shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit or profit but shall use such property only in their capacity as an officer or employee of the city. 
(e)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section, which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(f)  Ineligibility of elected official. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which that person was elected. No former councilmember and no former mayor shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that person was elected. 
(g)  Political activities of certain officers and employees. No appointive officer of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying for or election to any public office in this city or any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall be made by the mayor and council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit that person's office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, or this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter and the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Emerson and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Sec. 2.18. - Oaths. 
The oath of office shall be administered by the city clerk or other designee to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America." 
"I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I by the laws of the State of Georgia am prohibited from holding. I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia. I have been a resident of the City of Emerson for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state and by the municipal Charter. I will perform the duties of my office in the best interest of the City of Emerson to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward, or expectation thereof." 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call shall be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible as provided by Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.], or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Three members of the city council shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote, and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote, and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of three members of the city council shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  No member of the city council shall abstain from voting on any matter properly brought before the council for official action except when such councilmember has a conflict of interest, which is disclosed in writing prior to or at the meeting and made a part of the minutes. Any member of the city council present and eligible to vote on a matter and refusing to do so for any reason other than a properly disclosed and recorded conflict of interest shall be deemed to have acquiesced or concurred with the members of the majority who did vote on the question involved. 
(c)  For purposes of establishing a quorum and voting, the mayor shall be deemed to be a member of the city council. 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be, "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Emerson ..." and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by the mayor or any member of the city council and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, that an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in section 2.24 of this Charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council, which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance shall not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of subsection (b) of section 2.22 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.26 of this Charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose, all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Emerson, Georgia." Copies of the Code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first Code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
Sec. 2.27. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the city manager's compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of that person's executive and administrative qualifications. 
Sec. 2.28. - Removal of city manager. 
The city manager is employed at will and may be summarily removed from office at any time by the city council. 
Sec. 2.29. - Acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate, subject to approval of the city council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during the city manager's temporary absence or physical or mental disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or the city manager's disability shall cease. 
Sec. 2.30. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the city manager's charge by or under this Charter. As the chief administrative officer, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Appoint and, when the city manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the city manager appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this Charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law; 
(3)  Attend all city council meetings, unless otherwise excused therefrom, except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline, or removal of the city manager, and have the right to take part in discussion, but the city manager may not vote; 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the mayor; 
(6)  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the city manager deems desirable; and 
(9)  Perform other such duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 2.31. - Council's interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under section 2.15 of this Charter, the council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 2.32. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and shall serve for a term of four years and until the mayor's successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of the mayor's service. The mayor shall forfeit the office of mayor on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner for councilmembers. 
Sec. 2.33. - Mayor pro tempore. 
By a majority vote, the councilmembers shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's physical or mental disability or absence. The mayor pro tempore shall continue to vote and otherwise participate as a councilmember. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the councilmembers. The mayor pro tempore shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in section 2.14 of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.34. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city. As the chief executive officer, the mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city, which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  Vote on matters before the city council and be counted toward a quorum as any other councilmember; 
(6)  Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; and 
(7)  Fulfill such other executive duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties, and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all non-elective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance or resolution. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(e)  All appointed officers and directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be nominated by the city manager with confirmation of appointment by the city council. All appointed officers and directors shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by the city manager unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this Charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, and such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All members of boards, commissions, or authorities of the city serve at will and may be removed at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the councilmembers, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. 
(b)  The city attorney is not a public official of the city and does not take an oath of office. The city attorney shall at all times be an independent contractor. A law firm, rather than an individual, may be designated as the city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The councilmembers shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain city council records required by this Charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan, which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.15. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Emerson. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that such judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the judge's office to the best of the judge's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $2,500.00 or imprisonment for 12 months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing, as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendants sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Bartow County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Title 21, Chapter 2 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Election of the city council and mayor. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal general election biennially in odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  There shall be elected the mayor and two councilmembers at one election and at every other election thereafter. The remaining councilmember seats shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created. Terms shall be for four years. 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices, and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by plurality. 
The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant as provided in section 2.12 of this Charter, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, that if such vacancy occurs within 24 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Title 21, Chapter 2 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Title 21, Chapter 2 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  A councilmember, the mayor, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing, which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Bartow County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Bartow County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Emerson. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by two installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business in this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, assessments, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fa.'s.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time such issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and shall repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies, provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts shall be executed in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the O.C.G.A., or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 6.24. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. 
Sec. 6.25. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 15 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget provided for in section 6.29 of this Charter, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.26. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The councilmembers may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted shall provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the last day of each fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to section 6.24 of this Charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.27. - Levy of taxes. 
The city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.29. - Capital budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 15 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and budget. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in section 2.24 of this Charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the last day of each fiscal year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, that the mayor may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.30. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.31. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to section 2.21 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.32. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.33. - Sale and lease of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the city manager to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations. 
Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of this city not in conflict with this Charter shall continue in force, unless repealed or amended, for two years from the effective date of this Charter. During such two-year period, the city council shall review all such provisions and shall readopt, repeal, or amend each, so that a codification as provided by subsection (b) of section 2.26 of this Charter is accomplished. 
Sec. 7.12. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.13. - Construction and definitions. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
(d)  Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, the term: 
(1)  "City council" means the members of the city council and the mayor. 
(2)  "Councilmember" means a member of the city council other than the mayor. 
Sec. 7.14. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 7.15. - Specific repealer. 
An Act to provide a new Charter for the City of Emerson, approved March 24, 1988 (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4549), and all amendatory Acts thereto are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 7.16. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its otherwise becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 7.17. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - HOTEL TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this subpart is 2016 Ga. Laws (Act No. 414), page 3687. Amendments are shown in history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history indicates that the provisions are derived from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title of the act and enacting clause has been editorially omitted. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Authorized. 
Pursuant to the authority of subsection (b) of Code Section 48-13-51 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)], the governing authority of the City of Emerson is authorized to levy an excise tax at a rate not to exceed eight percent of the charge for the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to, the municipality for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly or periodically furnished for value. 
Sec. 2. - Resolution. 
The enactment of this Act is subsequent to the adoption of Resolution No. 2016-002 of the governing authority of the City of Emerson on February 22, 2016, which specifies the subsequent tax rate, identifies the projects or tourism product development purposes, and specifies the allocation of proceeds. 
Sec. 3. - Use of proceeds. 
In accordance with the terms of such resolution adopted by the mayor and council of the City of Emerson: 
(1)  In each fiscal year during which a tax is collected pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of Code Section 48-13-51 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(2)], an amount equal to not less than 50 percent of the total amount of taxes collected that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent shall be expended for promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows by the destination marketing organization designated by the City of Emerson; provided, however, that the City of Emerson may exercise its option under paragraph (2) of subsection (e) of Code Section 48-13-51 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(e)(2)] to contract with an entity qualified under such provision; and 
(2)  The remaining amount of taxes collected that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent which are not otherwise expended under paragraph (1) of this section shall be expended for tourism product development. 
Sec. 4. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections constitute and are designated "The Code of Ordinances, City of Emerson, Georgia" and may be so cited. The Code consists of subparts A and B. 
State Law reference— Codification of ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions generally. 
In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or repugnant to the context of the provisions: 
Generally. 
(1)  When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general and the more stringent provision shall always prevail. 
(2)  All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city council shall be effectuated. 
(3)  Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
(4)  Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(5)  Scrivener's errors shall be ignored. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Emerson, Georgia, as now or hereafter amended. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Emerson, Georgia. 
City council, council. The term "city council" or "council" refers to the city council of the City of Emerson, Georgia. 
City officers, employees, boards, committees, commissions, etc. References to officers, employees, boards, committees, and commissions, are to city officers, city employees, city boards, city committees, and city commissions. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Ordinances, City of Emerson, Georgia. The Code consists of subparts A and B. While subpart B of this Code is a codification of ordinances pertaining to land use and land development, and subpart A of this Code is a codification of general ordinances: 
(1)  The inclusion of a provision in subpart A that relates to land use or land development does not excuse noncompliance with such provision. 
(2)  The inclusion of a provision in subpart B that does not relate to land use or land development does not excuse noncompliance with such provision. 
Computation of time. When a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time, except hours, is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either… or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that the term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Bartow County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Any provision requiring a city officer or city employee or other officer to do an act or perform a duty shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. Words of one gender include the other genders. 
Include, including. The term "include," "including" or any other similar term of inclusion means without limitation or restriction. 
Joint authority. Words giving a joint authority to three or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them, unless it is otherwise expressed. 
Judge. The term "judge" means the municipal judge. 
May. The term "may" confers a power. 
May not. The term "may not" has a prohibitory effect and states a prohibition. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" states a requirement. 
Number. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
Oath; affirmation. The term "oath" includes affirmations in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in like cases, the term "swear" includes the term "affirm." 
O.C.G.A., state acts. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as now or hereafter amended. A reference to a state act, whether by year and act number; year, act number and page; year and page; or short title is a reference to such act as now or hereafter amended. 
Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
Person. The term "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation, any limited liability company, any partnership, any firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes lands and structures. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Real estate or real property. The term "real estate" or "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and all rights thereto and interests therein. 
Shall. The term "shall" imposes a duty. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means a strip of land in front of or on the sides of a house or lot of land lying between the property line and the street. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the town. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," as applied to premises, include any person holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others. 
Tense. The present tense of a verb includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" mean any mode of representing words and letters in general use, except that signatures, when required, must be made by the writing or mark of the person. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the sections, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  History notes that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Editor's notes, state law references and other references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(d)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at any time the ordinances repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections or subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Chapter (article, division, subdivision, section or subsection, as appropriate) of The Code of Ordinances, City of Emerson, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(c)  In the event a new provision not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Code of Ordinances, City of Emerson, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a chapter (article, division, subdivision, section or subsection, as appropriate) to be numbered ____________ , which such provisions read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(d)  All chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, sections and subsections desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by chapter, article, division, subdivision, section and subsection, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted into the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, or a misdemeanor by ordinance, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, a simple misdemeanor or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless language is present negating the effect of this subsection. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,500.00, imprisonment not exceeding 12 months, alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law, or any combination thereof. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  With respect to violations that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to other violations, each act of violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(e)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise. 
(f)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity, unenforceability or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof, and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Prior acts, obligations or uses unaffected. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize or permit any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any ordinance: 
(1)  Extending, contracting or describing the boundaries of the city. 
(2)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Prescribing the number, classification, benefits or compensation of any city officer or city employee. 
(4)  Making any appropriation. 
(5)  Adopting a budget or amending same. 
(6)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(7)  Establishing or prescribing grades of any street. 
(8)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(9)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(10)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(11)  Approving any plat. 
(12)  Levying or imposing taxes not codified in this Code. 
(13)  Pertaining to zoning or a comprehensive plan. 
(14)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(15)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(16)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Records management. 
(a)  The city clerk, acting under the supervision of the city manager, shall act for and on behalf of the city council in directing and coordinating all records management matters including maintenance and security of records. 
(b)  The city does hereby adopt the record retention schedules recommended by the Georgia Secretary of State entitled "Retention Schedules for Local Government Paper and Electronic Records," as now or hereafter amended. 
(c)  An archival depository will be selected to store those records determined to have permanent historical value. 
(d)  For maintenance and security of the records, a centralized records center (and/or local holding area) shall be established, and all records not required for day-to-day operation shall be transferred to the records center or local holding area until destroyed in accordance with the approved records retention schedule. 
(e)  No record shall be destroyed except in accordance with approved retention schedules. Whenever any records are destroyed, a certificate of destruction shall be prepared and forwarded to the city council which shall show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the dates covered, and the volume destroyed. 
(f)  Records retention schedules approved by the city shall be on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2011, § 31.1) 
State Law reference— Records management, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq. 
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-21—2-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-44—2-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-75—2-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-92. - Statement of intent. 
It is the intent of the city to establish, foster, and maintain procedures of procurement that maximize the value of each dollar spent on goods and services used by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 1, § 1, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-93. - Objectives. 
(a)  To assure the public that money provided to the city and appropriated by city council is spent wisely and effectively. 
(b)  To provide instructions and guidance to all city personnel engaged in the purchasing process. 
(c)  To establish levels of purchasing that relate procedural formality, cost of procurement activity and levels of approval to the cost of the item purchased. 
(d)  To develop reliable, competitive sources of supply based upon fair and open vendor relations. 
(e)  To establish ethical standards to ensure that procurement is made without favoritism or inappropriate vendor inducements. 
(f)  To remit payments to vendors in a timely manner without error, consistent with vendor terms and taking advantage of any discounts. 
(g)  To establish and maintain internal controls over purchasing and vendor payments that deter misappropriation of city resources without creating unnecessary or excessive administration. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 1, § 2, 11-25-2013) 
Secs. 2-94—2-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING PROCESS 

Sec. 2-115. - General rules and principles. 
(a)  The foundation for effective and proper purchasing conduct is sound and well-communicated policy and procedures. It is the responsibility of the city manager or his designee to ensure that sound procedures are in place, to train and assist city departments in understanding the procedures, and to ensure that the purchasing processes run smoothly. 
(b)  Operational responsibility for the purchasing process is delegated to the city clerk. 
(c)  In order to minimize the cost of procurement, purchases of less than $2,500.00 are delegated to each department. This puts accountability, as well as responsibility, into the hands of the department head to ensure that all rules and expectations are met. 
(d)  Purchases greater than $2,500.00 have a higher degree of centralization and require greater effort in seeking the most competitive price. Therefore, there are more formal procedures and greater administrative oversight established. 
(e)  It is the department head's obligation, with the assistance of the city clerk, to make certain that any departmental employees involved in procurement know, understand, and adhere to established policy and procedures. Any delegation of authority by department heads permitted under these procedures should be exercised with prudence with regard to both selection of individuals and monitoring of activity. The most important element of effective purchasing and proper purchasing conduct is the active understanding, support and commitment of department heads and staff. 
(f)  All purchasing activity is expected to comply with departmental budget availability and established budget procedures. 
(g)  Departments are expected to always seek the most cost-effective goods and services that meet departmental needs. Departments should anticipate needs so as to purchase in sufficient quantities to lower unit costs while avoiding waste due to over-stocking or pilferage. 
(h)  Competition for city business is critical to cost-effective purchasing. However, as indicated below, the amount of staff time and effort required to complete a purchase should be relative to the total cost of the purchase. In other words, a smaller amount of time and effort should be expended for lower dollar purchases while considerable time and effort is expected for higher dollar purchases. 
(i)  The city is exempt from state sales tax. Departments are expected to take active measures to avoid the payment of sales tax, including, but not limited to, providing a sales tax exemption certificate to vendors when needed to complete a tax-exempt transaction. 
(j)  City employees who are involved in the purchasing function in any manner must refrain from all indications or appearance of impropriety with regard to vendors. Specifically, employees are not to accept gifts, gratuities or offers from any individual, company, firm, or business establishment that is a current or prospective vendor. Offers may include, but are not limited to, money, entertainment, gifts, favors, loans, or promises of employment. Any such offers should be politely declined. Any offer of significant value that could be construed as an attempted bribe shall be reported immediately to one's supervisor. 
(k)  City employees who are involved in the purchasing function in any manner must refrain from all indications or appearance of conflict of interest. A conflict of interest arises when a purchase of goods or services would result in the employee or any member of the employee's family realizing a financial gain. The employee shall report all potential or actual conflicts of interest to his department head or city manager (as applicable) and remove himself from the decision-making process. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 2, § 1, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-116. - Smaller amount purchases (under $2,500.00). 
Smaller amount purchases are defined as purchases in amounts of under $2,500.00. Reasonable effort shall be made to obtain the most favorable price for these purchases, but no formal or informal competitive pricing is required. 
(1)  Petty cash purchases. 
a.  Petty cash is authorized in the city clerk's office in the amount of $250.00 for use of all departments. Petty cash is intended for purchases less than $250.00 that may be expedited more efficiently than by issuing a check or using a credit card. 
b.  Petty cash purchases are made on a reimbursement basis. Receipts with proper approval shall be turned in to the department head or city clerk, with a purchase form and include departmental approval. The city clerk then replenishes the petty cash in the amount of the documented receipts. Petty cash may, under no circumstances, be used to conduct personal business. For instance, petty cash may never be used to cash employee checks. 
c.  Petty cash shall be maintained in a secure manner and kept physically separate from all other cash. The total of cash and petty cash receipts on hand should always be equal to the authorized petty cash amount, and is subject to unannounced audit by the city manager or his designee. 
(2)  Credit card purchases. 
a.  The intent of credit cards is to provide a faster, more efficient, more flexible manner to procure purchases, at less transaction cost, than issuing checks, resulting in greater productivity. The credit card is often used to expedite Internet purchases. 
b.  Nevertheless, extreme caution must be observed at all times to ensure that the use of credit cards is consistent with city policy and not subject to abuse. The use of credit cards is absolutely prohibited in the following situations: 
1.  Any purchase that exceeds $2,500.00 (purchase of a single item or a single purchase of multiple items). 
2.  Any purchase that is not budgeted or exceeds the department's approved budget amount. 
3.  Any purchase that is not work-related. 
4.  Cash advances through ATMs or bank tellers. 
5.  Maintenance or other service agreements. 
6.  Purchases of personal items of any nature. 
c.  The city manager shall determine those individuals that are to have credit cards issued. Credit cards are to be kept secure at all times. Employees are held personally responsible for the safekeeping of issued credit cards until such time as they are surrendered to the city manager. The city clerk shall maintain a credit card issuance list containing all pertinent data, and said list shall be stored in a secure location. 
d.  Receipts for any credit card purchases are mandatory and are ultimately the responsibility of the department head. The receipt shall be certified by the individual making the purchase and approved by the department head. The receipts, with a purchase form and approval, shall be submitted to the city clerk. Internet orders generally result in a confirmation that should be printed and used for receipt documentation. 
e.  The city clerk or his designee is responsible for reconciling the credit card statement to the submitted receipts and contacting the department to resolve any discrepancies. The credit card shall be paid in full prior to the due date to avoid any finance charges. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 2, § 2, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-117. - Medium amount purchases ($2,500.00 to $10,000.00). 
(a)  For purposes of this policy, medium amount purchases are defined as purchases in amounts that are greater than $2,500.00 and less than $10,000.00. 
(b)  Obtaining competitive pricing is a requirement for medium amount purchases. 
(c)  Specifically, departments are required to obtain price quotations or proposals prior to purchase, and are strongly encouraged to obtain a minimum of three price quotations or proposals. 
(d)  Verbal quotations are acceptable for medium amount purchases. The quotations should all meet the requirements, standards, or specifications of the goods or services to be purchased so that the purchasing decision will be based on comparable competition. 
(e)  Departments are given considerable latitude in obtaining price quotations or proposals. Quotations may be obtained over the telephone, by fax, by e-mail, by sealed quotation, from printed catalogs, or from online catalogs. Regardless of the source of the quotation, comprehensive information documenting the quotation shall be compiled on a city purchasing quotation/requisition form. 
(f)  The quotation form shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Items for which the quotations are obtained. 
(2)  Names of all businesses providing price quotations. 
(3)  Specific source of the price from within the businesses. 
(4)  The name of the individual providing the quotations. 
(5)  Catalog reference (name and date of the catalog, and the page number of the catalog) if the price is obtained from a catalog. 
(6)  Copy of a fax for a fax quote. 
(7)  Printed copy of a webpage if the price is obtained from the Internet. 
(8)  The dollar amount of each quotation. 
(9)  The city employee obtaining the quotation. 
(g)  More expensive purchases or the purchase of a more complex item will require greater effort and formality. For instance, a written solicitation might be sent to prospective vendors that fully and completely describes the item to be purchased, outlines any special requirements, and provides a deadline for submitting the quote. 
(h)  Employees should keep in mind the general principle that there is greater potential for savings and greater potential for vendor disputes as the price of purchases increases; taking the time to purchase carefully will provide better stewardship of city resources and will also reduce the likelihood of ending up with goods or services that do not successfully meet the needs of the job. 
(i)  A copy of the quotation form shall be sent to the city clerk. Medium amount purchases should be made using purchase orders when feasible. One larger purchase may not be divided into multiple purchases to circumvent this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 2, § 3, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-118. - Large amount purchases ($10,001.00 to $50,000.00). 
For purposes of this policy, large amount purchases are defined as purchases in amounts ranging from $10,001.00 to $50,000.00. Three written quotes must be submitted to the city manager for approval before making the purchase and/or expenditure. Formal advertising in the city legal organ is not required for large amount purchases. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 2, § 4, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-119. - Bidding purchases and request for proposal (greater than $50,000.00). 
(a)  Purchases and expenditures greater than $50,000.00 require a formal sealed bid or request for proposal (RFP) process. These purchases shall be publicly advertised in the legal organ of the city, the Daily Tribune News, for a minimum of 14 days, and posted on the city website. 
(b)  Pre-bid conferences may be held for bidding and RFP purchases to provide bidders the opportunity to ask questions regarding the solicitation. The bidding or RFP package will outline the location, date, and time of any pre-bid conference. 
(c)  Bidding purchases require a public bid opening. Public bid openings are normally held at Emerson City Hall on the date specified in the solicitation package. The information read out loud for the bids includes the vendor name and total bid amount. The information read out loud for RFPs includes the vendor name only. 
(d)  Bidding and RFP purchases must be received and date/time-stamped in at the city clerk's office prior to the deadline in order to be accepted. Any bidding or RFP package received after the deadline will not be accepted or opened. 
(e)  All award of bidding and RFP purchases must be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 2, § 5, 11-25-2013) 
Secs. 2-120—2-136. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BONDS 

Sec. 2-137. - Purpose. 
Bonds provide a form of financial protection against damages. A bond is a binding agreement executed by a bidder or vendor and another party to guarantee the performance of certain obligations or duties to the purchaser. There are three types of bonds that may be appropriate for inclusion in procurement for costly items or construction projects. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 3, intro. ¶, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-138. - Bid bonds. 
Bid bonds provide surety that the firm awarded a bid shall not withdraw the bid, shall insure the execution of the contract document, and shall furnish any required payment and performance bonds. When specified in the bid package, each bid must be accompanied by a bid bond of not less than five percent of the amount of the bid where the cost is greater than $100,000.00, or as required by the city. The guarantee may be in the form of a cashier's check or certified check made payable to the City of Emerson, or a bid bond issued by a surety company. Bid bonds will be returned upon award of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 3, § 1, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-139. - Performance bonds. 
A performance bond is executed subsequent to award by a successful bidder to protect the city from loss due to the bidder's inability to complete the contract as agreed, and to secure the fulfillment of all contract requirements. When specified in the bid package, the successful bidder will be required to furnish a performance bond prior to commencing work. The guarantee of performance may be in the form of a cashier's check, certified check made payable to the City of Emerson, performance bond, or irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association as defined in O.C.G.A. ch. 7-1A. Irrevocable letters of credit will not be accepted on contracts of more than $300,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 3, § 2, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-140. - Payment bonds. 
The successful bidder will be required to furnish a guarantee of payment for the protection of all subcontractors, individuals, or businesses participating in the project or contract. The payment bond is normally in the amount of the contract awarded and must be provided prior to commencing work. This bond is required for construction or other projects with subcontractors when specified in the bid package. This guarantee may be in the form of payment bond, cashier's check, certified check made payable to the City of Emerson, or an irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or a savings and loan as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4. Irrevocable letters of credit will not be accepted on contracts of more than $300,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 3, § 3, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-141. - Maintenance bonds. 
When required in the bid package or by other regulation, a maintenance bond will be provided in the amount and for the length of time as specified in the bid package. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 3, § 4, 11-25-2013) 
Secs. 2-142—2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MISCELLANEOUS PURCHASING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-166. - Receiving. 
A vendor confirmation or a city purchase order establishes the specific items and requirements of the ordering department. There is a departmental follow-up responsibility to see that the goods or services received match what was ordered. Specifically, when goods are received, the order should be inspected and compared to both the packing slip that accompanies the order and the purchase documentation. The receiving verification should also provide assurance that the goods arrived in good condition. Any discrepancies in quantity or condition should be noted on the purchase documentation and must be satisfactorily resolved prior to payment. Similarly, any services performed under contract should be verified for completion and correctness prior to payment. Each department is responsible for establishing its own internal procedures to ensure accountability for this function. The packing slip should be retained with the purchase documentation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 4, § 1, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-167. - State contracts. 
The state department of administrative services maintains statewide contracts on many commodities and services. Many of these contracts are available for use by local governments. Using this source for purchases can save time and money. Since state contracts are already the result of a competitive process, departments are authorized to purchase off of state contracts at the prices bid or negotiated by the state in lieu of requirements for obtaining additional competitive prices. Nevertheless, departments are encouraged to spot check state contract prices with prices available for the same item from another source in an effort to obtain the most favorable price. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 4, § 2, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-168. - Only known source (sole source) purchases. 
(a)  "Only known source" purchases are purchases of goods or services that are so unusual or unique that only one vendor is known to provide this item. If a vendor sells a product that is unique in design, but other vendors have products with a different design that performs the same function, then it is not an "only known source" situation. 
(b)  An exception to the requirement of competitive purchasing for any procurement over $2,500.00 may be made in the unusual circumstance when a good-faith review of all known or potential vendors determines that there is only a single known source for procurement. Departments must take care to avoid eliminating competition by writing specifications in such manner that needlessly and unfairly results in elimination of sources of supply. 
(c)  Departments are required to provide a written explanation of any "only known source" purchases and have the purchase approved by the city manager prior to issuance of a purchase order. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 4, § 3, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-169. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  Normal competitive purchasing procedures may be temporarily waived during bona fide emergencies. An emergency is hereby defined as any situation or circumstance that is determined to constitute a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or to the soundness and integrity of public property, or to the delivery of essential services, and where the adverse effects of such emergency may worsen materially in the short term with the passage of time. 
(b)  The city manager must declare a "state of emergency" that would permit a waiver of normal purchasing procedures. Departments shall still use such competitive procedures as circumstances reasonably permit. Emergency purchasing provisions must not be used to compensate for poor planning. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 4, § 4, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-170. - Annual (or term) contracts and blanket purchase orders. 
(a)  It is often advantageous to procure goods or services on an annual or long-term basis. Such procurement might be for service or maintenance contracts, or for the purchase of commodities such as building or office supplies or petroleum products. Service or maintenance contracts typically specify a term (length of agreement). 
(b)  Purchase of commodities may result in a pricing agreement. For example, a vendor might offer a percent discount from catalog or list price in anticipation of selling a greater quantity of goods to the city. Where competition exists, pricing agreements can be sought through either the less formal quotation process or the more formal bid process. Pricing agreements should require no commitment on the part of the city to buy a specific quantity of goods or services, and should contain a non-exclusive clause that allows the city flexibility to use other vendors when needed or desired. In the event that the city enters into any pricing agreements, the city shall confirm the arrangement through a blanket purchase order which would confirm the pricing agreement but not specify specific quantities of goods to be purchased. The city clerk shall maintain a file of any blanket purchase orders. 
(c)  Normally, no contracts or blanket purchase orders shall exceed one year in length. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 4, § 5, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-171. - Brand name purchases. 
Purchase of a brand name product or service is permissible when the goods comprise a major brand system, program, or service previously selected by the city. This is allowed only when operational effectiveness, future enhancements or additions, or maintenance and storage of spare parts preclude the mixing of brands, manufacturers, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 4, § 6, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-172. - Request for qualifications. 
For the procurement of services where the qualifications of the firm or its principals are central to the services performed, the initial step may be the issuance of a request for qualifications (RFQ). RFQs are typically used when a specialized professional service is sought. An RFQ might seek information regarding the background of the firm, summaries of similar work done by the firm, references, biographies of the personnel that would be used, time requirements, etc. Cost estimates are not normally sought in an RFQ process. Once RFQs have been received and evaluated, the top candidates might be invited for interviews and/or to provide price bids. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 4, § 7, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2-173. - End of fiscal year purchases. 
Purchases made at the end of one fiscal year and beginning of the next fiscal year can cause confusion regarding which budget is used for the purchase. This is not a matter of choice or discretion. Generally accepted accounting principles for local governments provide that expenditures take place when the liability is incurred. In other words, if a purchase order is issued in June, the amount of the purchase order is charged against that year's budget, even if the item is not received until July or August. On the other hand, generally accepted accounting principles do not permit a purchase initiated in July to be charged against the prior year's budget. To reduce end-of-year confusion and accounting problems, year-end purchasing should be kept to a minimum. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 4, § 8, 11-25-2013) 
Secs. 2-174—2-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - INVOICES AND ACCOUNTS PAYABLE 

Sec. 2-200. - Generally. 
(a)  All purchasing activity that results in the issuance of a city check requires adequate supporting documentation for the check. Supporting documentation includes quotation forms for medium amount purchases and purchase orders for purchases greater than $2,500.00, invoices, receipts, check request forms, credit card statements, expense reports, etc. 
(b)  Payment authorizations should be supported by original invoices rather a copy of an invoice or a statement. This is important to prevent duplicate payments to vendors. Any exceptions must be documented explaining the reason for using a copy. 
(c)  Payment checks to vendors shall not be issued by the city clerk until the department head or other authorized department employee has approved the invoice or other supporting document for payment. 
(d)  The city's standard terms of payment are to pay within 30 days of the receipt of an invoice. All city staff must work together to ensure that this standard is met. 
(e)  Approval of invoices is part of each department's fiscal accountability. This step is intended to ensure that no checks are issued merely because an invoice has been received. Department heads or other staff authorized to approve invoices shall carefully check the invoices and assure themselves that the goods have been received in good condition and in the correct quantity (or that the service has been satisfactorily performed), prior to approving payment. Invoices should be returned to the city clerk within three to five business days. Any charges in dispute shall promptly be communicated to the vendor. The department head or authorized staff reporting the dispute shall then await resolution prior to payment. 
(f)  Special handling and rush handling of invoices is inefficient and expensive. Therefore, priority must be given to standard, efficient invoice processing according to established procedures, and avoid invoice handling outside of the norm. 
(g)  Invoices occasionally provide an early payment discount (for instance, two percent of the payment price may be deducted if the invoice is paid within ten days). Such invoices should be expedited to ensure that the city loses no discounts. 
(Ord. No. 2013-018, art. 5, 11-25-2013) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. title 3; local regulation of alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Adoption of state law. 
The state laws and regulations relating to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine in the state are incorporated into and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein. Any violation of such state law or regulations shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of any license issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.1, 9-12-2016) 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. title 3. 
Sec. 4-2. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter, except where otherwise provided, are applicable to all establishments, which are licensed to sell or serve alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits, either by package or pouring. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.2, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-3. - Definitions. 
The definitions in O.C.G.A. title 3 apply to this chapter. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Growler means a glass bottle, not to exceed 64 ounces, that is filled by a licensee or employee of a package outlet with beer from a keg. 
Hotel or motel means every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed, and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, and whether conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel or motel operation: 
(1)  Which maintains 40 or more rooms used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests; 
(2)  Which maintains an adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment to serve food as required therein; 
(3)  Which operates one or more public dining rooms (excluding banquet rooms) with a combined seating capacity of at least 50, where meals are regularly served to guests; provided that, consistent with the definition of the term "lounge," in no event shall the seating capacity of the lounge exceed that of the public dining room; 
(4)  Which employs sufficient personnel to serve food required herein; and 
(5)  Which derives at least 45 percent of its gross income from the sale of such meals prepared, served and consumed on the premises. The city shall review the gross income figures from each establishment, which shall provide such information at the end of the third quarter of each calendar year, and at any other time requested to do so by the city, and determine if the annual sales meet the required ratio and make the appropriate recommendations to the mayor and city council. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge; restaurants on the premises and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of the term "hotel." 
(6)  All restaurants must include a kitchen built to commercial kitchen standards, which include, at a minimum: 
a.  A three-compartment sink with drainboards is required for all restaurants. The size of the sink compartments is determined by the type of operation. One must be able to immerse the largest piece of equipment or utensils to be washed in each compartment. Sink compartments in most establishments may not be smaller than 15 inches by 18 inches. 
b.  A hand sink is required in all food preparation and toilet rooms. 
c.  If the operation requires washing of vegetables and meats, or, thawing food under water, a food preparation sink is required. The sink must have an indirect sewer connection. 
d.  A mop sink or wash area is required for all restaurants. 
e.  Adequate refrigeration must be provided. 
f.  Adequate and approved work surfaces must be provided. 
g.  All rooms shall have sufficient mechanical ventilation to remove excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, obnoxious odors, smoke and fumes. Hoods and ventilation equipment must be approved by the building official, the fire department and the health department. 
h.  A commercial stove, oven, grill and/or range. 
Licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink on the premises means any person duly licensed to sell by the drink and for consumption only on the premises. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with or a part of, and adjacent to, a restaurant, or located in a hotel, provided, that in no event shall the seating capacity of the lounge exceed that of its connected restaurant. 
Package outlet means a store for the retail sale of either package wine or package malt beverages, or both, depending upon the license held, with consumption on the premises not being permitted. 
Package wine outlet means a store exclusively for the retail sale of package wine and no other alcoholic beverages. Said store shall be allowed to sell specialty items, including food (for example, breads and cheeses). For the purpose of fees, said store shall pay the same licensing requirements as retail wine package stores and for all other requirements of the ordinance from which this article is derived unless other specified. However, food sales can be no more than 30 percent of its total gross revenue sales. Additionally, a package wine outlet shall be allowed to repackage or bottle wine for sale, and shall be allowed to serve samples in eight-ounce containers to patrons. Additionally, said establishment shall submit a report on its sales and samples served on the forms prescribed by the city. 
Police department means the City of Emerson Police Department. 
Pour means to sell alcoholic beverages for beverage purposes, to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, and to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink, or malt beverage and wine, or both. 
Pour or sell by the drink means to sell beverages for purposes of consumption on the premises. 
Pouring license means the authorization by the mayor and city council to engage in the sale for consumption on the premises of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits. 
Pouring outlet means any place where distilled spirits, wine and/or malt beverages (unless specifically modified) are poured or proposed to be poured. In the case of liquor and wine, the term "pouring outlet" means only a restaurant, hotel, motel, private club or lounge. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether a room, shop or building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. The term "premises" also includes any area or patio immediately adjacent to the main licensed facility and located on property owned or leased by such licensee. The area or patio need not be covered, but must be completely enclosed, except for entrances and exits, by a wall, fence, shrubbery or other decorative material no less than 30 inches in height. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations: 
(1)  Which maintains an adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment to serve food as required in this article; 
(2)  Which provides a regular seating capacity for at least 50 persons; provided, that consistent with the definition of the term "lounge," in no event shall the seating capacity of the lounge exceed that of its connected restaurant; 
(3)  Which employs sufficient personnel to serve food as required herein; 
(4)  Which serves at least one meal per day at least five days per week (with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating), and said meal must be served from 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. or 7:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. every day the establishment is open, and hours of operation must be posted on the front door of the premises; 
(5)  Which derives at least 45 percent of its gross income from the sale of such meals prepared, served and consumed on the premises. Cover charges cannot be included in determination of gross income from food sales. The city shall review the gross income figures from each establishment which shall provide such information at the end of the third quarter of each calendar year, and at any other time requested to do so by the city, and determine if the annual sales meet the required ratio and make appropriate recommendations to the mayor and city council; 
(6)  All restaurants must include a kitchen built to commercial kitchen standards which include, at a minimum: 
a.  A three-compartment sink with drainboards is required for all restaurants. The size of the sink compartments is determined by the type of operation. One must be able to immerse the largest piece of equipment or utensils to be washed in each compartment. Sink compartments in most establishments may not be smaller than 15 inches by 18 inches. 
b.  A hand sink is required in all food preparation and toilet rooms. 
c.  If the operation requires washing of vegetables and meats, or, thawing food under water, a food preparation sink is required. The sink must have an indirect sewer connection. 
d.  A mop sink or wash area is required for all restaurants. 
e.  Adequate refrigeration must be provided. 
f.  Adequate and approved work surfaces must be provided. 
g.  All rooms shall have sufficient mechanical ventilation to remove excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, obnoxious odors, smoke and fumes. Hoods and ventilation equipment must be approved by the building official, the fire department and the health department. 
h.  A commercial stove, oven, grill and/or range. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.3, 9-12-2016) 
State Law reference— Definitions generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 4-4. - Fees. 
All fees referenced or required in this chapter shall be as established by the city. 
Secs. 4-5—4-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-27. - Compliance. 
No person shall engage in the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises or malt beverage and wine by the drink for consumption on the premises or package in the city without first complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.10, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-28. - Storage of alcoholic beverages. 
No licensee shall keep any alcoholic beverages stored in any bonded or other type of warehouse in the city, nor shall he enter into any type of arrangement whereby alcoholic beverages ordered by him are stored for him by any licensed wholesaler. A licensee shall keep no inventory or stock of alcoholic beverages at any place except his licensed place of business, and within his licensed place of business, in his storage space for alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.11, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-29. - Gambling. 
Any violation of O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 12, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq.) in any place of business licensed under this chapter, or in any room adjoining same, owned, leased, or controlled by a licensee, shall be cause for suspension or revocation of a license. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.12, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-30. - Distilled spirits purchases to be from licensed wholesalers. 
No pouring licensee shall buy or arrange to buy nor in any way may affect the transfer of any distilled spirits except from a licensed wholesaler. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.14, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-31. - Place of sale or delivery. 
(a)  No licensee shall sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any person except in such licensee's place of business. A licensee shall be permitted to load purchased goods in a customer's vehicle when the sale physically takes place and moneys have been exchanged inside the place of business. 
(b)  No drive-in windows or curb service shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.15, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-32. - Licensees to keep copy of chapter on premises; employees to be familiar with terms; responsibility of licensee for violations. 
Each licensee shall keep a copy of this chapter at the establishment licensed under this chapter and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof, and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling, pouring or serving alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be responsible for any acts of agents or employees, which are in violation of this chapter or of the laws of the state or the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.16, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-33. - Inspections. 
(a)  The business premises of all licensed facilities shall be open to inspection at any and all times by the law enforcement officers, officers or officials authorized by the city manager to conduct such inspections. 
(b)  The city shall conduct periodic inspections of business regulated by this chapter and document any violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such business or other regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business, or for the violation of any state or federal law or city ordinance, other than infrequent minor traffic violations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.17, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-34. - Container limitations. 
No licensee may purchase distilled spirits in containers smaller than 50 milliliters. The sale of distilled spirits by any pouring licensee in unbroken packages or in any quantity for other than consumption on the premises is expressly prohibited. 
(1)  All licensed retailers shall sell or offer to sell in the original unbroken package only. 
(2)  Any package wine outlet dealer may repackage wine for sale, if said wine is labeled as repackaged wine. 
(3)  The sale of growlers in compliance with this chapter is authorized for package outlets authorized to sell alcoholic beverages, excluding distilled spirits, by the package. Furthermore, the filling of growlers by means of tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. The term "growler" shall mean a glass bottle not to exceed 64 ounces that is filled by a licensee or employee of a package outlet with beer from a keg. Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. Every customer who purchases a growler shall, at the time of the purchase, be provided written documentation by the licensee regarding the open containers laws of the state and city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.18, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-35. - Sign relative to purchase by or sales to under-aged persons. 
The licensee of an establishment licensed under this chapter shall post in the most conspicuous place in his establishment a sign, printed in letters at least four inches high, containing the following language for each license issued: 
"SALE OF MALT BEVERAGES, WINE OR DISTILLED SPIRITS TO MINORS STRICTLY PROHIBITED." 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.20, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-36. - Smoking. 
Any violation of the Georgia Smoke-Free Air Act of 2005 (O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1 et seq.) shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of any license issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.22, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-37. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Police may conduct periodic enforcement checks of all licensed establishments. Such check may include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Surveillance by plainclothes and/or uniformed officers to confirm compliance with state law and city ordinance. 
(2)  Purchase of alcoholic beverages by a young adult (21 years of age or older) to determine if identification is being checked to confirm legal age. 
(3)  Attempted purchase of alcoholic beverages by a minor (20 years of age or younger) to ensure compliance with state laws and city ordinances. 
(b)  Based on the results of the checks, the chief of police may conclude that employees of the licensee are not following proper alcoholic beverage sales procedures to ensure compliance with the law and/or do not possess adequate knowledge of the law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.23, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-38. - Prohibited acts. 
No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct; breach of the peace, lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct, or practices, or noise which is disturbing to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.24, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-39. - Consumption on premises. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to open, drink, or otherwise consume any alcoholic beverage upon any premises licensed under this chapter, other than a pouring outlet, wherein such beverages are sold under a license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.25, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-40. - Consumption in other public places. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit consumption of any intoxicating beverages in any public place in the city other than within the definite, closed-in or partitioned location, whether room or building, wherein pouring takes place, except for permitted caterers, sidewalk cafes, or right-of-way cafes, or city-sanctioned events. 
(b)  No bottle or other containers of alcoholic beverages shall be opened or consumed by any person on the premises upon which the place of business is conducted and licensed under this chapter, whether the bottle or container so opened or consumed was bought or obtained at the place of business or elsewhere, unless the premises is licensed under this chapter for consumption on the premises, except in the case of those places of business which are licensed for a wine specialty shop. These businesses may also allow sampling of wines, so long as there is no charge for admittance for the wine sample and the serving size does not exceed 1½ ounces. 
(c)  An establishment licensed under this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages shall not allow any person to leave such licensed premises with any alcoholic beverage in an open cup, bottle, can or other open container. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to city-sanctioned events. A city-sanctioned event is an event which is approved by a vote of the mayor and city council, or an event for which permit is granted to any board of the city, or downtown development authority. 
(e)  Establishments licensed to sell growlers may offer samples under the following guidelines: 
(1)  Growler malt beverage sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a growler malt beverage offered for sale within the premises. 
(2)  Growler malt beverage tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(3)  Growler malt beverage sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one time per day per customer. Samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. 
(4)  Only the licensee or an employee shall open, handle, and serve growler malt beverages, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. 
(5)  No open growler containers shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.26, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-41. - Order required; disorderly conduct prohibited. 
(a)  Owners, managers, and employees of a licensed business shall be responsible for keeping an orderly place and shall not permit any employee, patron, or other person to cause a disturbance or engage in loud, boisterous, lewd, or obscene conduct or practice within the establishment. 
(b)  The owner and manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment shall be responsible for monitoring parking lots and other outside areas around the establishment and prohibiting patrons and other persons associated with the establishment from standing, sitting, mingling, or assembling outside the licensed premises in a manner which causes or contributes to disturbances and/or illegal acts. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city, while intoxicated by alcohol or other drugs on the sidewalks, parks, squares, streets, public buildings and other public places, to be disorderly or to endanger his life or safety or that of any other person. 
(d)  Any peace officer who takes into custody an intoxicated person for violation of this section may, in lieu of placing criminal charges against such person, take or send such person to his home, or to a treatment or protective custody facility. Any peace officer so acting shall be deemed to have performed his official duty. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.27, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-42. - Occupancy monitoring; restrooms; cleanliness and Code compliance. 
(a)  Any establishment licensed by the city to dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall establish a procedure for monitoring the number of people in the establishment, and shall be in continuous compliance with the occupancy limit as shown on the certificate of occupancy for the premises. 
(b)  Any establishment licensed by the city to dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall at all times while open to the public keep restrooms open and operating in sufficient numbers to accommodate the needs of its customers. Such establishment shall be in continuous compliance with city building and plumbing code requirements regarding public restrooms. 
(c)  All premises, including the sidewalks and any adjacent public ways, shall be kept clean and free of litter, trash, rubbish and debris, and such premises shall be and remain in full compliance with all requirements of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.28, 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 4-43—4-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXES 

Sec. 4-73. - Malt beverage excise tax. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city, an excise tax in the amount of 0.4166 cents ($0.004166) per ounce of malt beverages sold by such wholesale dealer within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Malt beverages sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, and commonly known as tap or draft beer, shall not be subject to the excise tax provided in subsection (a) of this section; but in lieu thereof, there is hereby imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling such malt beverages within the corporate limits of the city an excise tax of $6.00 for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of 15½ gallons sold by such wholesale dealer within the city, and a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
(c)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages at retail or wholesale, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  Failure to make a timely remittance of the taxes imposed in this section shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to 25 percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such remittance was due, and a further penalty of one percent of the total amount due for each successive 30-day period, or any portion thereof, during which such remittance is not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report required by the state law shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount of the remittance, which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(e)  Failure to make a timely report or remittance, or the filing of a false or fraudulent report, shall also constitute grounds for the revocation of the business license issued by the city to the wholesale dealer. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.30, 9-12-2016) 
State Law reference— Municipal excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-60 et seq. 
Sec. 4-74. - Wine excise tax. 
(a)  In addition to the annual retail wine license fee required, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter on all wine sold, displayed, or stored in the city; such tax shall be prorated on miniatures, half-pints, fifths, half-gallons, and other quantities, so that each bottle shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. 
(b)  The tax shall be paid to the city by each wholesale distributor on all wine sold to retailers in the city as follows: each wholesale distributor selling, shipping or in any way delivering wine to any such retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery, and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer, on or before the tenth day of the month following. 
(c)  Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the city a summary of all purchase invoices for wine sold to each retailer in the city on or before the tenth of each month following such purchases. The invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to audit, and to require production of records from, each wholesaler supplying retailers in the city and each retailer so supplied. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.31, 9-12-2016) 
State Law reference— Local wine excise tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 et seq. 
Sec. 4-75. - Distilled spirits excise tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter which shall be paid to the city on all distilled spirits sold in the city. Such tax shall be paid to the city by the wholesaler on all distilled spirits sold to pouring outlets in the city, as follows: 
(1)  Each wholesaler selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits to any pouring outlet, shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery to each pouring outlet, and pay same to the city on or before the tenth day of the month following. 
(2)  The per-liter rate shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler to sell, ship or deliver in any manner any distilled spirits to a pouring outlet without collecting the tax. It shall be unlawful for any pouring licensee under this chapter to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any distilled spirits on which such tax has not been paid. 
(b)  In addition, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of three percent of the charge to the public on sales of distilled spirits by the drink made by pouring outlets. This tax shall not apply to the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented beverage. Such tax shall be paid to the governing authority by the pouring licensee, on all distilled spirits sold to customers by the drink in the city, on or before the tenth day of the month following such sales. It shall be unlawful for any pouring licensee to fail to pay such excise tax. Pouring licensees collecting the tax authorized in this subsection shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deductions shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 8. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.32, 9-12-2016) 
State Law reference— Local taxes on sales of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-80, 3-4-130 et seq. 
Secs. 4-76—4-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSING REQUIREMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local licensing of sale of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-40, 3-4-110; local licensing of sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; local licensing of sale of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-60. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-94. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell, store or offer to sell at wholesale or retail, or to pour or offer to pour any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within the corporate limits of the city without having the appropriate license for such sale, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license. 
(b)  A separate license shall be required for each malt beverages package outlet, wine package outlet, and pouring outlet; and separate application shall be made for each outlet; provided, however, that the holder of a combination malt beverages and wine package license may sell both malt beverages and wine at the same outlet. 
(c)  A pouring licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink on the premises shall also be allowed to sell, pour and serve malt beverages or wine, provided he shall secure and have a license therefor. 
(d)  The business of manufacturing, distributing, selling, handling and otherwise dealing in or possessing alcoholic beverages is declared to be a privilege and not a right; and such privilege shall not be exercised in the city except as licensed under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.50, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-95. - Classification and fees. 
Licenses under this chapter shall be classified as follows. 
(1)  Retail malt beverages package. A retail package license shall permit only the sale of malt beverages in packages at retail, and not for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  Retail wine package. A retail wine package license shall permit only the sale of wine in packages at retail, and not for consumption on the premises. 
(3)  Retail malt beverages and wine package. A retail license shall permit only the sale of wine in packages and malt beverages in packages at retail, and not for consumption on the premises. 
(4)  Pouring license. A pouring license shall permit the sale of wine or malt beverages, by the drink for consumption on the premises of a pouring outlet. 
(5)  Wholesale wine. A wholesale wine license shall permit only the sale of wine at wholesale. 
(6)  Wholesale malt beverage. A wholesale malt beverage license shall permit only the sale of malt beverages at wholesale. 
(7)  Distilled spirits pouring license. A distilled spirits pouring license shall permit the sale of distilled spirits, by the drink, for consumption on the premises of a pouring outlet. 
(8)  Refund. There shall be no refund of license fees to licensees who close their licensed businesses during a calendar year. 
(9)  Term. Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon, and no such licenses may be renewed without the licensee filing a renewal application with the city as provided in this chapter. 
(10)  Proration. There shall be no proration of fees for a license. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.51, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-96. - Automatic revocation of license. 
A license shall be automatically revoked by operation of law if: 
(1)  The licensee's state alcoholic beverage license is revoked. 
(2)  Operation of the licensed activity is commenced and then voluntarily suspended for a period of 30 days or more. 
(3)  The licensed business fails to properly account for and pay any excise tax levied under this chapter. 
(4)  The licensed business has not operated or been open to the public for six consecutive months. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.52, 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 4-97—4-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE 

Sec. 4-121. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a license shall be made on forms furnished by the city and all requested information thereon shall be provided, including all applications, documents and information provided or to be provided to the state department of revenue to obtain a state license. All applications shall be presented in person at Emerson City Hall. 
(b)  Each new applicant shall pay an investigation fee to the city police department at the time of the filing of the application for a license. 
(c)  An application filed and submitted before containing substantially all the information required may be rejected by the mayor and city council, and the applicant may not re-file for a period of 90 days. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to file an application for a license, or permit his name to be used in such application, where the application contains a nominal applicant for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this chapter restricting applicants to persons of good character and without criminal records, or restricting economic interests in qualifying establishments, or for elusive purposes. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit his name to be used in an application for a license where such person will not be the de facto owner of the license. It shall be unlawful for any person to file, or permit to be filed, an application for a license wherein a sham applicant is named. 
(e)  An application containing false information or false statements may result in disapproval, revocation, suspension or failure to renew the license applied for. 
(f)  If the council approves the application, the city shall issue an annual license to the applicant upon the payment of the license fee. 
(g)  A copy of this chapter shall be given to all applicants for license upon their filing applications with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.60, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-122. - Contact person. 
(a)  All license holders under this chapter must provide, in writing, an individual to be designated the contact person who is a county resident for all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter as follows: 
(1)  If the license holder is a county resident, then said license holder shall be the contact person; 
(2)  If the license holder is not a county resident, the license holder must designate one employee officer, property owner or lessor of the location, or an attorney who is a county resident as the contact person; 
(3)  The license holder must, in writing, designate the contact person on the forms provided by the city upon initial application, renewals and/or changes in the contact person; 
(4)  A contact person is subject to all provisions of this chapter; 
(5)  If the contact person ceases to meet the requirements of a contact person, then the license holder must, within three business days, notify the city, and a new contact person must be employed, named and appointed by the license holder within ten business days from the previous contact person's termination as such; 
(6)  All service of notices and/or violations required by this chapter may be made to the contact person in lieu of the license holder for the purposes of this chapter. The license holder shall be responsible for any service of any notice to the contact person and for any and all actions; 
(7)  If at any time an establishment licensed under this chapter does not have a contact person except as provided for in this section, then said establishment cannot sell alcoholic beverages, and must immediately cease the sale of all alcoholic beverages and post a notice on the premises on all doors open to the public, until a new contact person has been designated; 
(8)  If a licensee operates an establishment without a contact person, except as provided for in subsection (2) of this section, then said licensee is subject to the suspension and revocation of his license as provided for in this chapter for all violations of this chapter; 
(9)  A contact person under this chapter must meet all requirements and qualifications for which he serves and must meet the additional qualifications provided, which shall be required during the entire period that the licensee shall hold the license. 
(b)  The contact person must be a resident of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.61, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-123. - Training requirements. 
At the time of filing an application to sell distilled spirits and/or malt beverages and/or wine within the city, the application, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, shall include a detailed summary and plan of the training of all employees of the establishment or other individuals who sell or distribute alcoholic beverages. Said plan shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Description of the training program and/or trainer, including qualifications. 
(2)  How often training is required. 
(3)  Requirements to pass the training program. 
(4)  Penalty for selling alcohol to a minor by the employer to employee. 
(5)  Inspection policy. 
(6)  Procedures required to check identification and to make sales. 
(7)  A copy of the training manual, if available. 
(8)  Any other matters as required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.62, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-124. - Investigation fee for multiple licenses. 
When an applicant is making applications for more than one on-premises consumption (pouring) license or off-premises consumption (package) license at the same time, said applicant is only required to pay one investigation fee as required herein, whichever investigation fee is highest for the licenses requested. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.63, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-125. - Initial inspections. 
An inspection of the business premises by the police department shall be required prior to the operation of any licensed activity. The chief of police or his designee will inspect said premises and prepare a report to be submitted to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.64, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-126. - Limitations on issuance. 
(a)  No person holding a package license for a particular location shall be granted a pouring license for the same location, or vice-versa. 
(b)  The spouse of a license holder shall not be eligible to hold a license under this chapter; provided, however, that where a license holder applied on behalf of a corporation in which neither the license holder nor the spouse of the license holder either jointly or severally holds a majority interest, both the license holder and the spouse may apply for and hold separate licenses as representatives of the corporation, for separate locations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.65, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-127. - Issuance procedures and general standards. 
The mayor and city council, in making its determination on an application, shall be guided by the following factors as to whether or not to issue or deny a license under this chapter: 
(1)  No license shall be granted to any person, unless such person is at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for a license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(3)  No employee or official of the city shall be eligible to receive a license. 
(4)  The city may require all applicants to provide financial statements and other evidence of financial responsibility in conjunction with the application. 
(5)  All applicants for a license shall meet all requirements or qualifications of the appropriate licensee as described in this chapter. 
(6)  No license shall be granted to an applicant who does not meet all requirements or qualifications of the appropriate licensee as described in this chapter. 
(7)  No license shall be granted to any applicant who is not the owner of at least 51 percent of the business for which the application for license is being made. 
(8)  No license shall be issued to corporations, limited liability partnerships or limited liability companies. 
(9)  No license shall be issued to partnerships, but a license may be issued to an individual partner who owns a 51 percent interest in the business for which the application is being made, if all other partners or persons owning an interest therein comply with and meet all the qualifications (other than owning 51 percent) in this chapter for applicants. 
(10)  No license shall be issued for any location which is not in compliance with the city zoning or building ordinances. 
(11)  Approval of an application shall expire after 90 days from the date of such approval, unless the applicant has procured and paid the fee for the approved license. The mayor and city council may extend the approval up to 90 days for cause, provided the request therefor is made within the original 90 days. 
(12)  No applicant may submit, and the mayor and city council shall not act upon, an application which is substantially the same as an application submitted within the previous six months, unless the mayor and city council exercises its discretion to do so. 
(13)  The mayor and city council may defer action upon any application, the subject matter of which is substantially the same as the subject matter of litigation then pending in state or federal courts, until such time as the litigation is resolved. 
(14)  Whenever the mayor and city council shall deny an application for a license, the applicant shall have 15 days following notification of denial to request a hearing before the mayor and city council. The applicant shall be entitled at such hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses present at the hearing. 
(15)  The applicant must be present at the meeting of the mayor and city council at which his application is considered. If the applicant is not present, the mayor and city council cannot consider the application and may table it until the next meeting or deny it, which requires the applicant to resubmit and pay any required fees again (fees are not refunded if the application is denied). 
(16)  The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location, that is, whether the same is predominately residential, industrial or business. 
(17)  The proximity of churches, hospitals, schools, college campuses, public libraries, public parks and playgrounds, private residences and alcoholic treatment centers owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(18)  Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons. 
(19)  Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion, and resulting hazards therefrom. 
(20)  The criminal record of the applicant and the outlet manager and general good character and reputation and his financial responsibility; provided that nonpayment of federal, state, county or city taxes shall be prima facie evidence of lack of financial responsibility. 
(21)  A report from the city manager, chief of police, the building inspector, the fire marshal or city engineer. 
(22)  The information required in the application or statement, and whether all requirements as to notice, advertisements, fire codes, building, zoning, parking, lighting and legal matters have been met. 
(23)  Evidence as presented to the council for or against the application. 
(24)  Whether or not the granting of the application is in the interest of the city. 
(25)  Whether any license for sale or beer or wine or alcohol previously issued for the location has been revoked for cause by the city. 
(26)  Whether the applicant holds or possesses any other license for the sale of alcohol issued by the city. 
(27)  The history or reputation of the building or establishment (proposed for an outlet) for prostitution or other sex offenses, fighting, shooting, stabbing or other violence, gambling, illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs, and other violations of the law. 
(28)  Compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the provisions of the Code. 
(29)  If a licensee has failed to satisfy the criteria for obtaining a license to sell. 
(30)  If a licensee, or such licensee's employee or agent, has violated any federal, state, or local laws of ordinances relating to the use and sale of drugs and alcoholic beverages, and/or violent crimes. 
(31)  When the continued operation of the licensed business is determined to be detrimental to the health safety, or welfare of the public. 
(32)  The failure of the licensee or his employees to report immediately to the city a known violation of law or municipal ordinances, breach of peace, disturbance or altercation occurring in or in the immediate proximity to the licensee's premises. 
(33)  Failure by the licensee to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the licensed premises, including, but not limited to, adjacent parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of the licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
(34)  In breach of the peace, disorderly conduct or altercations and incidents involving breach of the peace, disorderly conduct, or altercations, the following additional factors shall be considered: 
a.  The facts and circumstances of the incident. 
b.  The parties involved. 
c.  The criminal history of the parties, if any. 
d.  Damage to persons and property. 
e.  Intoxication levels of individuals involved. 
f.  Conduct of employees and the licensee in regards to said incident and involvement. 
g.  Mitigating circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.66, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-128. - Licensee qualifications. 
A licensee under this chapter must be and continue to be a person of a good moral character, be a resident of the United States for a period of at least one year, and must meet the following additional qualifications, which shall be required during the entire period that the licensee shall hold the license. 
(1)  The applicant shall not have been convicted, within five years of the date of his application, of a felony or any violation of the laws of this state or any other state relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  The applicant shall not have had revoked, for cause, such as a violation of regulations or improper operation, within three years next preceding his application, any license issued to him by any state, county, or municipality to sell alcoholic beverages. This subsection shall not apply to any licenses heretofore revoked by the city. 
(3)  The applicant must not have any past due city taxes, bills, fees, assessments or any other charges. 
(4)  All applicants must be at least 21 years of age. 
(5)  The applicant must be able to read and write the English language. 
(6)  The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications under subsections (1) through (5) of this section and shall place it on file with the city before any license is issued. Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for revocation of the license and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. 
(7)  The applicant may not employ any person who does not meet the employee qualifications as outlined in this chapter. 
(8)  A violation of any of the above qualifications and restrictions shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license issued. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.67, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-129. - Pouring license limited to certain establishments. 
No application for a pouring license shall be granted to an applicant whose premises for a pouring outlet is anything other than a restaurant, hotel, motel, private club, or lounge, as defined in this chapter. It is the intention of this chapter that wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises be sold only at bona fide restaurants, hotels, motels, and private clubs under the restrictions herein set out, and not at walk-in bars or sham establishments; provided, however, any property within a city-approved CID which includes both a sand volleyball venue of six or more courts and a multi-purpose indoor sports facility of not less than 125,000 square feet shall be permitted a pouring license for wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises within the confines of the indoor facility, volleyball venue, baseball complex or soccer complex, and upon compliance with divisions 1, 2 (excepting this section), 3, and 4 (excepting sections 4-191, 4-192, and 4-193) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.68, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-130. - Wholesale. 
Any wholesaler of malt beverages or wine licensed by the state or the agent of such wholesale dealer may be granted a license to distribute such beverages in the city upon application for such license to the city and presentation of evidence that he understands this chapter and the conditions under which retail licenses are issued. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.69, 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 4-131—4-158. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE TERMS, CONDITIONS, ETC. 

Sec. 4-159. - Display. 
Licenses issued under this chapter shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which same was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.80, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-160. - Terms and conditions; duties of holders. 
(a)  A license issued under this chapter shall be subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this chapter or any future ordinance. License holders shall be responsible for compliance with such terms and conditions by all of their employees and those working under their supervision and control. It shall also be the duty of the license holder and those under his supervision and control to report to the city any violation of this chapter occurring on the premises of the license holder. 
(b)  All licenses shall have printed on the front the following language: 
"This license is granted by the city council and accepted by licensee subject to all of the terms and conditions of the ordinances governing the issuance and retention of the same." 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.81, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-161. - No refund upon revocation. 
In case of revocation, the licensee shall not be entitled to a refund of any license fee paid. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.82, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-162. - Reinstatement of suspended licenses. 
(a)  Licenses suspended for a definite period shall be automatically reinstated without further hearing after the definite period has elapsed. 
(b)  Licenses suspended pending compliance with designated conditions to be corrected shall be automatically reinstated upon compliance, without further hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.83, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-163. - Surrender upon sale or closing. 
Immediately upon the sale or closing of a business licensed under this chapter, the licensee shall surrender his license to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.84, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-164. - Licensee to report and obtain approval for changes in information provided. 
A licensee shall make immediate report to, and receive approval by, the council of any change in the interests in or ownership of the pouring outlet and any change in the information as stated in the original application for license, including the list of employees. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.85, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-165. - Loss of qualifications. 
In the event of death or termination or resignation of any employee or other person holding a license, there shall be a 30-day grace period for the owner of the business engaging in the sale of alcoholic beverages to obtain a new license from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.86, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-166. - License transfer. 
Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.87, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-167. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  All licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall be renewable as a matter of course upon payment of the appropriate fee, on or before December 31 of each year, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The license fee shall be paid in full in cash or by a bank certified check. 
(c)  The city shall provide the chief of police with a list of current license holders prior to the annual renewal date. The chief of police shall report on the licensee's activity, if any, and upon activity at the location of the licensed business, if any, during the year. 
(d)  If the chief of police reports any activity which constitutes probable cause for not renewing a license, the renewal shall not be made, and the matter shall be referred to the mayor and city council for its consideration. 
(e)  The mayor and city council shall afford the licensee a public hearing, after reasonable notice, and in passing upon the application for renewal, the mayor and city council shall be guided by the same criteria and qualifications for issuance of the initial license. 
(f)  At the public hearing, the mayor and city council may grant or deny for cause the renewal of any license. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.88, 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 4-168—4-187. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PREMISES RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 4-188. - Generally. 
(a)  Each applicant applying for a license shall attach to his application detailed plans of the building and outside premises. Sufficient detail shall be provided to show compliance with this article for the type of license requested. The building shall comply with all ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue commissioner and the laws of the state. 
(b)  Each applicant applying for a pouring license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease, if the applicant is leasing the building. No percentage leases of buildings or realty for pouring outlet stores shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.100, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-189. - License pending completion; time limit. 
(a)  Where a building in which any person intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is, at the time of the application for the license, not in existence or not yet completed, a conditional license may be issued for the location, provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. No sales or consumption shall be allowed in the establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this Code. 
(b)  All licensees under this chapter must, within 90 days after the issuance of a city license, open for business. Failure to open for business shall constitute a forfeiture and cancellation of the issued license, and no refund of license fees or occupational taxes shall be made. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this section may make written request to the administrator for an extension of time not to exceed 90 days; and the administrator, at his discretion, may grant or deny the request. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.101, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-190. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No pouring license for an establishment that does not sell distilled spirits shall be granted to any person unless the front door of the premises of the proposed location is situated not less than 100 yards from any church building, not less than 100 yards from the property line of any school grounds or college campus, and not less than 100 yards from any building used as an alcohol rehabilitation center, the same to be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(b)  Each applicant for a pouring license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest type of building and/or property lines of types of property referred to in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21 and subsection (a) of this section, or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with such provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.102, 9-12-2016) 
State Law reference— Location restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-191. - Parking lots. 
The parking area of any building in which alcoholic beverages are sold at retail package or pouring shall be paved with concrete or asphalt and contain sufficient square footage and parking spaces as required by ordinance for the type of business and building in which the business is to be operated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.103, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-192. - Lighting of building. 
Each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold at retail or pouring shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all outside exposed walls of the building are readily visible at all times from the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.104, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-193. - Land use restrictions. 
No licensed establishment selling or distributing distilled spirits or malt beverages and wine shall be located within the city except in the zoning districts as designated by the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.106, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-194. - Pouring outlet hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any pouring outlet, pouring licensee or any employee thereof to sell, pour or serve alcoholic beverages or allow any person to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises at any of the following times: 
(1)  At any time on Christmas Day. 
(2)  At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or a special order of the governing authority. 
(3)  No pouring shall be permitted between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. 
(4)  No alcoholic beverages may be consumed on the premises of the pouring outlet between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(5)  In no event shall alcoholic beverages be sold, delivered or served during the prohibited hours, based upon timely sale of tickets, chips, decanters or other devices. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.107, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-195. - Package outlet hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or serve any malt beverage or wine on Christmas Day, or any day prior to 6:00 a.m. or after 12:00 midnight; furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or serve any malt beverage or wine on Sunday prior to 12:30 p.m. or after 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.108, 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 4-196—4-213. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 4-214. - Investigations of certain prospective employees. 
Any license holder, before employing any person for the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages, shall submit such prospective employee's name and identification information and shall make such prospective employee available for photographing, fingerprinting and such other investigating as may be required by the city to the police department, who shall make such investigation as to such prospective employee's qualifications, before issuing such person an employee identification card. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.120, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-215. - Employee qualifications. 
(a)  An employee under this chapter must be and continue to be a person of a good moral character, must be a resident of the United States for a period of at least one year, and must meet the following additional qualifications, which shall be required during the entire period that the employee is employed at the licensed establishment: 
(1)  The employee shall not have been convicted, within three years of the date of his application, of a felony or any violation of the laws of this state or any other state relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  The employee shall not have had revoked, for cause, such as a violation of regulations or improper operation, within three years next preceding his employment, any license issued to him by any state, county, or municipality to sell alcoholic beverages. This subsection (a)(2) shall not apply to any licenses heretofore revoked by the city. 
(3)  The employee must be able to read and write the English language. 
(4)  The employee shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications under the provisions of this section, and shall place it on file with the city. Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for revocation of the license, and shall make the employee liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. 
(b)  A violation of any of the above qualifications and restrictions shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license issued. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.121, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-216. - Employee identification cards. 
(a)  Any person, including the licensee, who works in an establishment licensed under this chapter shall apply to the police department for an employee identification card, which card shall expire one year from the date issued, and be renewable on or before that time. 
(b)  Employees, while on duty in a pouring outlet or package wine outlet shop which provides wine samples, selling, pouring, serving alcoholic beverages or providing samples shall visibly wear the employee identification card on their persons at all times. All other employees must have the employee identification card at the facility while on duty. 
(c)  The police department shall investigate employee applicants. An employee identification card shall not be granted to any person who does not meet the requirements or qualifications of an employee as described in this chapter. The police department shall report any other detrimental information about an application to the city, and may prohibit the issuance of an employee identification card where the applicant's record indicates such employment would adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare, or violate the law. 
(d)  No licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall hire any person, nor shall any person work or assist in an establishment licensed under this chapter, until such person has procured an employee identification card. 
(e)  The police department may provisionally grant identification to an applicant, pending investigation and report. Where the report, when reviewed, is unfavorable as set out in subsection (c) of this section, the police department may revoke the card and demand its return. 
(f)  The city may, after reasonable notice and hearing (unless waived), revoke an identification card and demand its surrender where the employee violates the provisions of this article, or becomes one who adversely affects the public health, safety and welfare. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose card has been revoked, and upon whom demand for surrender of a card has been made, to refuse to so surrender, or to alter, conceal, deface or destroy the card. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.122, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-217. - Employment of minors. 
No pouring licensee shall employ, require or permit persons less than 18 years of age to sell, pour, serve or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.123, 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 4-218—4-242. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 4-243. - Generally. 
(a)  Permitted. Bands or orchestras, single musical instruments and record playing machines for patron listening and patron dancing shall be permitted at pouring outlets: 
(1)  Where adequate space exists; 
(2)  Where an application has been filed and all terms of this chapter have been complied with; 
(3)  Where all fire and safety regulations are met; 
(4)  Where the appropriate license fee has been fully paid; and 
(5)  Where prior approval of the city is obtained. 
(b)  Prior approval. Prior approval may be given only after notice of dates, time, approximate number of guests expected, nature of musical sources and such other information as may be required is given in writing to the city. 
(c)  Approval by city. Where music or dancing is provided on a regular basis, the city may singly approve such regular basis, provided notice of any substantial departure from such regular basis is given to the city. In all cases wherein music or dancing is provided on other than a regular basis or entertainment for such occasion, approval shall be obtained from the city. 
(d)  Police attendance. The city may require a pouring outlet providing such music and dancing to provide such police attendance and protection, in the opinion of the chief of police, is adequate to meet the need thereof. 
(e)  Fraternization prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any employer, performer, entertainer or contract artist of any business selling alcoholic beverages on premises to dance or sit with customers in the premises, or for any employee, performer, entertainer or contract artist to accept any food or drink purchased by a patron or customer, nor shall any such employee, performer, entertainer, or contract artist be permitted to participate with any customer in any recreational activity offered on the premises. 
(f)  Prohibited entertainment. It shall be unlawful for any pouring licensees to permit any of the following activities: professional belly dancers, dancers or performance artists who remove their clothing on stage, exotic dancers or any like kind, by whatever name called, in connection with the operation of a restaurant, lounge, or private club. It is the intent of this provision to prohibit in any restaurant, lounge, or private club dancing or any other kind of performance or activity which involves unclothing, uncovering, or showing of unclothed or uncovered human buttocks, genitals, pubic areas, or areas immediately below the top of the areola of the female breast. 
(g)  Application. Application for permit should include the following: 
(1)  The name, residence and business address of the manager or person in charge. 
(2)  The address and the particular rooms for which the permit is required, the square foot area thereof to be used and the seating capacity. 
(3)  The dates upon which the entertainment is to be scheduled. 
(4)  Maximum capacity of the building. 
(5)  The times at which entertainment is to begin and end. 
(6)  Current business licenses and pouring licenses numbers. 
(7)  The type of entertainment planned and number of entertainers. 
(h)  Applications presented to the city. All applications should be presented to the city. The city shall have ten days to consider said application and investigate the application to determine its compliance with all applicable city ordinances. 
(i)  Issuance or non-issuance of license. The city shall issue a license to an applicant unless it finds one or more of the following: 
(1)  An applicant is overdue in his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to answer or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form provided. 
(3)  An applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter within three years immediately preceding the application. 
(4)  An applicant's premises have not been approved by the health department, fire department and the building department. 
(5)  An applicant has been convicted of, within the last five years: 
a.  A felony; 
b.  A misdemeanor involving: 
1.  Prostitution; 
2.  Public lewdness; 
3.  Gambling. 
(6)  If the application does not show adequate measures for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare in terms of traffic control, crowd protection and security both inside and outside the premises. 
(j)  Expiration of permit. The permit for entertainment expires on the date indicated on said permit or upon: 
(1)  The sale, transfer, or new ownership of the premises for which the permit is granted. 
(2)  The applicant in whose name the original permit is issued leaving the business. 
(k)  Revocation/suspension of a license. 
(1)  The city may, at any time, provide notice to the licensee of a suspension or revocation hearing of an entertainment permit whenever the licensee, or any manager, officer, director, agent, or employee of the licensee has caused, permitted or knowingly done any of the following: 
a.  Failed to keep the building structures or equipment of the licensed premises in compliance with the applicable health, building, fire or safety laws, regulations or ordinances in a way which relates to or affects public health or safety on the entertainment permit premises. 
b.  Failed to comply with the operating rules and regulations of entertainment permits specified in this chapter. 
c.  Whenever the city learns that the permittee made a material false statement or representation, or failed to disclose any material information to the city, in connection with any application for the entertainment permit or any permit renewal. 
d.  Whenever the permittee or any manager, officer, director, agent or employee of the permittee fails within a reasonable time to cure a condition that caused a permit suspension. 
e.  Whenever the permittee or any manager, officer, director, agent or employee of the permittee knowingly permits conduct on the permitted premises that violates any federal, state or city criminal or penal statute, law or ordinance. 
f.  Whenever operation of the entertainment permit becomes the approximate cause of a significant increase in criminal activity on the premises or in the immediate vicinity in such a way as to endanger persons or property. 
(2)  The suspension or revocation of a permit may be appealed to the mayor or council under the procedures indicated in this chapter. 
(3)  Such suspension or revocation shall remain in effect until the conditions causing the suspension are cured and reasonable measures are taken to ensure that the same will not reoccur, as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.130, 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 4-244—4-264. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CATERERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Caterers, O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4-265. - Scope of article. 
In addition to the general business license requirements of this Code, the following sections shall apply to the licensing and operation of all establishments selling alcoholic beverages for consumption off-premises in connection with an authorized catered event or function, and should any section of this article conflict with other provisions in this chapter or the general business license requirements of this Code, then this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.140, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-266. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer licensed pursuant to this chapter and any other applicable chapters of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.141, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-267. - Alcoholic beverage license required. 
(a)  Any alcoholic beverage caterer who possesses a valid license from the city or another city or county in Georgia, and possesses a valid license from the state to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink and/or by the package at a fixed location within the state, may be issued by the city an event permit authorizing such sales off-premises and in connection with an authorized catered event or function. 
(b)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may only sell that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may only sell malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(c)  An alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event permit to the city. The license may be applied for at the same time as the alcoholic beverages license. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained a permit as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.142, 9-12-2016) 
State Law reference— Local licensing of caterers, O.C.G.A. § 3-11-2. 
Sec. 4-268. - Food caterer. 
Any food caterer, as defined herein, operating within the city shall apply for an alcoholic beverage caterer's license in order to distribute or sell any distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine off the premises of the food caterer's business. This does not affect any requirements that the food caterer have a license to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises of the food caterer's business. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.143, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-269. - Event permit and application. 
(a)  Exclusive of the permit required herein, each alcoholic beverage caterer wishing to sell or distribute spirits, malt beverages, or wine at an authorized catered event or function within the city must apply for an event permit. The application for the event shall include the name of the caterer, the date, address, time and name of the event, and the quantity of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event or function. 
(b)  The original event permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function, and shall be available for inspection at the catered event or function during the duration of such event or function. 
(c)  It is unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages off-premises except as authorized by the event permit. 
(d)  The event permit will be valid for the length of the authorized event or function or as approved by the city. After expiration of the event, the alcoholic beverage caterer shall apply for a new event permit in the same manner as the original permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.144, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-270. - Duration and renewal of licenses. 
Any license issued hereunder shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year of its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.146, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 4-271. - Restrictions. 
No alcoholic beverage caterer may distribute or sell alcoholic beverages during any hours prohibited in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.147, 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 4-272—4-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 4-291. - Violations. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to a fine and/or incarceration in jail as allowed by law. Additionally, any person violating this chapter may, after a hearing as provided under the licensee's malt beverage and wine and/or distilled spirits licenses, have his licenses suspended or revoked and/or other penalties and fines imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-015, § 3.148, 9-12-2016) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animals generally, O.C.G.A. title 4; Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - County animal control ordinance adopted. 
The county animal control ordinance as now or hereafter amended shall apply in the city and such ordinance is hereby adopted by reference. No person shall violate such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, 9-10-2012) 
Chapter 8 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cemeteries generally, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - Loitering in cemeteries and disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or remain in any cemetery located in the city except during services therein, or to be engaged in disorderly conduct in or near the entrances to said cemetery. Each cemetery shall have posted therein at least one sign which states "No Loitering." 
(Ord. of 7-27-1992) 
Chapter 10 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 10-19. - False alarms. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to define false alarm, to make the activation of an alarm system or placement of a telephone call to report an emergency when there is no emergency a violation of the ordinance from which this article is derived, to establish penalties for initiating a false alarm, and related items. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm means any signal (audio or video, recorded or live) transmitted to the county, indicating a predetermined emergency condition exists, when the alarm is received by: 
(1)  The county 911 communications center or the city's telephone; 
(2)  A private alarm service company relaying the alarm to the county 911 communications center or the city's telephone; or 
(3)  An automated telephone alarm system, playing a recorded message when received at the county 911 communications center or the city's telephone. 
Additionally, the term "alarm" means any audible or visual sign or signal received by the county 911 communications center or the city's telephone. 
Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices designed and arranged to detect a fire or signal an unauthorized intrusion onto premises, or attempted robbery at protected premises, or other emergency situation, and, with respect to said signal, public safety officers are expected to respond. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system when none of the emergency situations for which the alarm system has been installed have, in fact, occurred. This includes the accidental activation of an alarm by the property owner, premises lessee, resident or tenant. 
Telephone alarm system means any alarm system which automatically transmits by telephone line a recorded electronic or mechanical signal to a telephonic instrument located at the county 911 communications center or offices of the city. A telephone alarm system is prohibited. 
(c)  Unlawful activation; failure to notify police department of malfunctioning alarm system when reporting an activated alarm. It is unlawful for anyone to activate any fire, robbery or burglar alarm for the purpose of summoning public safety officers except in the event of an actual fire, attempted burglary or robbery or other emergency. It is unlawful for anyone to notify the police department or the fire department of an activated alarm when that person knows that activation of the alarm was caused by a malfunction of the alarm system or by maintenance or repair work on the alarm system without simultaneously telling the police department about the malfunction or maintenance or repair. 
(d)  Response to false alarm; fees; corrective action. 
(1)  For each response to a false alarm, the property owner or premises lessee shall, within five business days, provide a written explanation to the city's police department describing the reasons for the false alarm. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the explanation, the police department may take the following actions: 
a.  For the first false alarm from a premises within a three-month period, leave an alarm response notice and a copy of the ordinance from which this article is derived at the premises (on or under the main or front door). The notice shall include information that continued false alarms will lead to a service charge. 
b.  For the second false alarm from a premises within a three-month period, inform the property owner or premises lessee that the alarm system should be inspected by a state-licensed contractor and corrective measures taken. The property owner or premises lessee is responsible for payment of such inspection and/or repair. 
c.  For the third false alarm from a premises within a three-month period, charge the property owner or premises lessee a fee established by the city. 
d.  For the fourth false alarm from a premises within a three-month period and for each subsequent false alarm from a premises within a three-month period, charge the property owner or premises lessee a fee established by the city. 
(3)  The police department shall be responsible for issuing citations for fees imposed. 
(4)  Exceptions. 
a.  The police department shall have the discretion to waive assessment of the fee if: 
1.  The false alarm was activated by inclement weather; or 
2.  Within ten days of the occurrence of a false alarm, the property owner or premises lessee demonstrates that the alarm system has been examined by an authorized repair service and the repair service certifies that the alarm system now works correctly. 
b.  Notwithstanding the foregoing in this subsection (4), within a three-month period, only one such explanation from the property owner or premises lessee shall be accepted as the basis for avoiding a fee assessment. 
(Ord. of 8-27-2007(1), §§ 1—3) 
Chapter 12 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE 

Sec. 12-19. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter, waste, tire disposal and burning. The objectives of this article are as follows: to provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all litter on public or private property; to prevent any reduction in the quality of life or aesthetic beauty of the city; to prevent environmental harm to the waters of the city; to preserve air quality of the city; to prevent health risks associated with used tires and scrap tires; and to provide a clean and well-kept environment for the citizens of the city. Litter is a nuisance that decreases property values and contributes to the decline of neighborhoods, and should be eliminated. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2004, § 101) 
Sec. 12-20. - Applicability; conflicts with other laws. 
(a)  Application. This article shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(b)  Conflicts. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other city ordinance. Where this article conflicts with another city ordinance, including, but not limited to, the zoning ordinance or the nuisance ordinance, the stricter or more restrictive provision shall control. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2004, § 102) 
Sec. 12-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biomedical waste means pathological waste, biological waste cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals, contaminated animal carcasses (body parts, their bedding, and other wastes from such animals), sharps, chemotherapy waste, discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials which have not been decontaminated, as further defined in rule 391-3-4-.15 of the department of natural resources, and other such waste materials, in any amount. 
Commercial purpose means for the purpose of economic gain. 
Discarded materials includes, without limitation, organic or inorganic garbage, rubbish, refuse, or trash; discarded debris, hulls, peelings, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, or slag; discarded boxes, papers, bottles, tin cans, metal containers, plastic containers, or glass containers; dead animals; discarded tobacco products, tires, appliances, tools, machinery, steel, mechanical equipment or parts; discarded building materials, construction materials, lumber or wood; discarded or abandoned motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts, vessels, and aircraft equipment; waste oil; discarded antifreeze, chemicals and fluids; sludge from a wastewater treatment facility, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; air contaminants from any source or facility; and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, or governmental operations. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
EPD means the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
Hazardous substance means any substance listed as a hazardous constituent in regulations promulgated pursuant to the federal Act by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency which are in force and effect on February 1, 1992, codified as appendix VIII to 40 CFR part 261, Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste. 
Hazardous waste means any discarded materials which have been defined as hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal Act which are in force and effect on February 1, 1996, codified as 40 CFR section 261.3 and any designated hazardous waste. 
Litter means any discarded materials which do not exceed ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or which are not otherwise defined as waste. 
Open burning means any outdoor fire from which the products of combustion are emitted directly into the open air. 
Prescribed burning means a fire set under controlled conditions to burn forest understory and used as a forest management practice to establish favorable seedbeds, remove competing underbrush, accelerate nutrient cycling, control tree pests, enhance wildlife habitat, and contribute to ecological benefits. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial or farm properties. 
Slash burning means a fire set to remove trunks, stumps, branches, residue, and other wastes left on land after the removal of timber. 
Waste means the following: 
(1)  All discarded materials exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume; or 
(2)  Any weight or volume of biomedical waste, hazardous waste, or hazardous substances; or 
(3)  Any amount of discarded material dumped for commercial purposes. 
Waters in the city means any lake, river, stream, pond, creek or other body of public or private water located partially or fully within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2004, § 201) 
Sec. 12-22. - Littering; illegal dumping. 
(a)  Littering. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, place, throw, or leave, or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving, of litter on any public or private property in the city (including one's own property) or any waters in the city, unless the property is an authorized landfill, and the person disposing of litter is authorized by applicable regulations; or unless the litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property. 
(b)  Illegal dumping of waste. Dumping, throwing, discarding, discharging, or burning waste, or more than ten pounds or 15 cubic feet of litter at one time in one location, shall constitute unlawful waste dumping, and shall subject any person convicted to fines pursuant to section 12-26, except that the listed fine shall be doubled, to a maximum of $1,200.00 per violation, per day. 
(c)  Covering waste. Any person transporting litter or waste shall enclose or cover the litter or waste to prevent spillage and infiltration of rainwater. Tarpaulins must be used to cover compactor box openings, roll-off tops, or other openings. Tarpaulins must be kept in good repair at all times. 
(d)  Littering or dumping from vehicle. Whenever litter or waste is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped, whether intentionally or unintentionally, from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance onto any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city, unless the property is an authorized landfill, and the person disposing of the litter or waste is authorized by applicable regulations, it shall constitute prima-facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. Any spillage of waste or litter shall be immediately cleaned and removed by the person spilling the waste or litter. 
(e)  Identifiable litter or waste. Whenever any litter or waste that is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property is discovered to contain any documents which display the name of a person thereon in such a way as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(f)  Clean premises. Any person owning or occupying any private property, including of a commercial, industrial or residential nature, shall be required to keep such property free of litter and waste, and to ensure all litter and waste is placed in proper litter or waste containers or receptacles. Persons owning businesses shall be required to keep the sidewalks, service alleys and parking areas of their businesses free from litter and waste. 
(g)  Multiple violators. Every person involved in illegal littering or illegal dumping of waste shall be subject to citation under this article, including persons operating vehicles, and persons actively disposing of or dumping litter or waste. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2004, § 301) 
State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; local litter control ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-48. 
Sec. 12-23. - Scrap tires. 
(a)  The most current provisions of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, rules and regulations chapter 391-3-4-.19, relating to scrap tire management, as amended from time to time, are incorporated herein by reference as if said provisions were set forth herein in their entirety. Violations of said provisions shall be prosecutable under the provisions of this article, and shall be assessed fines pursuant to the schedule in section 12-26, to a maximum fine of $1,000.00 per violation, per day. 
(b)  In addition to the preceding state regulations incorporated by reference, the city also adopts the following requirements, that shall replace and/or supplement any corresponding requirements in the EPD regulations: all scrap tires, used tires and new tires shall be required to be stored in an enclosed building or garage. Outdoor storage is prohibited, as is storage under a tarpaulin or open-sided shelter. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2004, § 302) 
Sec. 12-24. - Open burning. 
(a)  Open burning prohibited. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning in any area of the city except as listed in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. Burning in barrels and 55-gallon drums constitutes open burning, and is prohibited at all times. Open burning of trash, litter, waste, construction debris, cut wood, or lumber for disposal purposes is prohibited at all times. 
(b)  Summer exceptions. During the months of May, June, July, August and September, the following open burning activities may be conducted; whenever feasible, they should be conducted between 10:00 a.m. and one hour before sunset: 
(1)  Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting of crops. 
(2)  For recreational purposes or cooking food for immediate human consumption. 
(3)  Fires set for purposes of training firefighting personnel when authorized by the appropriate governmental entity and the guidelines set forth by the director of the EPD are strictly observed. 
(4)  Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame-making equipment. 
(5)  Setting and maintenance by contractors and tradesmen of miscellaneous small fires necessary to such activities as street-paving work installation or repair of utilities, provided that such fires are kept small in size, and no smoke emissions exceed 40 percent opacity. 
(6)  Disposal of all packaging materials previously containing explosives, in accordance with U.S. Department of Labor safety regulations. 
(c)  Winter exceptions. During the months of January, February, March, April, October, November and December, the following burning activities may be conducted: 
(1)  All activities listed under subsection (b) of this section (without time restriction). 
(2)  Reduction of leaves on the premises on which they fall by the person in control of the premises. 
(3)  Destruction of combustible demolition or construction materials on site. 
(4)  The prescribed burning of any forest land by the owner or the owner's designee. 
(5)  The slash burning of any forest land by the owner or the owner's designee. 
(6)  Disposal of tree limbs from storm damage by open burning. 
(7)  Open burning for weed abatement, disease prevention, and pest prevention. 
(8)  Open burning in other than predominantly residential areas for the purpose of land clearing or construction or right-of-way maintenance, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Prevailing winds at the time of the burning are away from the major portion of the area's population; 
b.  The location of the burning is at least 1,000 feet from any dwelling located in a predominantly residential area; 
c.  The amount of dirt on or in the material being burned is minimized; 
d.  Heavy oils, asphaltic materials, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any materials other than plant growth are not being burned; and 
e.  No more than one pile, 60 feet by 60 feet, or equivalent, is being burned within a nine-acre area at one time. 
(9)  Open burning of vegetative material for the purpose of land clearing using an air curtain destructor, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Authorization for such open burning is received from the fire department and the state forestry office, if required, having local jurisdiction over the open burning location, prior to initiation of any open burning at such location; 
b.  The location of the air curtain destructor is at least 300 feet from any occupied structure or public road. Air curtain destructors used solely for utility line clearing or road clearing may be located at a lesser distance upon approval by the state EPD; 
c.  No more than one air curtain destructor is operated within a ten-acre area at one time, or there must be at least 1,000 feet between any two air curtain destructors; 
d.  Only wood waste consisting of trees, logs, large brush and stumps which are relatively free of soil are burned in the air curtain destructor; 
e.  Tires or other rubber products, plastics, heavy oils or asphaltic-based or impregnated materials are not used to start or maintain the operation of the air curtain destructor; 
f.  The air curtain destructor is constructed, installed and operated in a manner consistent with good air pollution control practices for minimizing emissions of fly ash and smoke; and 
g.  The cleaning out of the air curtain destructor pit is performed in a manner to prevent fugitive dust. 
(d)  Smoke. Except for a reasonable period to get a fire started, no smoke, the opacity of which is equal to or greater than 40 percent, shall be emitted from any source of open burning listed in subsection (b) or (c) of this section. 
(e)  Burning prohibited during air pollution declaration. During an air pollution episode declared by the state or county government, no open burning of any kind shall be permitted, unless open burning is required in the performance of an official duty of any public office, or a fire is necessary to thwart or prevent a hazard which cannot be properly managed by any other means, or is necessary for the protection of public health. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2004, § 303) 
Sec. 12-25. - Violations and inspections. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section, or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Inspections. Any authorized official, including code enforcement officers and law enforcement personnel, shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may be reasonably deemed necessary to carry out the duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose, to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of open burning. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized official who requests entry for the purpose of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(c)  Citations. Any authorized official, including code enforcement officers and law enforcement personnel, are authorized to issue citations and otherwise enforce this article. Citations shall be heard in the municipal or city court. Citations for violation of this article shall be commenced by the completion, signing, and service of a citation, which shall cite the provision of this article that has been violated. The original of the citation shall be personally served upon the violator, his authorized representative or, if a corporation or other legal entity, an officer or representative of the entity. Upon conviction, fines shall be assessed at the amounts specified in section 12-26. 
(d)  Stop-work order. In the event ongoing construction is taking place under a building permit or land disturbance permit, violation of this article shall authorize issuance of a stop-work order in conjunction with the citation and fine, preventing further work or development until said violation is corrected or overturned. 
(e)  Multiple violations. Each day a violation exists shall be a new violation, subjecting the offender to a new citation. Each separate action or occurrence of any specific provision of this article shall be a separate violation, subjecting the offender to a separate citation. Any offender may be cited with a maximum of ten citations per day. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2004, § 401) 
Sec. 12-26. - Fines. 
(a)  Fines. Fines for violations of this article shall be assessed according to the following schedule. As a deterrent to violation, second and subsequent violations by the same offender of any provision of this article, whether violations of the same or different provisions of this article as the initial violation, shall increase the fine owing. However, repeated citations for the same violation on a second day and subsequent days shall not count as a subsequent violation, but shall rather be assessed at the same rate as the initial violation. Multiple violations on the same day shall also be assessed at the same level: 
(1)  First violation. For the first violation of any provision of this article by any violator (whether an individual or corporation), the fine shall be a minimum of $200.00. 
(2)  Second violation. For the second violation of any provision of this article (whether the same or different as the first violation) by the same violator (whether an individual or corporation), the fine shall be a minimum of $400.00. 
(3)  Third and subsequent violations. For the third and subsequent violation of any provision of this article (whether the same or different as the prior two violations) by the same violator (whether an individual or corporation), the fine shall be a minimum of $600.00. 
(4)  Aggravating circumstances. If, in the judgment of the officer issuing the citation, the violation is severe, or other aggravating circumstances exist, such as multiple violations of numerous provisions of this article on the same property, the citation may indicate aggravating circumstances exist, and state those circumstances. The fine shall be doubled in such cases (to a maximum of $1,200.00 for violations of section 12-22, and to a maximum of $1,000.00 for other violations), if the determination of aggravating circumstances is upheld. The court may also impose this determination, after hearing the evidence, and increase the fine accordingly. 
(b)  Maximum fines. The maximum permissible fine for violations shall be $1,000.00, except for violations of section 12-22. The maximum permissible fine for violation of section 12-22 shall be $1,200.00 per offense. Furthermore, violations of section 12-22(b) shall be fined at double the above-listed amount, to a maximum of $1,200.00 (i.e., the first violation is $400.00, the second violation is $800.00, and the third and subsequent violations are $1,200.00). 
(Ord. of 3-8-2004, § 402) 
Sec. 12-27. - Other relief. 
(a)  Superior court. In addition to or in lieu of any other remedy, any authorized official, appropriate authority, or any person who is or would be damaged by such violation, may seek injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate relief in superior court to enjoin or prevent a violation of any provision of this article. Such action may also seek civil fines at the rates specified in section 12-26 for violation of this article, and may additionally seek the costs of restitution, costs of clean up, attorney's fees and costs, and any other costs associated with the action to enjoin or prevent any violation of any provision of this article. 
(b)  Restitution. In addition to the fine set out in section 12-26, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter, or other costs incurred by the city to mitigate the actions of the violator. Such amount shall be assessed by the municipal or city court in addition to any required fine. 
(c)  Community service. In the sound discretion of the court, a person convicted of violating section 12-22 may be required to clean up litter as community service. Such person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public right-of-way (for a distance not to exceed one mile) any litter located thereon. In the alternative, such person may be directed to pick up and remove any litter located on the public or private property (with the owner's permission) upon which he has unlawfully dumped litter. In either case, removal of any litter shall include all litter dumped thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of the sentence, and not just the litter dumped by the violator. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2004, § 403) 
Chapter 14 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. title 25. 

Sec. 14-1. - Fire hydrant testing, maintenance and identification. 
(a)  Title. This chapter shall be known as the "City of Emerson Fire Hydrant Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a standard system for hydrant color identification and establish a practice of maintenance for fire hydrants within the service area of the county fire department, which includes the incorporated areas of the city. These provisions shall incorporate by reference the American Water Works Association (AWWA) manual M17, "Installation, Field Testing, and Maintenance of Fire Hydrants;" the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 291 latest edition, defining fire flow testing and marking hydrants; and the Insurance Service Organization (ISO) standards for fire hydrant testing, collectively referred to herein as the "standards." 
(c)  Testing required. All fire hydrants within the service area of the county fire department and owned by the water system of the city shall be flowed and tested in accordance with the standards. The testing shall determine the gallons per minute (GPM) fire flow for that hydrant. Testing shall be coordinated with the water system. Proper public notice shall be issued in advance of any testing to ensure the public is aware of potential water discoloration. 
(d)  Color coding. After testing, each hydrant shall then be color coded in accordance with NFPA 291, as follows: 
(1)  Standard hydrants. 

 
Disclaimer: Color coding is only descriptive of what GPM flow was at the time of the last documented test. It in no way guarantees that the hydrant will flow at that GPM rate at the time of an incident and does not take into account any high demands, broken mains, closed valves or other events that could affect GPM flow. Color coding is only used as a general reference to what the potential flow may be at any given time, and citizens and staff should be aware and prepared for GPM flow changes. 
(2)  Special hydrants. 

 
(e)  Maintenance procedures. An annual maintenance schedule and visual check program shall be established by the county fire department. Personnel and citizen safety shall be a high priority. All fire hydrants are to be opened and closed very slowly to prevent water hammer, line damage and equipment failure. 
(f)  Recording data. All test data shall be maintained in the county fire department records as well as the records of the city's water system. A record of malfunctions, corrections and system changes shall be recorded. Any malfunction of the system, while performing work on the system, is to be immediately reported to the battalion chief, who will in turn notify appropriate water system officials. 
(Ord. No. 2014-018, §§ 1-1, 1-2, 9-22-2014) 
Chapter 16 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Freeport exemption. 
One hundred percent of the value of property in all three classes of inventory described in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2 shall be exempted from ad valorem taxation, including all such taxes levied for educational purposes and for state purposes. 
(Res. No. 2016-003, 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-2. - Insurer license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1993 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $25.00. For each separate business location in excess of one which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $25.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1993, § 1) 
State Law reference— Municipal license fees on insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
Secs. 16-3—16-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS OR OCCUPATION TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local business or occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 16-23. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the city. 
For the year 1995, and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation and shall receive a business license; which business license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in Emerson, Georgia, such business license shall be shown to the city manager, city clerk or his respective deputies and/or representatives or to any police officer of said city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1, 11-23-2009) 
State Law reference— Occupation tax authorized, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7. 
Sec. 16-24. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax, which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business means any person who, within the city, engages in, causes to be engaged in, and/or represents himself to be engaged in any occupation, practice of a profession, sale of any goods or services, commercial activity, or other activity with the object of financial gain, benefit or advantage either directly or indirectly. 
Business license or license means the document evincing payment of the occupation tax, also referred to as the registration for occupation tax. 
Certificate means a certification of exemption. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation, or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099. An employee is also an individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to the individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2. 
Location or office means any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such a site or conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Number of employees means the number of persons employed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that, for the purposes of this computation, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee, and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added, and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue-raising purposes. 
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation as designated by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 2, 11-23-2009) 
State Law reference— Applicable definitions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 16-25. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 through 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 3, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-26. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Every business operating in the city, except as otherwise exempted herein, shall be required to register said business and pay the occupation tax, and receive in return a business license from the city. The amount of occupation tax shall be fully payable to the city, on January 1 each year, and the same shall be delinquent if not paid on or before March 31 each year. Each such registration for the occupation tax shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to pay said occupation tax shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first registered for said occupation tax, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided therefor. 
(c)  All time periods set forth in this article are enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20(a). 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as an attempt by the city to regulate any profession, if such regulation is prohibited by law. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot regulate or suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the failure of said practitioner to comply with this article shall subject the practitioner to the payment of late fees, interest and civil penalties, all as set forth in other parts of this article, but shall not subject the offending party to suspension of the practitioner's right to engage in his profession. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 4, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-27. - Penalty of article violation; enforcement. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26, any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil fine in an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation, to be determined in the discretion of the municipal court after a hearing. The municipal court shall be empowered to enforce this civil fine by use of the contempt power of the court. 
(b)  The city attorney or other authorized attorney shall also be authorized to bring injunctive or other actions in superior court to enforce any of the provisions of this article, to seek orders closing unlawful businesses, and seek civil fines for the violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 5, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-28. - Occupation tax levied; registration. 
(a)  Levied based upon number of employees. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6, and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner on January 1 of each year. 
(b)  Registration; filing return. Persons registering under this article shall be required to provide the information requested on the return form provided by the city clerk's office, and which shall include the name and address of the business, a description of the type of business and the products and services provided, as well as the number of employees and other applicable information sufficient to determine compliance with this article. The registrant shall be identified and his relationship to the business identified, and he shall provide a government-issued photo identification to the city clerk or his designee. 
(c)  Occupation tax schedule. 
(1)  Number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as established in the City of Emerson Fee Schedule, which rates may be revised and updated from time to time by the city council: 

 
(2)  Administrative fee. Each business shall also pay an administrative fee in the amount established by the city. 
(3)  Business license. Upon payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee, a business license shall be issued as certification of payment of the occupation tax, and shall also serve as registration of a business under this article. 
(4)  Part year operation. When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The entire administrative fee is still owed. 
(d)  Conditions of issuance. The city clerk's office shall issue the certificate or business license only: 
(1)  When satisfied that the business does not, and will not, violate the requirements of the city's zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Upon the fulfillment of the registration requirements of this article; and 
(3)  Upon the payment of the occupation tax levied by this article, except as provided for exempt businesses. 
(e)  Term of certificate or license. No certificate licenses will be issued for less than one year, except after July 1, at which time if any new business is started, the license may be issued on the basis of six months, except as otherwise herein specified. In such event, said tax shall equal one-half of the annual tax as herein provided for in this article. 
(f)  Transfer. A certificate or license issued by the occupation tax official under the authority of this article may be transferred or assigned, except as otherwise noted in this article, provided the person conducts the business for which the license was issued at the same place and pays the city a transfer fee of $10.00. The new owner or operator shall be required to provide proof of ownership in a form acceptable to the city clerk's office (including potentially a bill of sale, deed, or other evidence) prior to the transfer being approved by the city. If the business is moved to a different location, with the same owner and operators, the license may also be transferred to the new location, by notifying the city clerk's office and payment of the transfer fee. Evidence of the new location shall be provided to the satisfaction of the city clerk. In the event that the proper authorities are not notified, an additional ten percent fee shall be charged for the transfer. 
(g)  Misrepresentation. No person shall use any deceitful means or misrepresentation in obtaining the license or certificate to do business in the city, from the city. Licenses or certificates obtained with false information are void and invalid, and are subject to recall by written notice of the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 6, 11-23-2009) 
State Law reference— Taxation on basis of employees authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 16-29. - Duty to keep information current. 
Any person required by this article to register his business shall notify the city clerk's office, in writing, within 30 days of the following changes: 
(1)  Any change of address of the business, in which case the same business license tax receipt shall be valid at the new location. 
(2)  Any change of ownership, in which case the transfer shall be treated as the termination of one business and the establishment of a new business for the purposes of this article. 
(3)  The termination of any business. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 7, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-30. - When tax due and payable; late payments; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Due date for existing businesses. Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said occupation tax and associated administrative fee shall be payable January 1 of each year (or on the first weekday thereafter when the city clerk's office is open for business) and shall, if not paid by March 31 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. 
(b)  Due date and amount for new businesses. On any new business, profession, trade, or calling begun in the city in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the occupation tax shall be due 30 days following the commencement of the business, profession, trade or calling. The owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year, and tax based on said amount shall be paid. 
(c)  Delinquent tax penalty. Occupation taxes that are not paid by their due date shall be delinquent. Delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 1½ percent per month. In addition, the occupation tax, if not paid within 90 days from the due date, shall have an automatic penalty of ten percent of the amount of the occupation tax added. 
(d)  Late fee. If the occupation tax is not paid by March 31 of each year, an additional administrative fee in the amount established by the city shall be due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 8, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-31. - Businesses with multiple locations. 
(a)  Where a business is operated at more than one place, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location. 
(b)  Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(c)  A business with multiple locations in the city will not be assessed more than $1,715.00 for its occupation tax fee for all its locations combined. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 9, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-32. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
(a)  Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in the city, and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or servicing customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Any business with no location or office in the state shall be exempt from assessment of an occupation tax under this article if such business or practitioner submits proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state based upon the business' or practitioner's sales or services in the state. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 10, 11-23-2009) 
State Law reference— Taxation of business with in-state location, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
Sec. 16-33. - Each line of business to be identified on occupation tax registration. 
The occupation tax registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered for occupation tax purposes with the city and that line of business being noted by the city upon the business license which is to be displayed by the business owner. For businesses or practitioners with more than one type of service or product, the business or practitioner shall be classified according to the dominant line of business. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 11, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-34. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18). 
(a)  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 16-28; or 
(2)  An occupation tax amount of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per-practitioner tax amount applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(b)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 12, 11-23-2009) 
State Law reference— Taxation of professionals, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(g). 
Sec. 16-35. - Financial institutions. 
(a)  License tax levied. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied, for the year 2006 and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon each state and national banking association, federal savings and loan association and state building and loan association at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(b)  Filing of return. Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(c)  Due date of taxes. The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 13, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-36. - Exemptions. 
Certain businesses are exempt from paying the occupation tax annually, but are required to register and obtain a certificate of exemption. Such persons as are exempt shall possess and display at their places of business a certificate of exemption that may be obtained from the city by application of a form provided by the same. The applicant for exemption shall clearly state the provision of this article or other provision of law under which the applicant claims exemption. The certificate shall contain sufficient facts for the city clerk to determine whether the applicant is entitled to the exemption. The certificate of exemption shall remain valid and the business need not reapply for an annual certificate of exemption so long as the conditions entitling the business to the exemption remain the same. The application for the certificate of exemption shall be made under oath. The certificate of exemption shall not exempt any business from complying with the duty to register. The following businesses are subject to exemption and the foregoing provisions: 
(1)  Businesses operated for a charitable purpose and registered as a nonprofit organization pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(2)  Local or state authorities, (e.g., housing authorities, development authorities, hospital authorities, etc.) created under local act, or under state law. 
(3)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, and instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state. 
(4)  Those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Nonprofit social, charitable, religious or fraternal organizations for the purpose of operating fairs, circuses or carnivals for periods of time not to exceed one week. 
(6)  Individual farmers who raise, grow or cultivate edible food from the soil of the state; provided, however, that farm, milk or other farmer cooperatives are not exempted when they engage in selling goods and/or services to the public in competition with persons taxed by virtue of this article. 
(7)  Established churches, religious, charitable and fraternal organizations chartered or operated for nonprofit purposes. 
(8)  Persons exempted from taxation by virtue of the Constitution or any statute of the United States, or the state. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 14, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-37. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(11)  Disabled veterans and blind persons as governed by O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 15, 11-23-2009) 
State Law reference— Exempt businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16. 
Sec. 16-38. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; display required. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the business license may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 16, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-39. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a business license, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 17, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-40. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the city, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The city, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under-reporting, a civil penalty of $500.00 plus interest on the deficiency at 1½ percent per month will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 19, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-41. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part hereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 16-40, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operating of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 20, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-42. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in the city after the registration for said business has been revoked as stated in section 16-41, hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the city request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 21, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-43. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city clerk, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax and pre-execution interest at the rate of 1½ percent per month from the date when such tax becomes delinquent, which said execution shall then bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date the execution issues, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the laws of the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied upon the property of the defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the laws of the state, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by the proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 22, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-44. - Administration; enforcement of provisions. 
The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy, assessment, collection and penalties imposed herein. In carrying out his responsibilities hereunder, said official shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for registration and application for a license of a business, and for the submission of required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(2)  To issue to each person a business license tax within a reasonable time after the payment of the occupation tax assessed and levied in this article; provided, however, where under other ordinances of the city, permits, certifications and compliance with the enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the city clerk shall not issue a business license until the applicant exhibits to the administrator such obtained permits, certifications and compliances. 
(3)  To issue in any year without a charge a business license when an applicant exhibits to the city clerk such permits, certifications and compliance under the law of the state or the United States would entitle the applicant to such. 
(4)  To have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state or the constitution of the state for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the occupation taxes hereunder. 
(5)  To summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. 
(6)  To inspect all licenses and certificates issued by the city, as often as in his judgment he may deem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 23, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-45. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 24, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-46. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by city council. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 25, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-47. - Requirement of public hearing. 
In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing to determine how to use the additional revenue. Said hearing may be conducted as part of the annual budgetary process. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 26, 11-23-2009) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-28. 
Sec. 16-48. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 27, 11-23-2009) 
Secs. 16-49—16-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX ON ROOMS, LODGINGS AND ACCOMMODATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local room tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 16-70. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Emerson Hotel and Motel Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2016-013, § I, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-71. - Taxing district. 
There is hereby established a special taxing district coterminous with the territorial boundaries of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 2016-013, § II, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-72. - Imposition of tax. 
Within the territorial limits of the special district, the city does hereby levy an excise tax of eight percent upon the furnishing for value to the public for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity doing business in the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, travel trailer park, RV park or campground or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished. 
(Ord. No. 2016-013, § III, 8-22-2016) 
State Law reference— Tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 16-73. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The tax authorized by this article shall not apply to charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any person who certifies that he is staying in such room, lodging or accommodation as a result of the destruction of his home or residence by fire or other casualty. 
(b)  The tax authorized by this article shall not apply to the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations for any continuous occupancy after the first consecutive 30 days of continuous occupancy, provided, however, that said tax shall be imposed for the first 30 days of occupancy. 
(c)  The tax authorized by this article shall not apply to charges made for the use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or to any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge. 
(d)  No tax shall be levied as provided in this article upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Ord. No. 2016-013, § IV, 8-22-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(h). 
Sec. 16-74. - Expenditure of proceeds. 
(a)  An amount equal to the amount by which five of the eight total taxes collected under this article exceed the taxes which would be collected at a rate of three percent, but not to exceed two percent of the taxes collected, shall be expended through a contract with the Cartersville-Bartow County Tourism Council for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions and trade shows, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The tax collected and remitted to the city from any lodge located within the city which is operated under the jurisdiction of the department of natural resources which regularly furnishes for value rooms, lodgings or accommodations as meals and conferences or meeting facilities shall only be expended for development, promotion and advertising of said lodge or similar facility operated under the jurisdiction of the department of natural resources. 
(c)  Prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the Cartersville-Bartow County Tourism Council shall provide to the city a budget detailing the expenditure of the funds provided under this section which such budget, after approval by the city council, shall be made part of the city's budget for said fiscal year. 
(d)  The Cartersville-Bartow County Tourism Council shall provide to the city audit verification that said tourism council has made use of said funds in conformity with this section. 
(e)  The remaining three of the total of eight shall be expended with one half to the Cartersville-Bartow County Tourism Council for promoting tourism, conventions and trade shows by said organization and the remaining one half to the city for tourism project development for future and current projects as allowed under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2016-013, § V, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-75. - Reduction for collection of tax. 
Each person collecting the tax authorized by this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due if the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-013, § VI, 8-22-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
Sec. 16-76. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel, motel, travel trailer park or other facility providing accommodations to the public in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said city clerk. Persons engaged in such business must so register no later than 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof regardless of registration. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business, the location of his place of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the city clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; and in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-013, § VII, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-77. - Determination, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city clerk showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2016-013, § VIII, 8-22-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-53.2, 48-13-53.6. 
Sec. 16-78. - Deficient determinations. 
(a)  Re-computation of tax; authority to make; basis of re-computation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or a fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk or his designated representatives shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by certified mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 2016-013, § IX, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-79. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 16-78(c). 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or a fraction hereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-013, § X, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-80. - Administration of ordinance. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every operator renting guest rooms or travel trailer space in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the city clerk may require. 
(c)  Examination of records, audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by the city clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting accommodations to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports, content. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such person's possession or custody information relating to rentals of accommodations which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by the city clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(Ord. No. 2016-013, § XI, 8-22-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.1. 
Sec. 16-81. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of the tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk/city manager may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assigns of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city clerk showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating the amount due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold funds from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Tax credit, or interest paid more than once or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been paid erroneously or unlawfully collected or received by the city clerk under this article, it may be offset by the city clerk. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has been determined by the city clerk, he will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city clerk, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid or his administrators or executors, successors or assigns. 
(Ord. No. 2016-013, § XII, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 16-82. - Penalties. 
In addition to the interest due on any delinquent taxes as provided for in this article, the penalties provided for in article I, chapter 8 of title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated governing late filings, failure to file and fraudulent filings and the remedies provided for therein are incorporated herein and made part of this article as if set out in full. 
(Ord. No. 2016-013, § XIII, 8-22-2016) 
Secs. 16-83—16-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

Sec. 16-108. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare by regulating peddling, itinerant traders, traveling salesmen, and other door-to-door salesmen, generally known as peddlers. Such persons typically market magazines, appliances, house wares, and other goods and services by going door to door in neighborhoods and business districts. The citizens of the city are subject to unregulated peddling by sometimes questionable organizations or individuals, with illegitimate products, or no intent to deliver. It is the purpose of this article to regulate peddling in the city, and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. To achieve this end, this article requires that peddlers seek licenses, have background checks, and peddle under certain limitations. However, it is not the intent of this article to require legitimate sales representatives, visiting businesses or persons they have already made appointments with, or already have a legitimate business relationship with, to need licensing. Neither is it the intent of this article to infringe free speech rights or require licensing for persons going door to door for political campaigns, religious proselytizing, or other free speech reasons. 
(Ord. No. 2009-007, § 101, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-109. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means the person seeking a license. 
Goods means any sort of personal property, wares or merchandise that can be sold, including, but not limited to, brushes, vacuums, magazines, newspapers, luggage, housewares, electronics, computers, furniture, food, agricultural products, flowers, tools, clothing, decorative accessories, rugs, paintings, sculptures, dishes, and so forth. 
License means a permit to peddle. 
Official photo identification means a driver's license or identification card issued by Georgia, another U.S. state, or the U.S. military, or a U.S. passport. 
Peddler means any person who engages in peddling. 
Peddling or to peddle means traveling from place to place or door to door on foot or in a vehicle and exhibiting, offering to sell, or selling goods or services to households, businesses or passers-by. It shall also mean traveling from place to place or door to door taking orders for the sale of goods or services for delivery at another time or place. The solicitation of orders combined with a separate transaction to make delivery to the purchaser as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed peddling. Visits by sales representatives pursuant to previously-arranged appointments with a specific business or person, or as a part of an ongoing business relationship, shall not be deemed peddling. 
Services means the provision of any sort of professional or trade service to another, including, for example, general maintenance, construction, painting, lawn service, house cleaning, mending, sharpening, motor repair, appliance repair, and so forth. 
(Ord. No. 2009-007, § 102, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-110. - Restrictions. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling in the city without first obtaining a license. Licenses shall be for a period of six months, and may be renewed. Each employee of a business or corporation engaging in peddling shall have a separate license. 
(b)  State law requirement. In addition to this article, peddlers, as defined by state law, must obtain a license from the probate court of the county, under the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq. The requirements of that statute are separate from this article, and obtaining only that license shall not satisfy the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-007, § 103, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-111. - License requirements. 
(a)  License application. All requests for a license must be provided to the city clerk's office. The city manager shall issue a decision within seven business days of the application being filed. 
(b)  Individual licenses required. Each individual person seeking to peddle must obtain a license. If the applicant is working for another individual or corporation or other business entity, that information must be disclosed on the application and the license, if granted. 
(c)  Required information. All applications for licenses must include, at a minimum, the following information, and shall be signed by the applicant: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, including a local address where the applicant will be staying while peddling. If the applicant is working for an entity other than himself, such as a corporation or another individual, provide the name of the employer, provide the headquarters address and address of the Emerson office, or the address of the closest branch office if there is no Emerson office; 
(2)  Applicant's height, weight, age, sex, and race for background check purposes; 
(3)  Photocopy of driver's license or other official photo identification of the applicant; 
(4)  Proposed peddling activity including identification of the type of business, and the goods or services to be sold; 
(5)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle together with the license plate; 
(6)  The desired duration of the license (maximum six months); 
(7)  The application shall contain a statement that the submission of the application shall be considered to be consent that a background check may be run by the police chief at his discretion on the applicant, and a statement that all information contained therein is true and correct; and 
(8)  Any additional information the police chief may find reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether the proposed event will endanger public health, safety or welfare. 
(d)  Fingerprints. The fingerprints of the applicant may be required by the police chief, for identification and background check purposes. In lieu of fingerprints, a criminal background check for past criminal convictions may be performed. 
(e)  License and identification carried. The signed license is to be kept on-site in the possession of a peddler at all times that peddling is underway. Licenses shall be displayed at the request of any citizen or law enforcement personnel. Official photo identification shall also be kept on the person of a peddler at all times he is peddling, and shall be presented upon request of any citizen or law enforcement personnel. It shall be a violation of this article to fail or refuse to display a license or official photo identification when requested. 
(f)  Duration, renewal. A peddler license shall be valid for the period specified thereon, up to a maximum of six months. A peddler license may be renewed upon submission of an application for renewal, accompanied by an investigation fee and a license fee. Such fees shall be as established by the city. Upon application for renewal, the police chief shall check to insure no complaints or criminal charges have been made against the peddler, and shall apply the same criteria as applies to the grant of a license to renew the license. 
(g)  Fees. An application shall be accompanied by an application fee to cover the cost of investigation and an additional license fee. Such fees shall be as established by the city. If the license application is denied, the license fee shall be refunded. These fees may be raised from time to time by the city council. The city manager shall have the authority to waive or reduce the fees on a case-by-case basis for charitable organizations, schools, and churches. 
(Ord. No. 2009-007, § 104, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-112. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Investigation. The city manager shall review the application for completeness and compliance with the terms of this article. The city manager shall forward the application to the police chief for investigation. The police chief shall determine whether there are any records of complaints against the applicant in the records of the local police department, county sheriff's department or the GCIC/NCIC crime database system. The police chief may, at his discretion, conduct a background check of the applicant. The police chief may, at his discretion, make any other inquiries he deems necessary for the investigation of the applicant. The police chief shall forward his findings along with a recommendation to the city manager for final determination. 
(b)  Decision. The city manager may grant or deny a license. The city manager shall issue a license as provided in this article from a consideration of the application and from such information as may otherwise be obtained, unless he finds that any or all of the following apply: 
(1)  The applicant or the employer of the applicant has any criminal complaints pending against them, or has a criminal record involving crimes of theft, fraud, or other moral turpitude; 
(2)  The background check has revealed the applicant is not of good character, or the proposed good or service is not legitimate or legal; 
(3)  The grant of the license is contrary to the public health, safety or general welfare; or 
(4)  The application was not complete, or the application or license requested are not fully in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
The city manager shall indicate on the application review form all reasons for rejection of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2009-007, § 105, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-113. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the denial or restriction of a license shall have the right to appeal the denial or restriction to the municipal court of the city. A written appeal shall be filed with the court. 
(b)  Procedure. The city manager and police chief shall appear and present their case and evidence as to why the application was denied. The applicant shall have the opportunity to present his case and evidence in support of the application. The hearing shall be conducted as a municipal court proceeding. 
(c)  Standard of review. The municipal court judge, keeping in mind the purpose of this article, the substantive provisions, and giving deference to the judgment of the city manager and police chief, shall make a determination as to whether the denial or restriction was lawful and in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare, or whether the license should be issued or modified. If the latter, the court shall enter an order providing guidance as to the location, time, persons, and other criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-007, § 106, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-114. - Peddling regulations; prohibited locations and times. 
(a)  Prohibited times. No peddling shall be allowed between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(b)  Prohibited locations. No peddling shall be allowed at the following locations: 
(1)  On any street or highway right-of-way; 
(2)  On any bridges and sidewalks; 
(3)  On any public property or governmentally-owned property; and 
(4)  On any private property without the permission of the property owner. 
(c)  Solicitation. Solicitation, as defined in the City of Emerson Solicitation Ordinance, shall not be allowed under a peddler's license. A separate solicitation license is required. See the City of Emerson Solicitation Ordinance for additional requirements. 
(d)  Peddlers under 18 years of age. Applications for peddlers under age 18 must be signed by an adult, and the adult must provide his address and relationship to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2009-007, § 107, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-115. - Violations, enforcement. 
(a)  Persons peddling without a license or in violation of the license shall be cited with a citation for prosecution in the municipal court of the city, in accordance with the requirements of law for such citations. Any police officer of the city shall be authorized to issue such citations. 
(b)  Any person, organization, business or entity violating the provisions of this article is subject to a fine. The minimum fine shall be $100.00 per day, per violation, per individual participant. 
(c)  Any violation of this article shall immediately revoke the license. The city manager and/or police chief shall also have the discretion to revoke the license upon charge of violation being made, or upon awareness of illegal or unauthorized activity, if revocation is required in the best interests of public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  Any person, organization, business or entity found guilty of violating this article may not be issued a license for a two-year period from the date of the violation. Upon second offense, the person, organization, business or entity found guilty of violating this article shall be banned from further peddling in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-007, § 108, 11-23-2009) 
Secs. 16-116—16-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STREET SOLICITATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate solicitations of contributions on streets, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97.1; standing in roadway to solicit business prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97. 

Sec. 16-144. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare by regulating roadside solicitation and other charitable events where contributions are sought. Solicitors are put at risk by entering the roadway and also put drivers and other pedestrians at risk. The citizens of the city are subject to unregulated solicitation by sometimes questionable organizations, or solicitations in a hazardous manner or location. It is the purpose of this article to regulate solicitation on streets and highways and other public areas of the city, to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 101, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-145. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means the charitable organization seeking a permit. 
Charitable organization means an organization which is qualified under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; Georgia-registered nonprofit corporations; churches; and public and private schools. Charitable organizations must also either be registered with the secretary of state under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5 or be exempt from such registration under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9. 
Event means any charitable solicitation within the city. 
Event permit means a permit issued pursuant to this article to conduct an event. 
Official photo identification means a driver's license or identification card issued by Georgia, another U.S. state, or the U.S. military; or a U.S. passport. 
Organizer means the person responsible for organizing the event and whose name shall be on the application. 
Permit means an event permit. 
Police chief means the chief of police of Emerson, Georgia or his designee. 
Services means the provision of any sort of professional or trade service to another, including, for example, general maintenance, construction, painting, lawn service, house cleaning, mending, sharpening, motor repair, appliance repair, and so forth. 
Solicitation or charitable solicitation means the act of asking for employment, business or contributions on a public road, street, highway, right-of-way, sidewalk or other public property from the occupant of any vehicle or any pedestrian. 
Solicitor means any person who engages in solicitation. 
Travel lanes means the marked lanes on a road or highway, or the lanes of travel for vehicles, including turn lanes, access lanes, and acceleration or deceleration lanes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 102, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-146. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Solicitation restricted. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97(b), the city prohibits any person from standing or entering on a highway or public street of the city for the purposes of soliciting employment, business solicitations, and/or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle or any pedestrian without a permit. Solicitation shall only be allowed by charitable organizations with a permit, under the terms of this article. It shall be a violation of this article to engage in solicitation without a permit, or otherwise not in accordance with the terms of this article and the permit. 
(b)  Permit required. No charitable organization is allowed to engage in solicitation on any public street or highway in the city without first obtaining an event permit. Persons, businesses and organizations that are not charitable organizations as defined in this article are not eligible to receive a permit for solicitation. An event permit shall be obtained from the city. An event permit is not required for any event sponsored or conducted by the county or its departments and agencies, nor by any municipality or government agency in the county, such as firefighter "boot drives" and similar collections. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 103, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-147. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Permit application. All requests for a permit must be provided to the city clerk's office at least five business days but no more than 60 calendar days prior to the date of the requested activity. The city manager shall issue a decision within seven business days of the application being filed. The city manager, for good cause shown, shall have the authority to consider any application under this section which is filed less than five business days before the date such event is proposed to be conducted, provided the police chief shall have adequate time to conduct the investigation. An application and permit shall be required for each event; provided, however, only one application and permit shall be required for each proposed event. 
(b)  Required information. All applications for permits must include, at a minimum, the following information, and shall be signed by the organizer: 
(1)  Name and address of the charitable organization, including the headquarters address and address of the Emerson office, or the address of the closest branch office if there is no Emerson office; 
(2)  Type of organization and certification, if listed below. The organization must be one of the following types to apply for a permit: 
a.  Organization qualified under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, including certification from the IRS; 
b.  Nonprofit corporation registered in the state, including certification from the Secretary of State; 
c.  Church; or 
d.  Public or private school. 
(3)  Name of the organizer, and address, height, weight, age, sex, and race of each organizer for background check purposes; 
(4)  Photocopy of driver's license or other official photo identification of each organizer; 
(5)  Proposed solicitation activity, and purpose for activity (i.e., use of funds); 
(6)  Specific location for the solicitation activity, including specific intersections, and number of solicitors at each such location; 
(7)  Dates and times of solicitation activity; 
(8)  Names of all participants proposed to be solicitors, and their ages; 
(9)  If any solicitors are under 18 years of age, the names and addresses of adult supervisors; one adult supervisor per four solicitors under age 18 is required; 
(10)  If the event is to be held on behalf of any person or organization other than the applicant, a communication in written form from that person or organization authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit; 
(11)  The application shall contain a statement that the submission of the application shall be considered to be consent by the organizer, the charitable organization, and the officers of the organization for a background check to be run by the police chief, at his discretion, on any person named on the application, and a statement that all information contained thereon is true and correct; and 
(12)  Any additional information the police chief may find reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether the proposed event will endanger public health, safety or welfare. 
(c)  Organizer. A minimum of one organizer is required for an event. No more than five persons shall be designated organizers for any event. The organizers are required to be at the event in person at all times. There shall be one organizer for each location where solicitation is occurring. All events shall be conducted under the supervision of a person or persons making application for same (the organizer) and shall be conducted in a peaceable and orderly manner in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable thereto. 
(d)  Permit on-site. The signed permit is to be kept on-site in the possession of an organizer at all times that solicitation is underway. If multiple locations are involved, a permit copy shall be kept at each location by each organizer. Permits shall be displayed at the request of any citizen or law enforcement personnel. 
(e)  Fees. An application shall be accompanied by an application fee to cover the cost of investigation and an additional permit fee. If the permit application is denied, the permit fee shall be refunded. Such fees shall be as established by the city. These fees may be raised from time to time by the city council. The city manager shall have the authority to waive or reduce the fees on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 104, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-148. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Investigation. The city manager shall review the application for completeness and compliance with the terms of this article. The city manager shall forward the application to the police chief for investigation. The police chief shall check if the charitable organization is registered with the Secretary of State, or is exempt under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9. The police chief shall determine whether there are any records of complaints against the applicant or organizers in the records of the local police department, county sheriff's department or the GCIC/NCIC crime database system. The police chief may, at his discretion, conduct a background check of the organizers or corporate officers, or any other person named on the application. The police chief may, at his discretion, make any other inquiries he deems necessary for the investigation of the applicant or the organizers. 
(b)  Decision. The city manager may grant or deny a permit, or grant a restricted permit. The city manager shall issue a permit as provided in this article from a consideration of the application and from such information as may otherwise be obtained, unless he finds that any or all of the following apply: 
(1)  The conduct of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic; 
(2)  The conduct of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire, or other emergency services; 
(3)  The applicant or any organizers or participants have any criminal complaints pending against them, or have a criminal record involving crimes of theft, fraud, or other moral turpitude; 
(4)  The applicant is not a qualifying charitable organization or is otherwise not a legitimate organization; 
(5)  The police chief has reasons to believe the event is a fraud or sham; 
(6)  If a charitable organization required to be registered with the Secretary of State under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5, it is not so registered; 
(7)  The conduct of the event is contrary to the public's health, safety or general welfare; or 
(8)  The application was not complete, or the application or permit requested are not fully in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
The city manager shall indicate on the application review form all reasons for rejection of the application. 
(c)  Restrictions. The city manager shall indicate on the permit the permitted activities, locations, and times of the event. The city manager may approve a smaller or shorter event than requested, may reduce the number of solicitors, may approve a different location, or may generally make any other adjustments he believes necessary to the application to serve the public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  Non-content-based review. The content of the message of any applicant, his beliefs, the identification of the participants, or any other matter which does not directly impact on the public health, safety, and welfare, shall not be relevant to the determination of whether to grant or deny a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 105, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-149. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the denial or restriction of a license shall have the right to appeal the denial or restriction to the municipal court of the city. A written appeal shall be filed with the court. 
(b)  Procedure. The city manager and police chief shall appear and present their case and evidence as to why the application was denied. The applicant shall have the opportunity to present his case and evidence in support of the application. The hearing shall be conducted as a municipal court proceeding. 
(c)  Standard of review. The municipal court judge, keeping in mind the purpose of this article, the substantive provisions, and giving deference to the judgment of the city manager and police chief, shall make a determination as to whether the denial or restriction was lawful and in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare, or whether the license should be issued or modified. If the latter, the court shall enter an order providing guidance as to the location, time, persons, and other criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 106, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-150. - Time, locations, duration, and supervision. 
(a)  Prohibited times. No solicitation shall be allowed between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(b)  Locations. Solicitation shall only be allowed at intersections on U.S. Highway 41, outside of any municipal corporate boundary, if the intersection has a median strip at least four feet wide where the solicitors can be located. At the discretion of the sheriff, solicitation may be allowed at intersections of U.S. Highway 411 or Georgia Highways 20, 113 or 140 where there is a median strip at least five feet wide. Solicitors are required to stay on median strips, sidewalks or otherwise out of the street. Solicitation from travel lanes is not permitted. When all vehicles are stopped at an intersection, solicitors may approach cars to receive donations if the occupants have indicated they seek to make a donation. Walking along a line of cars shall only be permitted if the solicitor stays out of the travel lanes. No more than one organization may solicit at the same intersection at the same time. An event may occur at more than one location or intersection on the same day. 
(c)  Duration. An event may last no longer than two days. A separate permit shall be required for each additional event (e.g., six days would require three permits). 
(d)  Solicitors under 18 years of age. All charitable organizations which are permitted to solicit funds must have one adult supervisor over the age of 21 for every four persons under the age of 18 years. 
(e)  Peddling. Peddling shall not be allowed under a solicitor's license. A separate peddler's license is required. See the City of Emerson Peddler Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 107, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 16-151. - Violations; enforcement. 
(a)  Persons peddling without a license or in violation of the license shall be cited with a citation for prosecution in the municipal court of the city, in accordance with the requirements of law for such citations. Any police officer of the city shall be authorized to issue such citations. 
(b)  Any person, organization, business or entity violating the provisions of this article is subject to a fine. The minimum fine shall be $100.00 per day, per violation, per individual participant. 
(c)  Any violation of this article shall immediately revoke the license. The city manager and/or police chief shall also have the discretion to revoke the license upon charge of violation being made, or upon awareness of illegal or unauthorized activity, if revocation is required in the best interests of public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  Any person, organization, business or entity found guilty of violating this article may not be issued a license for a two-year period from the date of the violation. Upon second offense, the person, organization, business or entity found guilty of violating this article shall be banned from further peddling in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 108, 11-23-2009) 
Secs. 16-152—16-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MEDIA PRODUCTIONS 

Sec. 16-171. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Emerson Media Productions Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 1, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-172. - Purpose. 
The motion picture, television and Internet industries can be environmentally clean industries, desirable to the city so long as there is adequate regulation to protect the health, safety and well-being of the local community, atmosphere and environment. As well, the city council desires to minimize the inconvenience placed upon citizens during such events. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 2, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-173. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the business of film production, motion picture production, television production or web-based production on private or public property within the limits of the city without first applying for or receiving a film production permit from the city. 
(b)  This is in addition to any permit that may be required by the International Fire Code or any other applicable code or law. 
(c)  Filming permits are a privilege, and as such, may be denied, revoked or suspended for any cause as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 3, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-174. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Broadcast studios. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any commercial motion picture, television or videotaping studio or photography studio operating at its established or fixed place of business in the city. 
(b)  Current news. The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect reporters, photographers, soundpersons' crew, vehicles or camerapersons in the employ of a newspaper, news service, television station or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot broadcasting or recording of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences in the news and of general public interest. 
(c)  Training, educational and public service use. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any industrial, corporate, charitable, public service announcement or not-for-profit film production intended for in-house training or educational purposes. 
(d)  Political use. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any film production intended for political purposes. 
(e)  City direction. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any film productions which are conducted by the city's public, education and government access organizations, or by or at the direction of the city. 
(f)  Non-commercial private events. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any private events filmed or photographed for non-commercial purposes, such as private parties or weddings. 
(g)  Low impact film production. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any film production which involves an on-location production crew of ten or fewer persons and three or fewer on-location production vehicles and is conducted entirely on private property and has no impact on public rights-of-way and is in compliance with all local ordinances, including, but not limited to, noise and light. Examples of impacts on the public rights-of-way include, but are not limited to, on-street parking, street closures, interruption of vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow, and placement of production equipment on public property. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 4, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-175. - Administration. 
The city manager or his designee shall be responsible for administering the provisions of this article. The city manager is authorized to act as the agent for the city in the receipt, processing and approval of applications for film production permits, as well as the issuance of any and all filming permits. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 5, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-176. - Application. 
(a)  Any person seeking the issuance of a film production permit shall complete the written application form provided by the city and shall provide all information therein and file that written application with the city not less than seven working days and not more than 180 days before the commencement of film production. Applications shall include: 
(1)  The representative of the property, the address, e-mail address and telephone number of the place at which the activity is to be conducted; 
(2)  The hours and dates of the activity; 
(3)  A general description of the filming to take place; 
(4)  The name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the person in charge of the filming activity; 
(5)  The name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the person who is in charge of the filming activity and is to be on-site; 
(6)  The exact number of personnel to be involved; 
(7)  Activities that may cause public alarm. These include road closures, large base camp operations, the use of explosives, gunfire, animals, etc.; 
(8)  The amount and type of vehicles and equipment to be utilized along with a site plan for placement; 
(9)  A comprehensive list of on-location non-computerized special effects to be utilized, and the proposed date and site for performance of each special effect or use of explosive devices; 
(10)  The name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the person in charge of special effects (pilot or technician) together with his qualifications and licensure by the applicable federal and state agencies; 
(11)  Signature by an authorized representative of the applicant. 
(b)  The application for a film production permit shall constitute an agreement by the applicant to pay for city personnel expenses and extraordinary services provided by the city, including all repairs, renovations and landscaping and turf restoration or replacement which is necessitated by virtue of the production, unless another agreement to fix all damages to public property caused by the production is agreed upon by the applicant and the city. 
(c)  The application for a film production permit shall constitute a covenant between the applicant and the city, specifying that the applicant will halt or interrupt filming upon instruction from an officer of the city police department or county fire department, upon violation of any state or local police or fire codes. The city covenants not to instruct that film production be halted or interrupted unless, in its discretion, it perceives that the filming shall cause or coincide with interference with traffic movement, disturbance of the peace, destruction of property, violation of the law or a threat to the public peace, health, safety, or welfare. 
(d)  The application for a film production permit shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from all damages suits, actions or liabilities, including all attorney's fees, resulting from acts of the filming company or its agents during the filming activity or occurring as a result of the use of filming locations by the filming company. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 6, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-177. - Approval criteria. 
Issuance of permits and other decisions rendered pursuant to the terms of this article shall be based upon: 
(1)  The health and safety of all persons. 
(2)  Mitigation of disruption to persons within the affected area. 
(3)  Traffic impacts within the area. 
(4)  Material misrepresentations in the application. 
(5)  Failure to comply with the rules and regulations governing filming set forth by the city. 
(6)  Previous violations or uncooperativeness in prior permitted applications. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 7, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-178. - Insurance. 
(a)  Liability insurance. Proof of general liability insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00 per incident or occurrence will be required before issuance of a permit, naming the city as and additional insured for protection against claims of personal injuries, wrongful death and property damage. The officers and employees of the city shall also be named as additional insured. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after 30 days' written notice to the city. A copy of the certificate shall remain on file at the city. 
(b)  Worker's compensation. Proof of worker's compensation insurance coverage will be required for each and every employee in any way involved with the film production, as required under state and federal law. 
(c)  Special effects. A comprehensive list of on-location non-computerized special effects to be utilized, and the proposed date and site for performance of each special effect or use of explosive devices will be required, accompanied by proof of $5,000,000.00 per incident or occurrence of liability insurance therefor, naming the city, it's officers and employees as additional insured. 
(d)  Hold harmless agreement. A hold harmless agreement shall be executed by the applicant as provided by the city pursuant to issuance of a permit. 
(e)  Security deposit. To ensure clean-up and restoration of the site, the city may require a security deposit in an amount to be determined by the city. The security deposit will be refunded if, after completion of filming, an inspection by the city of the site shows that no damage, debris or other significant occurrences related to the filming have occurred. In the event the city inspection provides evidence of any of the aforementioned, the city shall be authorized to not refund the security deposit either in part or whole. This remedy in no manner restricts the ability of the city to make claim against the applicant's insurance company. 
(f)  Increased insurance. The city manager is authorized to require higher insurance amounts and any other insurances he deems appropriate due to the nature of the proposed filming activity. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 8, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-179. - Notification of affected residents and businesses. 
(a)  Following the submission of a film permit application, but no less than three business days prior to commencement of the filming activity, the filming company shall notify, in writing, all businesses and residents affected by the proposed activity. The filming company shall provide a signed copy of such notification to the city manager. Where the planned activity may have a significant and/or prolonged impact on the normal activities of the area (for example, activities impacting parking or traffic), the city manager shall have the discretion to require earlier notification. 
(b)  The area to be covered by the notification prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall be a minimum of a 500-foot radius of the planned activity. Based upon the nature of the planned activity, the city manager shall have the discretion to specify a wider area of notification as a condition of issuance of the permit. 
(c)  Notification should include all available information concerning the location and duration of the filming, preparation and wrap activities, the times of day required for each location, proposed parking restrictions and restrictions on public streets, proposed locations for all support facilities, as well as specifics regarding the use of lights, noise and any special effects or extraordinary equipment. The notification shall also include the film company's production office telephone number and the location manager's telephone/cell phone/pager numbers. 
(d)  After commencement of the filming activity, the film company shall provide written notification to the affected businesses and residents of any subsequent changes to the information provided in the original notification and of any additional variances or permits granted by the city to the filming company. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 9, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-180. - Special effects, explosives and similar devices. 
(a)  No film production which involves the use of explosives, pyrotechnics, fire or other special effects which involve flames or incendiary devices may be undertaken unless approval from the county fire marshal, county fire department and/or state fire marshal offices have been obtained. 
(b)  Any permits necessary for the use of explosives, pyrotechnics, fire or other special effects which involve flames or incendiary devices are the responsibility of the film production company. A copy of any permits required not issued by the city must be submitted. 
(c)  Use of public water by way of hydrant hookup shall require coordination with the city. Payment for any such water consumed shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 10, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-181. - Fees. 
Fees for various permits, applications or other requirements of this article will be contained in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 11, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-182. - Denial; term; revocation; suspension. 
(a)  Denial. Where the film permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing by mail within five working days of denial and the reasons therefor. 
(b)  Term. Permits issued pursuant to this article shall be effective for the stated purpose and dates specified in the permit. 
(c)  Revocation or suspension. A film production permit may be revoked or suspended for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Material false statement contained in the application; 
(2)  Failure to comply with federal, state or municipal laws and regulations; 
(3)  Failure to comply with any conditions imposed by the city on the issuance of the film production permit; 
(4)  Failure to operate the film production in accordance with such ordinances, laws, orders, rules and regulations as may be applicable; 
(5)  Conducting the film production business or activity in a fraudulent or disorderly manner or in a manner which endangers the public health, safety, or welfare, or in any manner which disrupts the public peace. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 12, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-183. - Residential locations. 
Filming in residential neighborhoods shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., unless specified otherwise in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 13, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-184. - Clean-up. 
The permittee shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use and the clean-up of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris upon completion of shooting at the scene and restored to the original condition before leaving the site. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 14, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-185. - Filming on private property. 
A permittee must obtain permission, consent and/or secure a lease for any use of property not owned or controlled by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 15, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-186. - Traffic control. 
In the event the filming activity will require the closure of traffic lanes or will impair the flow of traffic, the applicant will be required to submit a traffic control plan for review to the city. No permit will be issued until the traffic control plan has been approved. 
(1)  In the event any filming impairs traffic flow, permittees may be required to use local law enforcement personnel for traffic control purposes and comply with other traffic control requirements as deemed necessary by the city. 
(2)  Permittees shall furnish and install advance warning signs and any other traffic control devices in conformance with the National Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). The city may, at its discretion, require additional signage other than that required by the MUTCD. 
(3)  For any lane closure or intermittent traffic control, the period of time that traffic may be restricted will be determined by the city based on traffic volumes for the location and time of day. 
(4)  Traffic shall not be detoured across a double line without prior authorization of the city. 
(5)  Unless authorized by the city, any camera cars must be driven in the direction of traffic and must observe all traffic laws. 
(6)  Any emergency work by city crews and/or private contractors, under permit or contract to the city, shall have priority over filming activities. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 16, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 16-187. - Operations center; parking. 
(a)  In the event an operations center, also known as a base camp, is utilized, a site plan must be submitted. The site plan shall include the location address, layout of any trailers, storage facilities, and parking, etc. 
(b)  If a film production company desires to park equipment, trucks and/or cars in restricted parking zones, roadways or rights-of-way, temporary "No Parking" signs must be posted, subject to the prior approval of the city. In addition, authorization is required to lay and safely mat cable across sidewalks or roadways from a generator to a service point. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 17, 2-9-2015) 
Chapter 18 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Chapter 20 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. title 41. 

Sec. 20-1. - Abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any vehicle within the city, whether on a public street or private property, and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(b)  It shall be further unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, to allow any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than seven days; and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property including any roadway, street or right-of-way within the city for a longer time than seven days; except that this chapter shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; a vehicle in storage as defined herein; or a depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(c)  Upon violation hereof, the city shall be authorized, after notice as provided herein, to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter or lost, stolen or unclaimed. Any fine, removal fee, and impoundment fee may be assessed against the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the property by the municipal court for the city. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Notice means written notice by first class mail to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, or to the property owner, tenant, occupant or lessee where said vehicle is located. 
Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
Storage means concealment in an enclosed, permanent structure, concealment by a privacy fence of at least eight feet in height, or concealment by a planting of natural shrubs or bushes of at least eight feet in height, which structure, fence or planting conceals the vehicle from view from any residence other than the residence located on the property in which the vehicle is being stored and from public view from any street or highway. 
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery, and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies and wagons. 
(Ord. of 8-9-1999) 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-8 et seq. 
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Use of railroad right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or cause to be used the railroad right-of-way between the northern city limits and the Highway 41 overpass for the purpose of overnight camping or for the purpose of storage of equipment. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986) 
Sec. 22-2. - Disorderly conduct. 
The following acts are declared to be disorderly conduct and unlawful: 
(1)  Public use of obscene, abusive or profane language; 
(2)  Making of any threat of violence to or against any other person; 
(3)  Being noisy and disorderly in or upon any street or other public place in the city; 
(4)  The reckless and dangerous use of firearms or dangerous weapons; 
(5)  Any noisy or riotous conduct to the disturbance of the public peace and tranquility; 
(6)  Engaging in, promoting, encouraging, aiding or abetting any fight, riot or noisy and disorderly proceeding on any street or public place; 
(7)  Maintaining, being in possession of or control of any private building or dwelling where persons residing in the vicinity are disturbed by disorderly proceedings and/or illegal activities, riotous conduct, dangerous use of firearms, fighting, obscene, abusive or profane language; or 
(8)  Maintaining, being in possession of or control of any private building or dwelling where disorderly proceedings and/or illegal activities, riotous conduct, dangerous use of firearms, fighting, or use of obscene, abusive or profane language are taking place. 
(Ord. of 11-24-1986(1); Ord. of 11-24-1986(2)) 
Sec. 22-3. - Possession of open container of alcohol in street or public place. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic or malt beverages in any open container upon any street or public place within the city. The provisions of this section do not apply in motor vehicles. 
(Ord. of 11-24-1986(4)) 
Secs. 22-4—22-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 22-25. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Emerson Special Events Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 1, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-26. - Purpose. 
The city council recognizes the impact that special events have on the availability of city services, and the city council further recognizes the dangerous nature of fireworks to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city, and therefore adopts this procedure to license and regulate activities of this nature. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 2, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, balloons requiring fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, sparklers and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. 
Nonprofit organizations means 501(c)(3)-approved organizations including, but not limited to, religious, educational, charitable, scientific, literary, testing for public safety, fostering national or international amateur sports competition, or prevention of cruelty to children or animal organizations. 
Parades, marches and processions means a group or number of people or vehicles, or the combination thereof, consisting of five or more vehicles or ten or more persons, or a combination of three or more vehicles and five or more persons, proceeding or moving in a body or in concert along the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
Road race means any race on public rights-of-way that requires the closing of such rights-of-way or otherwise impedes the flow of normal traffic. 
Special event , as used in this article, means: 
(1)  Any activity which occurs upon private or public property that will affect the ordinary use of parks, public streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks, or which otherwise impacts the delivery of public safety services. 
(2)  Any activity which causes an increase of more than 100 percent in average daily trips on any public street within the city. 
(3)  The term "special event" includes, but is not limited to, fairs, tours, grand opening celebrations, races, parades, arts festivals, concerts, holiday celebrations, bicycle runs and block parties. Private social gatherings which will make no use of city streets other than for lawful parking are not included. Garage sales, lawn sales, rummage sales, flea market sales or any similar casual sales of tangible personal property are not included. 
Special event permit means the permit required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 3, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-28. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on a special event, parade, march, procession, or road race or discharge fireworks on private or public property within the limits of the city without first applying for or receiving a special event permit from the city. This is in addition to any permit that may be required by the International Fire Code or any other applicable code or law. Special event permits are a privilege, and as such, may be denied, revoked or suspended for any cause as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(b)  Any special event which is designed or intended to attract the participation or attendance of 50 or more individuals at any given point in time, or at which any fireworks shall be used, exploded or displayed, shall require a permit. 
(c)  Nonprofit organizations are not exempt from obtaining a special event permit but may be exempt from paying applicable fees. 
(d)  No person shall advertise, engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any special event, unless a special event permit shall first have been obtained from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 4, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-29. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Lawful picketing. Lawful picketing shall be conducted off the street or roadway and not in a manner as to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Any lawful picketing which crosses, traverses, or is otherwise conducted in or upon any street, roadway, right-of-way or sidewalk shall not be exempted from the permit requirement. 
(3)  Activities of, or sponsored by, a governmental agency that do not require the closing of any street, roadway, right-of-way or sidewalk. 
(4)  Any bona fide athletic event or contest which is scheduled and sponsored by any bona fide elementary school, secondary school, or high school situated within the city, so long as during such special event no fireworks shall be used, exploded, or displayed and that does not require the closing of any street, roadway, right-of-way or sidewalk. 
(5)  Any bona fide athletic event held by a business licensed in the city to hold athletic events, so long as during such event no fireworks shall be used, exploded, or displayed and that does not require the closing of any street, roadway, right-of-way or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 5, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-30. - Administration. 
The city manager or his designee shall be responsible for administering the provisions of this article. The city manager is authorized to act as the agent for the city in the receipt, processing and approval of applications for special event permits. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 6, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-31. - Application. 
(a)  Any person seeking the issuance of a special events permit shall complete the written application form provided by the city and shall provide all information therein and file that written application with the city. An application for a permit (that does not involve closing of a street, roadway, right-of-way or sidewalk) shall be filed not more than 180 days and not less than 60 days before the date and time which the proposed special event is to take place. However, for just cause, the city manager may waive the minimum 60-day filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter period if, after consideration of the date, time, place and nature of the special event, the number of participants and the necessity for city services which will be required in connection with the special event, the city manager reasonably deems it appropriate to waive the filing period. If the proposed special event is associated with freedom of speech (and requires no closure of a street, roadway, right-of-way or sidewalk) the minimum filing period is seven days. Applications shall include: 
(1)  The name, place of residence, mailing address, e-mail address and telephone number of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  If the event is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization must be provided. 
(3)  The name, place of residence, mailing address, e-mail address and telephone number of the individual person responsible for conducting the event. 
(4)  The dates and times scheduled for the event. 
(5)  The exact location/street address of the event. (Attach a copy of a rental/lease agreement if the property is owned by someone other than the applicant.) 
(6)  A detailed plan/layout of the event (to include placement of tents, chairs, tables, stages, port-a-johns, dumpsters, etc.). If the event involves the closing of a street, roadway, right-of-way or sidewalk, a detailed layout of the route to be taken (including starting and ending points), roads involved, dates, times and length of times roads will need to be closed, whether or not a full road closure is needed or if a rolling closure can be done, and the purpose of closing the road, must be submitted with application. 
(7)  The nature and types of activities that will occur, as well as stating how trash disposal and access to toilets will be handled. If the event is scheduled to last two hours or longer, the entity filing the special event permit application is required to provide a sufficient number of port-a-johns for event attendees, to be determined by the city. Said entity is also responsible for the disposal of trash generated by its event. The determination of whether port-a-johns and trash dumpsters are required and the number of port-a-johns and size of dumpsters rests solely with the city, with the reservation and costs of such provisions being the sole responsibility of the special event permit applicant. 
(8)  The approximate number of spectators and participants present or participating in the event. 
(9)  The purpose of the event. 
(10)  If the event is a parade, the following additional information shall be required: 
a.  The exact location of any marshaling or staging areas for the parade. 
b.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to arrive at the staging areas, and the times at which all such units will be dispersed therefrom. 
c.  The exact route to be traveled, including the starting point and termination point. 
d.  The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will participate in the parade, including a description of the types of animals and vehicles to be used in the parade. 
e.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the street, roadway, or sidewalks to be used. 
f.  A designation of any public facilities or equipment proposed to be utilized. 
(11)  Attachment of all authorizations required by any other governmental agency possessing jurisdiction over the event, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Food service permit. 
b.  Sign permit. 
c.  Alcohol license. 
d.  Fireworks license (state) and permit (county). 
e.  Any other permit or license or authorization as may be required. 
(12)  The application shall be signed by the applicant under oath. 
(b)  The application for a special event permit shall constitute an agreement by the applicant to pay for city personnel expenses and extraordinary services provided by the city, including all repairs, renovations and landscaping and turf restoration or replacement which is necessitated by virtue of the event, unless another agreement to fix all damages to public property caused by the event is agreed upon by the applicant and the city. 
(c)  The application for a special event permit shall constitute a covenant between the applicant and the city, specifying that the applicant will halt or interrupt event proceedings upon instruction from an officer of the city police department or county fire department, upon violation of any state or local police or fire codes. The city covenants not to instruct that the event be halted or interrupted unless, in its discretion, it perceives that the event shall cause or coincide with interference with traffic movement, disturbance of the peace, destruction of property, violation of the law or a threat to the public peace, health, safety, or welfare. 
(d)  The applicant for a special event permit shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from all damages, suits, actions or liabilities, including all attorney's fees, resulting from acts of the special event company or its agents during the event activity. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 7, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-32. - Approval criteria. 
The city manager or his designee shall issue a permit as provided herein upon receipt that the following standards for issuance of the permit have been substantially satisfied or found not applicable to the requested permit: 
(1)  The conduct of the event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrians or vehicular traffic in or contiguous to the route or location of the event. 
(2)  The conduct of the event will not require the diversion of so great a number of public safety personnel or equipment of the city to properly secure the event area and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent the current level of public safety services from being furnished to other parts of the city. 
(3)  The event shall not take place until inspections by concerned departments have been conducted and a determination has been made that all codes and ordinances have been met and satisfied. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and/or vehicles at the event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection or ambulance service to areas contiguous to the event area and other areas of the city. 
(5)  The conduct of the assembly is not reasonably likely to cause injury or intended to cause injury to persons or property or to provide disorderly conduct as defined by state statutes, provided that under no circumstances may the city deny a permit solely on the basis of the proposed content of speech or ideas of the group involved. 
(6)  Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will be made available in or adjacent to the event area and the applicant has agreed to clean the right-of-way or public property of rubbish and debris, returning it to its pre-event condition, within 24 hours of the conclusion of the event, with the understanding that failure to do so will result in the city conducting the clean-up and charging the applicant with any and all costs associated with the clean-up. 
(7)  The conduct of the assembly will not result in noise at a level inappropriate for the areas surrounding the event or as may be restricted by ordinance or permit. 
(8)  There are sufficient parking places near the event to accommodate the approximate number of automobiles reasonably expected to be driven to the assembly. 
(9)  The applicant has secured parks and recreation, public works, police, fire and emergency medical services/protection, if any, required under this section, and has prepaid the expenses therefor. 
(10)  If the event is a parade, such parade is not to be held for the primary purpose of advertising any product, goods or event which is primarily for private profit; provided, however, that the prohibition against advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used to conduct the event. 
(11)  If the event is a parade, and if the parade will traverse a state or federal highway, the persons or organization must also have a permit from the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 8, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-33. - Insurance. 
(a)  Liability insurance. Proof of general liability insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00 per incident or occurrence will be required before issuance of a permit, naming the city as an additional insured for protection against claims of personal injuries, wrongful death and property damage. The officers and employees of the city shall also be named as additional insured. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after 30 days' written notice to the city. A copy of the certificate shall remain on file at the city. 
(b)  Workers' compensation. Proof of workers' compensation insurance coverage for each and every employee in any way involved with the event will be required, under state and federal law. 
(c)  Fireworks. Proof of general liability insurance in the amount of at least $5,000,000.00 per incident or occurrence will be required before issuance of a permit, naming the city as an additional insured for protection against claims of personal injuries, wrongful death and property damage. The officers and employees of the city shall also be named as additional insured. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after 30 days' written notice to the city. A copy of the certificate shall remain on file at the city. 
(d)  Hold harmless agreement. A hold harmless agreement shall be executed by the applicant as provided by the city, pursuant to issuance of a permit. 
(e)  Security deposit. To ensure clean-up and restoration of the site, the city may require a security deposit in an amount to be determined by the city. The security deposit will be refunded if, after completion of the event, an inspection by the city of the site shows that no damage, debris or other significant occurrences related to the event have occurred. In the event the city inspection provides evidence of any of the aforementioned, the city shall be authorized to not refund the security deposit either in part or whole. This remedy in no manner restricts the ability of the city to make claim against the applicant's insurance company. 
(f)  Additional insurance. The city manager is authorized to require higher insurance amounts and any other insurances he deems appropriate due to the nature of the proposed special event. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 9, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-34. - Notification of affected residents and businesses. 
(a)  Following the submission of a special event permit application, but no less than 14 business days prior to commencement of the event, the event company shall notify, in writing, all businesses and residents affected by the proposed activity. The event company shall provide a signed copy of such notification to the city manager. Where the planned activity may have a significant and/or prolonged impact on the normal activities of the area (for example, activities impacting parking or traffic), the city manager shall have the discretion to require earlier notification. 
(b)  The area to be covered by the notification prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall be a minimum of a 500-foot radius of the planned activity. Based upon the nature of the planned activity, the city manager shall have the discretion to specify a wider area of notification as a condition of issuance of the permit. 
(c)  Notification should include all available information concerning the location and duration of the special event, preparation and wrap activities, the times of day required for each location, proposed parking restrictions and restrictions on public streets, proposed locations for all support facilities, as well as specifics regarding the use of lights, noise and any fireworks. The notification shall also include the event company's office telephone number and the location manager's telephone, cell phone, and pager numbers. 
(d)  After commencement of the special event activity, the event company shall provide written notification to the affected businesses and residents of any subsequent changes to the information provided in the original notification, and of any additional variances or permits granted by the city to the event company. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 10, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-35. - Fees. 
Fees for various permits, applications or other requirements of this article will be contained in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 11, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-36. - Fee exemptions. 
(a)  All nonprofit or religious organizations shall be exempt from the payment of fees if the special event does not involve fireworks, a parade, the use of city facilities or the use of city personnel. A copy of the 501(c)(3) form must be provided. 
(b)  Activities of, or sponsored by, a governmental agency shall be exempt from the payment of fees if the special event does not involve fireworks, a parade, the use of city facilities or the use of city personnel. 
(c)  Any bona fide athletic event or contest which is scheduled and sponsored by any bona fide elementary school, secondary school, high school or college situated within the city shall be exempt from the payment of fees if the special event does not involve fireworks, a parade, the use of city facilities or the use of city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 12, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-37. - Standards for denial of permit. 
Reasons for denial of a special event permit, as determined by the city include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The event will disrupt traffic within the city beyond practical resolution. 
(2)  The event will interfere with access to fire stations and/or fire hydrants. 
(3)  The location of the special event will cause undue hardship to adjacent businesses or residents. 
(4)  The event will require the diversion of so many public employees that allowing the event would unreasonably deny service to the remainder of the city. 
(5)  The application contains incomplete or false information. 
(6)  The applicant fails to comply with all terms of this article, including failure to remit all fees and deposits, or failure to provide proof of insurance/certificate of insurance, proof of authorization from applicable outside entities such as licenses or permits required by federal, state or county officials for alcohol licenses, food service, fireworks, bonds, and a hold harmless agreement to the city. 
(7)  Previous violations or uncooperativeness in prior permitted applications. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 13, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-38. - Denial; term; revocation; suspension. 
(a)  Denial. Where the special event permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing by mail within five working days of denial and the reasons therefor. 
(b)  Term. Permits issued pursuant to this article shall be effective for the stated purpose and dates specified in the permit. 
(c)  Revocation or suspension. A special event permit may be revoked or suspended for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Material false statement contained in the application; 
(2)  Failure to comply with federal, state or municipal laws and regulations; 
(3)  Failure to comply with any conditions imposed by the city on the issuance of the special event permit; 
(4)  Failure to operate the event in accordance with such ordinances, laws, orders, rules and regulations as may be applicable; or 
(5)  Conducting the special event or activity in a fraudulent or disorderly manner or in a manner which endangers the public health, safety, welfare or which in any manner disrupts the public peace. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 14, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-39. - Clean-up. 
The permittee shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use and the clean-up of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris upon completion of the event and restored to the original condition before leaving the site. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 15, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-40. - Traffic control. 
In the event the activity will require the closure of traffic lanes or will impair the flow of traffic, the applicant will be required to submit a traffic control plan for review to the city. No permit will be issued until the traffic control plan has been approved. 
(1)  In the event any event impairs traffic flow, permittees may be required to use local law enforcement personnel for traffic control purposes and comply with other traffic control requirements as deemed necessary by the city. 
(2)  Permittees shall furnish and install advance warning signs and any other traffic control devices in conformance with the National Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). The city may, at its discretion, require additional signage other than that required by the MUTCD. 
(3)  For any lane closure or intermittent traffic control, the period of time that traffic may be restricted will be determined by the city based on traffic volumes for locations and time of day. 
(4)  Traffic shall not be detoured across a double line without prior authorization of the city. 
(5)  Unless authorized by the city, any camera cars must be driven in the direction of traffic and must observe all traffic laws. 
(6)  Any emergency work by city crews and/or private contractors, under permit or contract to the city, shall have priority over filming activities. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 16, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-41. - Fireworks displays. 
No person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall expose, use or explode any fireworks unless a license shall first have been obtained from the state department of treasury, bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms division, and a permit has been obtained from the county. A copy of the following documents must be submitted with the special event permit application: 
(1)  A state license as issued by the state department of treasury, bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms division. 
(2)  An approval letter from the county fire marshal. 
(3)  A certificate of liability insurance. 
(4)  The firework company's contact name, address and telephone number. 
(5)  A detailed listing of the type and quantity of fireworks to be used. 
(6)  A detailed written statement outlining all appropriate safety procedures which will be used at the fireworks display in order to protect the safety of the public and all surrounding property, and number of city personnel necessary for the event. 
(7)  A detailed written statement describing what facilities and containers will be used to store fireworks. 
(8)  If applicable, the applicant's federal license number for transporting fireworks across state lines. 
(9)  A detailed list of the names, addresses, occupations, and backgrounds of all individuals who will be responsible for the actual display, use, or explosion of any fireworks. The background statement should include a complete history of the experience of the individuals involved with respect to their use of fireworks, including a detailed list and explanation of each and every accident resulting from the use of fireworks which the individuals have been responsible for or involved in. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 17, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-42. - Parades, marches and processions. 
Parades, marches and processions shall be considered special events as defined in this article and shall require issuance of a permit subject to the fees and conditions contained in this article and as specified in the subsections below. 
(1)  Prohibited without permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to be a part of or to engage in any parade, march, or procession or to march, parade or proceed along any street or sidewalk in the city as a part of or a party to such parade, march, or procession without having first obtained a written permit from the city manager or his designee for the holding of such parade, march or procession. 
(2)  Police vehicle to precede parades, marches and processions. All parades, marches and processions through the streets of the city shall be preceded by a police vehicle and conducted in such manner as to impede and interfere with the flow of traffic to the least possible extent. 
(3)  If the special event is a parade and if the parade will traverse a state or federal highway the persons or organization must also have a permit from the state department of transportation. 
This section does not apply to funeral processions, which are exempt from the special events ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 18, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-43. - Police; security. 
After obtaining the above information, the city shall determine whether and to what extent additional police protection will be required for the event for purposes of traffic, crowd control and security. If additional police protection for the event is deemed necessary by the city, it shall so inform the applicant for the permit. The applicant then shall have the obligation to secure police protection acceptable to the city at the sole expense of the applicant and shall pay the expenses of such protection as required. The city shall consider what additional manpower, equipment, and supplies are needed, as well as any other items or expenses which will be necessary. Private security may be used by the applicant with approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 19, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-44. - Fire protection; medical services. 
The county fire department, county fire marshal and county EMS shall make all determinations as to the need for on-site fire watch or emergency medical personnel. The applicant shall be required to follow the recommendations provided. All costs associated with the requirements for fire and medical personnel shall be at the expense of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 20, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-45. - Additional city services; personnel. 
After obtaining the above information, the city shall determine whether and to what extent additional city staff will be required for the event for purposes of traffic control, park and/or street cleaning and maintenance, etc. In making this determination, the city shall so inform the applicant for the permit. The applicant then shall have the obligation to secure event staff acceptable to the city at the sole expense of the applicant and shall pay the expenses of such maintenance as required. The city shall consider what additional manpower, equipment, and supplies are needed, as well as any other items or expenses which will be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 21, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-46. - Duties of permittee. 
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The event chairperson shall maintain custody of the permit, and upon demand, shall produce it to the city authorities. Under no circumstances may a permit be transferred from the applicant to any other person or organization. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 22, 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-47. - Interpretation. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to exempt the applicant or any other person from the requirements of the Georgia code or any other applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004, § 23, 3-9-2015) 
Chapter 23 - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Statement of intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter and the rules and regulations set forth to establish a fair and uniform system of personnel administration for all employees of the city under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 1, § 1)) 
Sec. 23-2. - Objectives. 
These policies provide for the establishment of a classification and compensation plan, the recruitment, selection and appointment of qualified applicants, benefits for employees, holidays and leave of absences, employee responsibilities, ethics and conduct, probationary periods, performance evaluations, disciplinary and non-disciplinary action, grievances, separations and records and the establishment or orderly procedures for administering the personnel system in accordance with the following merit principles: 
(1)  Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their relative ability, knowledge and skill, including open competition of qualified applicants for initial appointment; 
(2)  Establishing classification categories and pay rates consistent with the principles of providing comparable pay for comparable work; 
(3)  Training employees, as needed, to assure high quality performance; 
(4)  Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting inadequate performance, and separating employees whose inadequate performance cannot be corrected; 
(5)  Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, sex, religious creed, age or handicapped status, 
(6)  Establishing a procedure for the presentation and adjustment of employee or applicant grievances based on alleged inequitable treatment or alleged discrimination; 
(7)  Assuring employee's protection against partisan political coercion and prohibiting the use of official authority for interfering with or affecting the results of an election or the nomination for an office. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 1, § 2)) 
Sec. 23-3. - Application of policy. 
The personnel policy, except where specifically noted or exempted by law, shall apply to all regular, full and part time employees including probationary and temporary employees. The mayor and members of the city council and advisory boards and commissions shall not be subject to these personnel policies. As well, as a matter of course, independent contractors are not subject to the personnel policies. Independent contractors shall include, but not limited to, municipal court judges, municipal court solicitors, and municipal attorneys. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 1, § 3)) 
Sec. 23-4. - Formulating department rules and regulations. 
Each department head for the city shall be responsible for preparing a schedule of rules and regulations applicable to his respective department designed to insure the efficient operation of the department. Department rules shall be a complement to this chapter. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be, at all times, posted in a conspicuous place within the department for use by its personnel, as well as filed with the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 1, § 4)) 
Sec. 23-5. - Equal employment opportunity. 
The city is an equal employment opportunity employer and does not unlawfully discriminate on the basis of race, sex, age, color, religion, national origin, disabilities, marital status, pregnancy status, veteran's status or any other basis prohibited by federal, state or local law. We value and encourage diversity in our workforce. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 1, § 5)) 
Sec. 23-6. - Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
Individuals with disabilities who need reasonable accommodations, in order to apply or maintain employment, should contact Emerson City Hall at 770-382-9819. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 1, § 6)) 
Sec. 23-7. - Equal employment opportunity guaranteed. 
Any applicant, employee or other affected person who alleges discrimination or inequitable treatment in any personnel transaction shall have the right to discuss the matter fully with the appropriate department head. If the claim is not satisfactorily resolved, the aggrieved party may exercise the right of appeal to the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 1, § 7)) 
Sec. 23-8. - At will employment. 
It is the policy of the city that all employees do not have a written employment contract for a specific fixed term of employment. Any employment relationship with the city is "at will" in nature, which means that the employee may resign at any time and the employer may discharge the employee at any time with or without cause. Nothing in this chapter creates an employment contract or term between the city and its employees. No person has the authority to grant any employee any contractual rights of employment. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 1, § 8)) 
Sec. 23-9. - Responsibilities of city manager. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint and discharge all employees subject to the conditions of these policies and shall be responsible for the administration of the personnel policies and rules contained within which shall apply to all appointed employees except those specifically exempted. The city manager may assign a designated representative to assist with the administration of this chapter. He shall continually monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the compensation plan and shall recommend appropriate changes and revisions at any time necessary. At the time of budget preparation each year, he shall evaluate the entire pay structure, grade assignments, personnel salaries, pay scale and pay policies, and shall recommend appropriate changes and revisions to the mayor and city council as necessary. 
(b)  The city manager or his designated representative shall: 
(1)  Maintain a position classification plan; 
(2)  Develop and submit a pay plan for annual budget consideration; 
(3)  Publicize job vacancies to assure obtaining the most qualified applicants; 
(4)  Take job application and make information available to the proper supervisor; 
(5)  Be notified of all selections for hiring; 
(6)  Maintain appropriate central personnel records; and 
(7)  Recommend amendments and changes to the personnel policies. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 1, § 9)) 
Sec. 23-10. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
207(k) employee means an employee engaged in fire protection or law enforcement activities with 28-consecutive-day work periods. 
Accrual means the process of earning a benefit such as vacation or sick leave. 
Adverse action means an action taken by the city manager, or his designee, that results in a suspension without pay, salary reduction, demotion or dismissal. 
Anniversary date means the date the employee began his employment in the most recent position. 
Date of hire means the effective date of the individual's employment with the city. 
Discharge means termination of an employee by the city. 
Doctor means a doctor of medicine, osteopathy, dentist or dental surgeon currently holding an active state license. Also referred to as physician and/or medical professional. 
Exempt means employees exempted from the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). 
Grievance means a condition thought to be unjust and grounds for a formal complaint. 
His. Use of this pronoun shall apply equally to both males and females. 
Immediate family includes spouse, child, parent, brother, sister, grandparents, parent-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law or grandchildren. The definition also includes any other person living in the employee's household who is recognized by state law as the employee's dependent. 
In-law means a relative by marriage such as mother-in-law, father-in-law, daughter-in-law and son-in-law. 
Layoff means termination of an employee by the city for lack of work, lack of funds, reorganization or other changes that have taken place. 
May. The term "may" is conditional and implies there is discretion concerning whether a condition exists or an action will take place. 
Nonexempt means employees covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
Outside employment means employment in a work outside of the duties as a city employee. This shall include self-employment and other business activity as well as working for a second employer. 
Overtime means all work performed in excess of the hours permitted under the Fair Labor Standards Act work period. 
Personnel records includes personnel and medical files. An employee's medical file shall be kept separate from his personnel file. 
Probation means a period during which a new employee or an employee who has been transferred, promoted or demoted is being tested on job capability and performance. 
Probationary employee. A person appointed to an allocated position who has not yet successfully completed the designated probationary period. A probationary employee may be rejected, dismissed, demoted or suspended without the right to appeal. An employee who successfully completes the probationary period will be considered a regular employee of the city. 
Regular employee means an employee who has successfully completed the probationary period and is assigned to a position which is regular full-time or regular part-time. 
Regular full-time employee means an employee who has successfully completed the probationary period, is assigned to a position which is expected to continue for an indefinite duration, and works a shift schedule which will total no less than 2,080 hours per year. 
Regular part-time employee means an employee who has successfully completed the probationary period, is assigned to a position which is expected to continue for an indefinite duration, and works a shift schedule of less than 40 hours per week. 
Shall/will. These terms are unconditional and imply that a condition exists or an action will take place. 
Temporary employee means an employee who is assigned to a position which is not expected to continue for an indefinite duration, generally short-term or seasonal. Temporary employees are paid on an hourly basis only for hours actually worked. They are not eligible for benefits except those mandated by state and federal government. The temporary employee or the city can at any time or for any reason terminate the employment relationship. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 1, § 10)) 
Secs. 23-11—23-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CLASSIFICATION PLAN 

Sec. 23-37. - Classified service defined. 
The classified service shall consist of all current classes of permanent positions with the city listed in the official classification plan approved by the city council except those positions exempted. The classification plan may consist of future classes of positions. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 2, § 1)) 
Sec. 23-38. - Classification procedures. 
(a)  The city manager is responsible for the administration and maintenance of the classification plan. He shall see that a job description be prepared and currently maintained for each position included in the personnel system. Each position shall be evaluated in relation to all other positions systematically grouped into categories of like duties and responsibilities, assigned a common title and organized into a classification plan. He shall also prepare and maintain current class specification outlining the distinguishing characteristics of work and desirable or required training and experience for each category of positions in the classified service. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each department head to submit to the city manager new position descriptions for all affected positions each time a department or division is permanently or substantially reorganized, when major changes in duties and responsibilities occur for any job, when a new position is requested, or at other times when the classification level of a position may be affected. 
(c)  New positions shall be established only with the approval of the city council, after which the city manager shall either: 
(1)  Allocate the new position to the appropriate class within the existing classification plan; or 
(2)  Recommend that the city council amend the position classification plan to establish a new class to which the new position may be allocated. 
(d)  When the city manager finds that a substantial change has occurred in the nature or level of duties and responsibilities of an existing position, he shall: 
(1)  Reallocate the position to the appropriate class within the existing classification plan; or 
(2)  Recommend that the city council amend the position classification plan to establish a new class to which the position may be allocated. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 2, § 2)) 
Sec. 23-39. - Official copy of the position classification plan. 
The city clerk shall be responsible for maintaining an official copy of the position classification plan, which shall include a current list of class titles and class specifications. A copy of the official plan shall be available for inspection by the public under reasonable conditions during business hours. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 2, § 3)) 
Sec. 23-40. - Classification appeals. 
Any employee who believes that his position is improperly classified may request, through the appropriate department head, that the city manager review the proper classification of the position. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 2, § 4)) 
Sec. 23-41. - Amendment to the plan. 
Classes of positions shall be added to and deleted from the position classification plan upon the recommendation of the city manager and with approval of the city council. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 2, § 5)) 
Secs. 23-42—23-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMPENSATION PLAN 

Sec. 23-67. - Definition. 
The compensation plan shall include: 
(1)  Current pay grade allocations for all classification categories in the classified service; 
(2)  A schedule of salary ranges consisting of minimum and maximum rates of pay with intermediate steps identified for all classes of positions; and 
(3)  The rules and policies contained in this article regulating pay rates and procedures. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 1)) 
Sec. 23-68. - Administration of the plan. 
The city manager shall be responsible for administering the compensation plan and setting personnel salaries in accordance with guidelines and policies established by the city council. In determining salaries the following factors shall be considered: 
(1)  Competency of the individual; 
(2)  Training and experience of the individual; 
(3)  Training and expertise required for the job; 
(4)  Salaries paid and fringe benefits provided to comparable municipal, county, state and private sector employees; 
(5)  Change in the cost of living in the area during the fiscal year; 
(6)  Any applicable state and federal laws and/or regulations; and 
(7)  The financial condition of the city. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 2)) 
Sec. 23-69. - Limitations on rates and increases. 
(a)  No employee may be compensated below the minimum step or above the maximum step of the pay grade range for his class of positions. 
(b)  All raises and increases are subject to the availability of funds and financial policies established by the mayor and city council. 
(c)  All merit increases granted shall be upon written recommendation of the respective department head and approval by the city manager. 
(d)  A salary increase given to any employee shall consist of no less than one and not more than two full steps in the salary range established for his grade. 
(e)  No employee shall receive more than a two-step salary increase in any fiscal year without prior written approval of the mayor and city council. This chapter does not apply to increases as a result of promotions, demotions or position reclassification. 
(f)  Salary adjustments approved after the first working day of a pay period shall become effective at the beginning of the next pay period or at such specific date as may be provided. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 3)) 
Sec. 23-70. - Appointment rate. 
The minimum (entry) rate of pay for a class shall be paid except for a qualified prospective employee or lack of available applicants at the minimum rate. The city manager may authorize employment above the minimum rate if appropriate. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 4)) 
Sec. 23-71. - Permanent status increase. 
An employee who successfully completes a probationary period following appointment or promotion may be granted a one step increase in salary. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 5)) 
Sec. 23-72. - Promotion rate. 
Promotion is movement from one class of positions to another classification with a higher salary grade and range. An employee who is promoted shall normally be advanced at least to the first step of the new range which constitutes an increase in salary and shall enter probation again for the new class. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 6)) 
Sec. 23-73. - Transfer rate. 
Transfer is movement from one position to another of the same or different classification with the same salary grade and range. An employee who is transferred will not normally receive an increase in salary and shall enter probation again for the new position. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 7)) 
Sec. 23-74. - Demotion rate. 
Demotion is movement from one class of positions to another classification having a lower salary grade and range. An employee who is demoted shall be reduced at least to the maximum rate of the new class or lower. A demotion may be voluntary or involuntary. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 8)) 
Sec. 23-75. - Reappointment rate. 
Reappointment is the rehiring of a permanent status employee who was separated while in good standing with the city. The reappointment rate shall normally be set at any step of the applicable range for the class that is not higher than the employee received at the time of separation. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 9)) 
Sec. 23-76. - Reclassification and reassignment rates. 
(a)  Reclassification. An employee whose position has been reclassified shall be compensated in the manner described under "promotion rate" or "demotion rate" as appropriate. 
(b)  Reassignment. An employee whose class is reassigned to a higher grade shall move to the first step of the new range which will constitute an increase in salary; provided, however, that the city manager may make additional adjustments based on circumstances. Reassignment to a lower grade is treated as a demotion. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 10)) 
Sec. 23-77. - Part-time work rate. 
Part time compensation rates are defined in the compensation plan for those job classifications which part time employment is allowed. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 11)) 
Sec. 23-78. - Overtime payment rate. 
(a)  This section shall not contravene the provisions of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) pertaining to the minimum rate of compensation for employment in excess of an established workweek/period, excluding exempted positions. To be eligible for overtime pay, the employee must have actually been present at work for the specified number of hours except on council designated holidays. Personal leave will not count as hours worked for calculating overtime pay. 
(b)  The city's responsibility for payment of overtime is as follows: The city will generally compensate overtime at the rate of 1½ for hours worked in excess of the number of hours allowed per work week/period defined below: 
(1)  Nonexempt employees will be paid at the rate of 1½ for hours worked in excess of 40 hours per week. 
(2)  Sworn police officers (207(k) employees) will be paid at the rate of 1½ for hours worked in excess of 171 hours in a 28-day work period. 
(c)  Employees in positions determined to be "exempt" from the FLSA are not eligible for overtime pay. Compensatory time off may be granted in lieu of overtime payment if the employee so elects, and provided the city can reasonably accommodate time off without undue burden or interruption of vital services. No allowances whatsoever shall be made for overtime work not authorized and approved by the department head or city manager. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 12)) 
Sec. 23-79. - Holiday payment rate. 
(a)  An employee who is not on approved leave and fails to report on a scheduled workday before or after a holiday shall not be paid for the holiday. Holidays which occur during approved annual or sick leave shall not be charged to annual or sick leave. 
(b)  Any regular, full time employee who is required to work on a council approved holiday shall receive pay for each hour worked plus holiday pay equal to each hour worked or eight hours, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 13)) 
Sec. 23-80. - On-call pay rate. 
Non-exempt employees who are on-call will be compensated at her standard rate of pay for two hours each day they are assigned as on-call. On-call hours are exempt and therefore do not contribute to the calculation of overtime pay. When an on-call employee responds to a call, hours worked begins once the employee starts working and will always be rounded up to the nearest quarter hour. The actual hours worked while on-call are not exempt and do contribute to the calculation of overtime pay. Actual hours worked while on-call also reduce the number of exempt hours each day by the number of hours worked. On-call employees will not be eligible to receive mileage/travel reimbursement for costs incurred in traveling to her assigned workplace. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 14)) 
Sec. 23-81. - Annual merit increase. 
With satisfactory performance and subject to the availability of funds, an employee may be granted a one step increase in salary at the beginning of any pay period he has served 12 months in the class since the last permanent status increase or annual increase was granted. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 15)) 
Sec. 23-82. - Special merit increase. 
The mayor and city council may grant additional special increases to employees in order to recognize exceptional performance or increased job skills and abilities, to correct errors or inequities, or for other job-related reasons. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 16)) 
Sec. 23-83. - Cost-of-living increase. 
At the discretion of the mayor and city council, employees may be given additional pay increases each year to offset the effects of inflation on real wages. Such increases shall not preclude eligibility for other salary increases. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 17)) 
Sec. 23-84. - Workers compensation payments. 
An employee who receives workers' compensation payments while receiving sick or annual leave benefit payments under these policies shall be required to endorse all such workers' compensation payments over to the city or shall have an equivalent amount deducted from his regular pay. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 18)) 
Sec. 23-85. - Termination pay. 
An employee who resigns or is terminated shall be paid for all accrued and unused annual leave provided he has turned in all city-owned equipment and property in his possession and has no outstanding liabilities to the city. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 19)) 
Sec. 23-86. - Payroll deduction. 
Deductions shall be made from each employee's salary, as required by law. Additional deductions may be made upon the request of the employee on determination by the city manager as to capability of payroll equipment, associated increase in workload and appropriateness of the deduction. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 3, § 20)) 
Secs. 23-87—23-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RECRUITMENT, SELECTION AND APPOINTMENTS 

Sec. 23-113. - Applications. 
The city reserves the right to accept applications only for current job vacancies. In order for applicants to be considered for employment, a city employment application must be completed. Applicants may also attach a resume to the application; however, a resume will not be accepted in lieu of an application. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 4, § 1)) 
Sec. 23-114. - Hiring process. 
The city manager or personnel officer will administer and coordinate the hiring process for all position vacancies to ensure compliance with contractual, legal and equal opportunity requirements. All hiring efforts are conducted in the spirit of equal opportunity. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 4, § 2)) 
Sec. 23-115. - Recruitment and selection for vacant positions. 
(a)  Recruitment may be closed to consider only qualified current employees or may be open for public competition. When a vacancy occurs, a recruitment plan will be developed by the city manager and the department head based on current organizational needs. 
(b)  Vacancies shall be announced on public or employee bulletin boards, via newspapers and by other means to assure obtaining well qualified candidates for the positions. The announcement for the position shall specify the title, salary range, minimum qualification requirements, manner of making application, and final date on which applications will be accepted. Every reasonable effect shall be made to publicize vacancies so that all potential candidates are informed and all qualified persons are attracted to compete. 
(c)  The personnel officer shall provide the candidate with an application form which requires information covering training, experience and other job-related information. All applications must be signed by the applicant. Once a hiring decision is made the application forms for those individuals not hired shall be maintained as specified in the City of Emerson records retention schedule. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 4, § 3)) 
Sec. 23-116. - Pre-employment testing. 
Examinations may be developed for certain positions based on the position's responsibilities, the qualifications required, and resources available. The examination may consist of oral interview/application review, a structured questionnaire, practical tests, written tests, in-basket exercise, fitness test or assessment center, etc. In all cases, the testing will be job related and designed to determine the candidate's knowledge, skills and abilities for the position. The examination contents are developed by the affected department. Examination contents are confidential and unauthorized disclosure to any candidate is grounds for discipline. In certain situations, outside consultants may be contracted to assist with test development and/or examination. The department head shall ensure that all testing is based on bona fide occupational qualifications. The department head shall ensure that reasonable accommodations are made in test procedures to assure that persons with disabilities can be tested in an appropriate manner. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 4, § 4)) 
Sec. 23-117. - Qualification standards. 
Applicants, in order to qualify for a vacancy, shall meet the employment standards established by the position classification plan, applicable provisions of federal and state laws, and such other reasonable minimum standards as to character, aptitude, ability to meet the public, and physical condition as may be established by the mayor and city council with the advice and recommendation of the city manager and department heads; provided, however, that such minimum standards are necessary for satisfactory job performance and do not discriminate against individuals or groups in protected categories. Every effort shall be made to accept equivalent qualifications for minimum job standards when appropriate. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 4, § 5)) 
Sec. 23-118. - Types of appointments. 
When a person is employed or promoted, the personnel action form shall indicate that the employee has been given one of the following types of appointments: 
(1)  Probationary. The initial six-month or longer trial period of employment during which an employee is observed for effective job performance and completion of mandated state training if applicable. 
(2)  Temporary. Temporary appointments may be made to fill positions which are authorized and established for a specified period of time; when the city requires the service of one or more employees on a seasonal or intermittent basis; or in cases of emergency. Permanent status and other benefits or advantages of the personnel system, may not be earned while serving in this capacity unless specifically authorized by the city council. 
(3)  Regular. An employee serving a probationary appointment shall be given a regular appointment upon satisfactory completion of the probationary "working test" period. A probationary promotional appointment does not affect an employee's earned permanent status or employment rights acquired in another position. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 4, § 6)) 
Sec. 23-119. - Probationary period. 
(a)  The probationary period shall be regarded as an integral part of the selection process and shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the most effective adjustment of a new employee to his position and for rejecting any employee whose performance is not satisfactory. 
(b)  For new appointments and promotions, the probationary period shall normally be six months in duration. Public safety personnel who have not completed mandated state training during the first six months shall have their probationary period extended up to 12 months. If a department head requests an extension of the probationary period within ten days prior to expiration, the city manager may extend the duration of such period and expiration. No extension totaling more than one year shall be allowed. 
(c)  Only employees in permanent status are eligible for promotion. The probationary period for promotional appointments shall normally be six months. If a person is removed during the probationary period following a promotion, he shall be entitled to reemployment rights in the former class when a vacancy occurs. 
(d)  Evaluation of performance during probation: 
(1)  During the probationary period, the department head will frequently confer with the employee as to job-related goals and objectives for successful job performance and shall clearly communicate progress made and acceptability of work performance. The department head shall keep written records of all communication. At least ten days prior to the expiration of the probationary period, the department head shall notify the city manager in writing by designated form whether or not the employee has satisfactorily completed the probationary period. Prior to the expiration of the probationary period, the city manager shall notify the employee in writing as to whether or not he or she has successfully completed probation. 
(2)  Failure to send such a notice shall automatically grant the employee permanent status in the position. 
(3)  During the probationary period, a department head, with the prior approval of the city manager, may remove an employee who is unable and/or unwilling to perform the duties of the position satisfactorily or whose habits and dependability do not merit continued employment. The department head shall immediately report such intended removal to the city manager and his reasons. Upon approval by the city manager, the department head shall notify the employee and state the reasons for such action. Employees serving their probationary period do not have appeal rights unless there is alleged discrimination because of race, color, creed, sex, national origin, age or handicapped status, or unless the charges for dismissal could potentially damage the reputation of the employee sufficiently to warrant a name-clearing hearing to protect liberty interests. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 4, § 7)) 
Sec. 23-120. - Employee performance evaluations. 
(a)  The primary objectives of the employee performance evaluation system shall be to assess each employee's performance in relation to performance standards established for the job, to identify and document positive accomplishments, and to communicate any areas which are unsatisfactory or in need of improvement. The report of performance shall be used in determining eligibility for salary increases, as a basis in part for promotion, demotion, transfers, training, and dismissal or other types of discipline; and as a factor to consider in determining the order of layoffs. 
(b)  Evaluation process: 
(1)  All employees, except those exempted from the personnel system, shall be evaluated by their immediate supervisor and/or department head prior to the completion of probation and at least annually thereafter, and at any other time deemed appropriate. The department head shall furnish the completed report of performance to the city manager at least ten days prior to completion of the evaluation period. 
(2)  The report of performance shall be discussed directly with the employee. If an employee disagrees with the evaluation, he may submit a written statement which shall be attached to the evaluation form and forwarded to the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 4, § 8)) 
Sec. 23-121. - Fraud prohibited. 
No persons shall make any false statements, certificate, mark or report with regard to any application, test, certification or appointment made under any provision of these policies or in any matter commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of this article and policies. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 4, § 9)) 
Sec. 23-122. - Payment for special treatment prohibited. 
No person shall, directly or indirectly, give, render, pay, offer, solicit or accept any money, service or other valuable consideration for any appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion to, or any advantage in, a position in the career service. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 4, § 10)) 
Secs. 23-123—23-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BENEFITS 

Sec. 23-149. - Group health insurance. 
The city offers to all its regular full-time employees who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth by the city's insurance coverage and their eligible dependents group health coverage group health coverage. Premiums for all regular full-time employees who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth by the city's insurance coverage may be paid in full by the city. Premiums for regular full time employees who wish to have dependent care coverage are paid at the same rate as for single coverage. Any amount due is the responsibility of the employee. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 5, § 1)) 
Sec. 23-150. - Group dental. 
The city offers to all its regular full-time employees who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth by the city's insurance coverage and their eligible dependents group dental coverage. Premiums for all regular full-time employees who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth by the city's insurance coverage may be paid in full by the city. Premiums for regular full time employees who wish to have dependent care coverage are paid at the same rate as for single coverage. Any amount due is the responsibility of the employee. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 5, § 2)) 
Sec. 23-151. - Group vision. 
The city offers to all its regular full-time employees who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth by the city's insurance coverage and their eligible dependents group vision coverage. Premiums for all regular full-time employees who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth by the city's insurance coverage may be paid in full by the city. Premiums for regular full time employees who wish to have dependent care coverage are paid at the same rate as for single coverage. Any amount due is the responsibility of the employee. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 5, § 3)) 
Sec. 23-152. - Life insurance. 
The city provides life insurance to all its regular full-time employees who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth by the city's insurance coverage. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 5, § 4)) 
Sec. 23-153. - Retirement system. 
(a)  The city is a member of the Georgia Municipal Association retirement plan. The city adheres to GMA's guidelines and procedures as adopted and/or updated. The city provides all regular full-time city employees a retirement program. Employees receive a defined benefit plan which is fully funded by the city. A regular full-time employee will be enrolled in the city's retirement program following one year of employment. 
(b)  A participant who meets the requirements of the city's retirement program, upon retirement on his normal retirement date, shall receive a monthly retirement benefit under which payments shall commence on the first day of the month coinciding with his normal retirement date and shall be payable on the first day of each month thereafter during his lifetime. The amount of the monthly retirement benefit of service shall be in accordance with the city's retirement program. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 5, § 5)) 
Sec. 23-154. - Social security. 
(a)  All employees are automatically included as participants in the social security system (FICA) which provides workers with the following benefits: retirement insurance, survivor's insurance, disability insurance, Medicare for the disabled and the aged, and supplemental security income. These benefits are in addition to public employees' retirement system benefits for which the employee may be eligible to receive. 
(b)  Financing of the program is accomplished by employee payroll deduction contributions and through a match paid by the city. Employee contributions stop each year once they have paid the required percentage as designated by the federal government. The salary limit and percentage are subject to change at the beginning of each year according to federal guidelines. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 5, § 6)) 
Sec. 23-155. - Unemployment compensation. 
The city is a covered employer under the unemployment compensation law. The basic objective of the program is to provide a partial replacement of wages for its employees during short periods of involuntary unemployment. The program is financed completely by the city. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 5, § 7)) 
Sec. 23-156. - Workers compensation. 
(a)  All employees are covered by worker's compensation, a program of industrial insurance to protect workers, their families and dependents from loss due to an injury caused by an accident arising out of and in the course of employment. The program provides for payment of medical and hospital bills, physical and vocational rehabilitation, and financial compensation while the worker is disabled, either temporarily or permanently, and is unable to work. It also provides for compensation for permanent partial disability such as the loss of a finger, eye, foot, etc., and assures death benefits and compensation to the worker's family or dependents in the event the injury is fatal. 
(b)  No compensation shall be allowed for the first seven calendar days of incapacity resulting from an injury, including the day of the injury, except the benefits provided for in O.C.G.A. § 34-9-200; however, if an employee is incapacitated for 21 consecutive days following an injury, compensation shall be paid for such first seven calendar days of incapacity. 
(c)  Generally, the average weekly wage over a 13-week period immediately preceding the injury shall be taken as the basis upon which to compute compensation. The city shall pay or cause to be paid a weekly benefit equal to two-thirds of the employee's average weekly wage but not more than $250.00 per week. Time spent on worker's compensation leave shall not be considered hours worked for purposes of leave accrual. An employee may be paid for earned sick leave while on worker's compensation leave. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 5, § 8)) 
Sec. 23-157. - Continuance of medical coverage (COBRA). 
(a)  In accordance with the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA), an employee and his or her dependents are entitled to elect to remain in the employer group health plan after it would normally end without proof of insurability. There will be no employer contributions for this extended coverage. The duration of coverage is as follows: 
(1)  Covered dependents who are terminated from the health plan because of divorce or death of the employee or Medicare—36 months; 
(2)  Covered dependent children who would lose coverage because of their ineligibility—36 months. 
(b)  Loss of coverage through: 
(1)  Reduction in hours—18 months; 
(2)  Termination (other than for gross misconduct)—18 months; 
(3)  Lay-off for economic reasons—18 months; 
(4)  Voluntary resignation—18 months. 
(c)  Employees and covered dependents who have been determined to be disabled under the Social Security Act may continue coverage for 29 months. The disability must exist prior to the date of the qualifying event and the member must provide notice of the disability determination to the employer within 18 months and no later than 60 days after the date of the Social Security Administration's determination. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 5, § 9)) 
Sec. 23-158. - Vehicles. 
(a)  The city may provide employees with vehicles to help them in carrying out their job efficiently and effectively. Employees shall not use a city vehicle for personal or private business. The only exception to this is commuting to and from work in a city vehicle. Use of a city vehicle for commuting must be authorized by the city manager for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  The employee responds to emergency or after hours calls; and 
(2)  The cost of providing the vehicle is less than the expense of mileage reimbursements for using a personal vehicle on city business; or 
(3)  The vehicle carries special equipment or personnel to respond to an emergency. Delays in getting this equipment or personnel to the scene of the emergency would result in increased danger to the public. 
(b)  The city may provide a vehicle or an allowance for the use of a personal vehicle as an additional fringe benefit for selected personnel. The criteria for providing such a benefit shall be: 
(1)  The city receives intangible benefits from giving the employee the vehicle benefit such as the speed of response to emergencies or after hours services which justify the benefit. 
(2)  Provision of the vehicle benefit is considered to be a part of the total pay package for the position. 
(3)  An employee who is provided an allowance for the use of a personal vehicle during official business may be covered by the city's vehicle insurance upon approval by the city manager and notification and approval is provided to the city by the city's insurer. 
(c)  Employees may not use a city vehicle for any personal use other than authorized commuting to and from work. Any further personal use of the vehicle may result in disciplinary action against the employee. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 5, § 10)) 
Sec. 23-159. - Educational enrichment. 
(a)  Upon the recommendation of the department head and the approval of the city manager, an employee may receive payment for the cost of tuition and books for any job-related course successfully completed. Such course shall be taken during employee off-duty hours unless it is necessary training for the job which is specifically approved by the department which involves travel; the city manager may also approve compensation based on regular city travel policies. 
(b)  Any employee who receives special training for his job qualifications through any private or governmental institution at the expense of the city and who thereafter within two years from receiving said special training terminates, either voluntarily or involuntarily, his employment with the city, shall repay to the city a pro rata part of such expense based upon the remaining balance of said two-year period. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 5, § 11)) 
Sec. 23-160. - Uniforms and equipment. 
Uniforms for police and fire department employees and such other employees as the city manager may authorize may be furnished by the city. Equipment deemed essential to job performance, including safety equipment, may also be furnished if authorized by the city manager. Employees are expected to maintain all uniforms and equipment in good condition, excluding normal wear, and turn in all items upon termination of employment. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 5, § 12)) 
Sec. 23-161. - Christmas bonus. 
The mayor and city council may authorize a Christmas bonus to both full time and part time employees. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 5, § 13)) 
Secs. 23-162—23-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOLIDAYS AND LEAVES OF ABSENCE 

Sec. 23-187. - Holidays. 
(a)  Employees will receive the following paid holidays: 
(1)  New Year's Day; 
(2)  Martin Luther King's Birthday; 
(3)  Good Friday; 
(4)  Memorial Day; 
(5)  Fourth of July; 
(6)  Labor Day; 
(7)  Veterans Day; 
(8)  Thanksgiving Day; 
(9)  Day After Thanksgiving; 
(10)  Christmas Eve; 
(11)  Christmas Day. 
(b)  Other days may also be designated as paid holidays at the discretion of the city council. Whenever a holiday falls on Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be designated as substitute holiday and observed as the official holiday for that year. When the holiday falls on Sunday, the following Monday shall be designated as the official holiday for that year. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 6, § 1)) 
Sec. 23-188. - Annual (vacation) leave. 
The following provisions shall govern all terms and conditions of annual leave: 
(1)  Eligibility. All regular, full-time employees shall be entitled to accrue annual leave. Temporary, part-time, probationary or other exempt employees shall not be eligible for annual leave under these policies unless authorized by the city council. 
(2)  Rate of leave accrual. Employees will receive a paid vacation on the following basis: 
a.  One year of service — one-week vacation; 
b.  Two years of service — two weeks' vacation; 
c.  Ten years of service — three weeks' vacation; 
d.  Fifteen years of service — four weeks' vacation. 
(3)  Request for leave. A request for leave shall be submitted to the employee's immediate supervisor on a form designated by the city manager. Leave may be taken only after approval of the supervisor and/or the department head so that the department can function without hiring additional temporary help. 
(4)  Maximum allowable accumulation. Department heads shall encourage employees to utilize vacation leave and shall make every effort to allow for scheduled time off. Unused vacation leave not to exceed five (20) days or shifts may be carried forward into the next calendar year and all leave accumulated beyond five (20) days or shifts at the end of each year shall be subject to forfeiture unless the city manager authorized such excessive leave to be carried forward. Normally an employee may not be granted pay in lieu of vacation time off. Exceptions may be granted by the city manager and must be recommended by the department head. 
(5)  Payment for unused leave. An employee separated from the city service shall be paid at the regular rate for all unused annual leave provided he has turned in all city-owned equipment issued and has no other outstanding liabilities or debts to the city. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 6, § 2)) 
Sec. 23-189. - Sick leave. 
Employees accumulate sick leave at a rate of four hours per month for a total of six days per year. A medical certificate signed by a licensed physician may be required by a department head or the city manager to substantiate a request for sick leave for the following reasons: 
(1)  Any period of absence consisting of three or more consecutive working days. 
(2)  To support a request for sick leave during a period when the employee is on vacation leave. 
(3)  Leave of any duration if absence from duty recurs frequently or habitually, provided the employee has been notified or warned that a certificate will be required. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 6, § 3)) 
Sec. 23-190. - Family medical leave. 
(a)  The city will provide employees with up to 12 weeks of unpaid family and medical leave during any 12-month period for the following: 
(1)  Birth, adoption or placement of a child for foster care. 
(2)  To care for a spouse, child or parent with a serious health condition or due to the disabling illness of the employee. 
(b)  To be eligible for leave, an employee must have worked for at least 12 months for the city and for a minimum of 1,250 hours during the previous year. Employees who take leave will be entitled to return to their positions, or positions with equivalent benefits, pay and other terms and conditions of employment. The city can deny a position to employees who are among the highest paid ten percent of the employees where the denial is necessary to prevent substantial and grievous economic injury to the operations of the city. 
(c)  Employees will not accrue any seniority or employment benefits during any period of leave. The city will provide coverage under a group health insurance plan for employees who are on leave under the same conditions as coverage would have been provided if no leave had been taken. Employees are required to provide at least 30 days' notice before beginning to take leave. 
(d)  Leave resulting from the birth of a child or the placement of a child for adoption or foster care cannot be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule unless the employee and city agree. Leave resulting from the serious illness of a child, spouse, parent or the employee can be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule when medically necessary. 
(e)  The city may require that any accrued personal leave of the employee be substituted for the 12 weeks of leave provided by the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act. Where leave is requested as a result of a serious health condition, the city can require the employee to provide a certification issued by a health care provider. The city can require an opinion from a second health care provider, which will be paid for by the city, where there is doubt as to the validity of the certification provided by the employee. If there is a conflict between the two opinions, the city may pay for an opinion by a third health care provider. The opinion of the third health care provider will be binding upon both the city and employee. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 6, § 4)) 
Sec. 23-191. - Military leave. 
(a)  The authority for this section is derived from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279 and applies to all city employees who are affiliated with the United States Armed Forces, National Guard or Coast Guard. 
(b)  The city is obligated to release employees for service with the armed forces when the employee participates in: 
(1)  Annual training. 
(2)  Inactive duty training assemblies (weekend drills). 
(3)  Involuntary call-up. 
(c)  Ordered military duty shall result in no loss of seniority status or benefits which would have normally accrued if the employee had not been absent for such purposes. The city is obligated to grant military leave with pay to the employees for absences not exceeding 18 calendar days per year in accordance with state law. The city shall not require the employee to use personal leave for such purposes. The employee may, however, request use of personal leave, or leave without pay, to supplement absences exceeding those covered by the 18-day military leave allowance. 
(d)  The employee is responsible to provide to his department head copies of all military orders which will result in a leave of absence for military duty. Orders must specify the duties of absence, promulgation authority, letter order number and signature of issuing authority. Employees are required to notify their supervisors at the earliest possible date upon learning of scheduled military duty. Employees who fail to return to work on the date specified in the leave request without receiving an extension in advance are subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. Inactive duty training dates (weekend drills) should be provided to the department head as soon as available if the dates conflict with scheduled employment with the city. 
(e)  Extended leave of absence (exceeding 18 calendar day allowance) will be pursuant to the policy on leave of absence without pay. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 6, § 5)) 
Sec. 23-192. - Jury/court leave. 
(a)  Any regular full-time employee who is required to serve on a jury, or as a result of official city duties is required to appear before a court, legislative committee or quasi-judicial body as a witness in response to a subpoena or other directive, shall be allowed authorized leave with pay. A probationary employee called will have his probationary period extended to by the same amount of time as required for serving on jury duty. An employee who receives notice of jury duty or witness service must notify his supervisor immediately in order that arrangements may be made to cover the position. The city reserves the right to request that an employee who is called for jury be excused if their absence would create a hardship on the operational effectiveness of the department to which they are assigned. 
(b)  In order to receive full pay for the necessary time off duty, all such fees received by the employee (other than meal and travel allowance) must be deposited with the city clerk. City employees who perform jury duty or who are required to be a witness in a legal proceeding when such is required during periods when the employee is otherwise in a non-duty status will be permitted to retain all fees and allowances received therefore. 
(c)  Employees who appear in court as the plaintive or defendant in any action not related to their official duties shall not be paid for time away from work unless that time is accrued personal leave. 
(d)  Employees are to return to work after jury duty although no more than the regularly scheduled number of hours for both jury duty and work shall be required. If excused as a juror on any given day, the employee is expected to contact the department head and to report to work as instructed. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 6, § 6)) 
Sec. 23-193. - Bereavement leave. 
A regular full time employee who has a member of his immediate family taken by death shall receive up to three days off with pay as bereavement leave to arrange and/or attend funeral activities. If additional time is necessary, it shall be taken as annual leave or unpaid leave if annual leave has been exhausted with authorization of the appropriate department head and city manager. Time for attendance at the funeral of others may be granted using annual leave, leave without pay or made up within the same pay period. The employee must notify his immediate supervisor upon making determination to take time off from work. Employees who fail to return to work on the date specified to the department head without receiving an extension are subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 6, § 7)) 
Sec. 23-194. - Workers compensation and use of leave. 
(a)  An employee who is temporarily disabled because of injury or illness sustained directly in the performance of his work is covered by the provision of the State Workers Compensation Act. Such injury or illness must be reported immediately or as soon as possible thereafter to the employee's supervisor. 
(b)  An employee receiving workers' compensation payments who has elected to use sick or annual leave shall be required to endorse such payments over to the city or have an equivalent deduction made from his regular rate of pay, whichever option is preferred by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 6, § 8)) 
Sec. 23-195. - Leave of absence without pay. 
Requests for leave of absence without pay shall be in writing and shall state specifically the reasons for the request, the date desired to begin the leave, and the date of return. The request shall normally be submitted by the employee to the affected department head. The department head shall confer with the city manager and grant, modify or deny the request based upon the best interest of the city, giving due consideration to the reasons given by the employee, and the requirements of any applicable state and federal laws. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 6, § 9)) 
Secs. 23-196—23-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITIES, ETHICS AND CONDUCT 

Sec. 221. - Hours of work. 
(a)  The normal working hours for employees shall be as scheduled by the various department heads, with such schedule to be established so that the needs of the department to deliver services to the citizens are met. Such schedule shall be approved by the city manager. Employees are expected to be at their work location and ready to begin work at the beginning of their work schedule. The meal periods should be scheduled to allow for continuous staffing of offices, when applicable, with at least one person, except where more personnel are required to be on duty. 
(b)  Hours for part-time and certain other employees may vary from the normal office hours noted above due to the nature of their duties and will be determined by the appropriate department head, with concurrence of the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 1)) 
Sec. 23-222. - Work periods. 
This section shall not apply to executive, professional, administrative and all other employees who are exempt from the Fair Labor Standards Act. The following work periods may be changed to accommodate special work schedules, such as summer maintenance schedules: 
(1)  The work period for any sworn police officer shall be 28 days. All sworn officers will be scheduled for an average of 171 hours per 28-day period. 
(2)  The work period for all other city employees shall be a seven-day period beginning on Friday at 12:01 a.m. and continuing to Thursday at 12:00 a.m. (midnight). The minimum work week for full-time employees shall be 40 hours. 
(3)  With respect to 207(k) employees, where hours worked are not in excess of the applicable maximum hours standard, the city may give the employee time off for the hours worked in excess of those normally scheduled. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 2)) 
Sec. 23-223. - Attendance and records. 
(a)  Each department head shall be responsible for the punctual attendance of all persons in the department. Daily attendance records will be maintained and submitted by each department, including the date and time of each absence and the reason for each absence. Attendance shall be a consideration in determining promotions, transfers, satisfactory completion of probationary periods, and continued employment with the city. Frequent tardiness or other attendance irregularities shall be cause for disciplinary action. 
(b)  Advance notice of anticipated tardiness is expected; notice of unavoidable tardiness is expected when possible. Failure to do so will be construed as an unexcused absence, and the day missed will not be paid. Tardiness must be made up during the pay period in which it occurs. Notification by another employee, friend or relative is not considered proper except in an emergency situation where the employee is physically unable to make the notification. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 3)) 
Sec. 23-224. - Employment of relatives. 
Two or more members of an immediate family shall not be employed within the same department. The term "immediate family" shall include spouse, mother, father, sister, brother, son, daughter, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandmother, grandfather, grandson, granddaughter, stepson, and stepdaughter. This section shall not apply retroactively to any employee actively employed before the adoption of this provision. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 4)) 
Sec. 23-225. - Outside employment. 
No employee may engage in any paid outside employment which interferes with the efficient performance of his duties and/or presents a conflict of interest. All outside employment must be reported to the department head and authorized by the city manager. When outside employment creates a conflict of interest situation between the employee and the city, resignation from one of the positions held will be expected. Failure to comply with this rule will constitute grounds for dismissal. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 5)) 
Sec. 23-226. - Gifts and gratuities. 
An employee shall not accept gifts, gratuities or loans from organizations, business concerns or individuals with whom he has official business. These limitations do not prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value which are distributed generally, nor do they prohibit employees from obtaining loans from regular lending institutions. It is particularly important that enforcement officers, inspectors and those involved in purchasing and the collection and expenditure of funds guard against relationships which might be construed as evidence of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. Violations of this rule will result in disciplinary action. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 6)) 
Sec. 23-227. - Political activity. 
(a)  No city employee shall be appointed, promoted, demoted, favored or discriminated against with respect to employment in the personnel system because of his political opinions or affiliations. 
(b)  No person shall use or promise to use, any official authority or influence to secure an appointment or advantage in appointment to a position in the personnel system or an increase in pay or other advantage in employment with the purpose of influencing the vote or political action of that individual. 
(c)  No employee in the personnel system shall solicit, take part in soliciting, pay or promise to pay an assessment for political purposes, subscription, contribution or service. 
(d)  No employee in the personnel system shall hold or seek an elective office. Any employee seeking elective office shall resign or be separated from employment with the city. 
(e)  The employee has the right to contribute to, hold membership in, serve as an officer of, support a political party, vote, support or campaign for city, county, state or national political candidates, express privately opinions on all political subjects and candidates, maintain political neutrality, or attend political meetings. 
(f)  Exception to subsection (e) of this section: Any city employee who, as a normal and foreseeable incident to his principal job or position, performs duties in connection with an activity financed in whole or in part by federal loans or grants, comes under the federal Hatch Act which prohibits the following: 
(1)  Use of official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with an election or nomination for office, or affecting the result thereof. 
(2)  Directly or indirectly coercing, attempting to coerce, commanding or advising any other such officer or employee to pay, lend or contribute any part of his salary of compensation or anything else of value to any party, committee, organization, agency or person for political purposes. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 7)) 
Sec. 23-228. - State driver's license and use of vehicles. 
(a)  Employees driving city vehicles are required to have such driver's licenses for the vehicles being driven as are required by state law, irrespective of whether the employee drives the vehicle on a regular, occasional or other basis, and whether or not this requirement is included or omitted in the description of the class to which the employee was appointed. Violations, citations, fines or other actions taken by any police jurisdiction against any employee while driving a city vehicle in violation of this rule shall be the responsibility of the employee and may be cause for disciplinary action. 
(b)  Anyone misusing or abusing city vehicles, using a city vehicle for other than approved purposes, or taking a vehicle home when not approved by the city manager shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action, including dismissal if deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 8)) 
Sec. 23-229. - Harassment/sexual harassment prohibited. 
(a)  The city prohibits, and will not tolerate, sexual harassment or harassment on the basis of race, gender, age, religion, color, national origin, age or disability. Harassment complaints or allegations will be investigated promptly and where it is determined that such inappropriate conduct has occurred, we will act immediately to eliminate the conduct and impose such corrective action as is necessary, including disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. 
(b)  Sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when: 
(1)  Submission to or rejection of such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment; 
(2)  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or 
(3)  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment. 
(c)  Harassment, other than sexual, is verbal or physical conduct that denigrates or shows hostility or aversion towards an individual because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, or disability, which has the purpose or effect of creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment or unreasonably interferes with an individual's work performance or otherwise adversely affects an individual's employment opportunities. Harassing conduct includes, but is not limited to, epithets, slurs, negative stereotyping, or threatening, intimidating, hostile acts. Written or graphic material which denigrates or indicates hostility or aversion toward an individual or group is prohibited from display on the employer's premises, or circulation in the workplace. 
(d)  Any employee who feels harassed or who knows of or suspects the occurrence of forbidden harassment is responsible for informing the department head or city manager, preferably in writing, of the facts regarding such harassment so that management may promptly and thoroughly conduct an investigation. Department heads who receive a harassment complaint are to contact the city manager immediately. 
(e)  If an investigation confirms that unlawful harassment occurred, the city will take immediate corrective action, including discipline up to and including immediate termination of employment of the harassing party as is appropriate. Employees making complaints of sexual harassment are protected against retaliation from alleged harassers or other employees. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 9)) 
Sec. 23-230. - Work place safety. 
Safety is the responsibility of both the city and employees. It is the policy of the city to establish a safe work environment for employees. Department heads shall establish a safety program including policies and procedures regarding safety practices and precautions and training in safety methods for their departments. Employees shall follow the safety policies and procedures and attend safety training programs as a condition of employment. Employees who violate such policies and procedures shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 10)) 
Sec. 23-231. - City property, personal property and privacy limitations. 
(a)  The city may furnish desks, closets and/or lockers for security of employee coats, purses and other personal possessions. The city does not, however, assume responsibility for any theft or damage to the personal belongings of employees. 
(b)  Employees should have no expectation of privacy when using such or any other city property. The city regards desks, closets, lockers, work spaces, computers, file cabinets and files, city vehicles, furniture and other city property, as well as data, programs, communications, messages and other property created on, acquired by, developed for or located in any city facility or equipment, either in printed or digital format, as city property. The city reserves the right to search the same, including any personal possessions contained in there when it determines that there is a security, health, or other appropriate reason to do so. Such reasons may include, without limitation, the following: the need to locate city property; health or safety concerns; reasonable suspicion of misconduct; termination of employee; or for other business- related purposes. The city reserves the right to review the contents of any document or communication, created or stored on a city computer or phone system, including electronic mail, text messaging, and voicemail. Employees do not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in these areas or in any other city work areas or when using city equipment. 
(c)  City equipment is provided at public expense to assist employees in carrying out official city business. While personal use of city equipment is prohibited, it is recognized that certain de minimis use may occur, e.g., the receipt of a personal phone call on a city-owned phone. It is the employee's responsibility to ensure the city incurs no cost as a result of personal use of city equipment. Inappropriate or excessive use of city equipment for personal purposes may subject the employee to disciplinary action, up to and including termination. 
(d)  The city recognizes that employees may need or want to bring personal property to work. The city permits employees to do so but asks its employees to refrain from bringing unnecessary or inappropriate personal property to the workplace. Any property that is not appropriate for the conduct of normal business, that may be disruptive to workflow, may pose a safety risk to employees or the public, or which violates the terms of any city policy may be considered unnecessary or inappropriate. It will be within the city's sole discretion to determine whether certain personal property is unnecessary or inappropriate. 
(e)  It is the employee's responsibility to safeguard personal belongings. The city will not be liable for lost, damaged or stolen property of its employees and at no time will the city replace or reimburse an employee for personal property that an employee brings to the workplace. Employees are encouraged to exercise reasonable care to safeguard personal items brought to work. For example, employees should not bring valuables to work and should not leave personal items where they might be damaged or stolen. Improper or excessive use of personal property brought onto city property or worksites or during work hours (for example, the excessive or inappropriate use of personal cell phones for personal phone calls, text-messaging, imaging or videotaping), may also result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 11)) 
Sec. 23-232. - Internet and email policy. 
(a)  The city furnishes computers for employees' use in conducting city business. This includes access to e-mail and the Internet. The Internet contains many useful features, including e-mail to non-city resources, access to research materials, and information exchange. The purpose of this chapter is to establish basic rules for employees' use of the city's computer system, including the Internet and Internet e-mail. 
(b)  The Internet can be misused in a variety of ways, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Downloading files that contain viruses, thereby endangering city information services; 
(2)  Accessing objectionable material; 
(3)  Wasting work time by performing unauthorized research or accessing non-business related information and people or for computer games, or online games. 
(c)  An employee does not have a right to privacy when using the Internet via city resources and employees should not expect or assume any privacy regarding the content of email communications. The city reserves the express right to monitor and inspect the activities of the employee while accessing the Internet at any time, and to read, use and disclose e-mail messages. In addition, all software, files, information, communications, and messages (including e-mails) downloaded or sent via the Internet using city resources are the city's records and property of the city; such records are subject to potential review and disclosure under the Georgia Open Records Laws. Even after an email message has been "deleted," it may still be possible to retrieve it. 
(d)  Internet use via city resources is for city business. Except as outlined here, use of city's computer, Internet and email services are for city business only. Some limited personal use is permitted, so long as it does not result in cost to the city, does not interfere with the performance of duties, is brief in duration and frequency, does not distract from the conduct of city business and does not compromise the security or integrity of city information or software. Such limited use should not occur on "paid time," but is permitted immediately before or after work hours and during an employee's breaks. Examples of allowable personal use include accessing a weather report or news item on the Internet, or transmitting e-mail to a family member to assure safe arrival at home. Any personal use of the city's computer, Internet and email services must comply with all applicable laws and city policies, including anti-discrimination policies and Internet usage policy. Internet use must comply with applicable laws and city policies including but not limited to all federal and state laws, and city policies. 
(e)  The city has the capability and reserves the right to access, review, copy, modify and delete any information transmitted through or stored in its computer system. The city may disclose all such information to any party (inside or outside the city) it deems appropriate and in accordance with applicable law. Accordingly, employees should not use the computer system to send, receive or store any information they wish to keep private. Employees should treat the computer system like a shared file system-with the expectation that files sent, received or stored anywhere in the system will be available for review by any authorized representative of the city for any purpose, as well as the public if a proper request is made for public records. 
(e)  Good judgment should always be employed in using the city's e-mail and Internet systems. Employee e-mail messages may be read by someone other than the person(s) to whom they were sent. E-mail inconsistent with the city's policies must be avoided. For example, it is prohibited to make jokes or comments which could offend someone on the basis of gender, race, age, religion, national origin, disability or sexual orientation. These comments would be in direct conflict with the city's policies prohibiting discrimination and harassment. Accordingly, employees should create and send only courteous, professional and businesslike messages that do not contain objectionable offensive or potentially discriminatory material. 
(f)  The safety and security of the city's network and resources must be considered at all times when using the Internet. Any programs from a non-current source (i.e., software that is not purchased in original diskette or CD ROM format) or which involve executable or binary files must not be downloaded or installed without prior permission from the city manager or his designee without being properly scanned for viruses. Employees are not to share or reveal individual passwords to anyone other than the city manager or his designee. 
(g)  Internet users are responsible for complying with this and all other city policies when using the city's resources for accessing the Internet. Violation of this chapter is grounds for disciplinary action, up to and including termination. The city manager has the right to restrict or prohibit any employee from Internet access for violation of the policies set forth. 
(h)  Nothing in this chapter prohibits the use and access of the described systems for bona fide law enforcement and investigation purposes. 
(i)  Sending unencrypted primary account numbers by end-user messaging technologies such as email, instant messaging, chat or text is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 12)) 
Sec. 23-233. - Wireless communication devices. 
(a)  Wireless communications devices include, but are not limited to, cellular telephones, wireless handheld devices and pagers. An employee's personal communications using city wireless communications devices should be limited, and employees are expected to exercise sound judgment in both the duration and frequency of such use. These devices should not be treated as if they were the employee's personal property. As with similar city property, such as telephones, although minor personal use of wireless communications devices is not prohibited by this chapter, it must not interfere with the performance of the employee's work duties or normal business operations of the city. Employees must reimburse the city for costs that would not otherwise have been incurred by the city resulting from the employee's personal use of such devices. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to monitor the use of all city-owned wireless devices. Reasonable precautions should be made to prevent equipment theft, vandalism, and improper use of wireless device equipment and services. 
(c)  Employee use of a personal wireless device shall be governed by and consistent with the guidelines provided for city-owned wireless devices, if the employee-owned wireless device is used for official city business and reimbursement is requested. Use of an employee-owned wireless device for city business should be limited to emergencies and situations where alternative means of communication are unsafe, inconvenient, or not readily available. Additionally use of an employee-owned wireless device for personal use while on duty shall be limited in use. Excessive use will be grounds for discipline. 
(d)  Employees should recognize that cellular transmissions are not secure; thus, employees should exercise discretion when relating confidential information during a cellular telephone call. 
(e)  Employees violating this chapter are subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 13)) 
Sec. 23-234. - Seat belt policy 
Anyone operating or riding in city owned vehicles must wear a seat belt at all times. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 7, § 14)) 
Secs. 23-235—23-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ALCOHOL AND DRUG POLICY 

Sec. 23-261. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city provides a range of services to its residents. Part of the city's mission is to ensure that these services are delivered safely and efficiently by establishing and maintaining a drug- and alcohol-free work environment which promotes the health and safety of employees and the public. In keeping with this mission, the city declares that the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of controlled substances or the misuse of alcohol is prohibited for all those employees performing functions which can cause injury to person or damage to property (safety-sensitive functions). 
(b)  Additionally, the purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines to maintain a drug and alcohol free workplace in compliance with the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 and all other relevant mandates and laws of the state and the federal government. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 1)) 
Sec. 23-262. - Applicability. 
This Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy applies to all employees (full- and part-time, paid or volunteer) and includes, but is not limited to, employees operating a vehicle owned, leased or routinely used by the city; maintaining any vehicle operated by the city for city business (regardless of ownership); protecting persons and property; ensuring health and sanitation; operating and maintaining buildings and other facilities owned or leased by the city; and all other functions and services performed or provided by the city which have the potential to injure persons or damage property (safety-sensitive functions). 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 2)) 
Sec. 23-263. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accident. An occurrence associated with the performance of the work, including the operation of a vehicle, if, as a result: 
(1)  A person dies; 
(2)  A person suffers a bodily injury and immediately receives medical treatment away from the scene of the accident; or 
(3)  One or more vehicles incurs disabling damage as the result of the occurrence and is transported away from the scene by a tow truck or other vehicle. For purposes of this definition, disabling damage is damage which prevents departure of any vehicle from the scene of an accident in its usual manner in daylight after simple repairs. Disabling damage includes damage to vehicles that could have been operated, but would have been further damage if so operated. Disabling damage does not include damage which can be remedied temporarily at the scene of the accident without special tools or parts, e.g., tire disablement without other damage even if no spare tire is available, or damage to headlights, taillights, turn signals, horn, mirrors, or windshield wipers that renders them inoperable. 
Adulterated specimen. A specimen that contains a substance that is not expected to be present in human urine, or contains a substance expected to be present, but is at a concentration so high it is not consistent with human urine. 
Alcohol. The intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol, or other low molecular weight alcohols contained in any beverage, mixture, mouthwash, candy, food, preparation, or medication. 
Alcohol concentration: expressed in terms of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath as measured by an evidential breath testing device. 
Cancelled test. A drug test that has been declared invalid by a Medical Review Officer (MRO). A cancelled test is neither positive nor negative. 
Department of Transportation (DOT). Department of the federal government which includes the Federal Transit Administration, Federal Railroad Administration, Federal Highway Administration, Federal Motor Carriers' Safety Administration, Research and Special Programs and the Office of the Secretary of Transportation. 
Designated Employer Representative (DER). An employee authorized by the city to take immediate action to prevent employees from performing their job unsafely and to make required decisions regarding testing. The DER also receives test results and other communications for the city, consistent with the requirements of 49 CFR Parts 40, as amended and 655. 
Dilute specimen. A specimen with creatinine and specific gravity values that are lower than expected for human urine. 
Disabling damage. Damage which prevents departure of any vehicle from the scene of the occurrence in its usual manner in daylight after simple repairs. Disabling damage includes damage to vehicles that could have been operated, but would have been further damaged if so operated, but does not include damage which can be remedied temporarily at the scene of the occurrence without special tools or parts, tire disablement without other damage, even if no spare tire is available, or damage to headlights, taillights, turn signals, horn, mirrors or windshield wipers that makes them inoperable. 
Employee. Any employee of the city, whether full time or part-time, paid or volunteer, and successful applicants for any city position, prior to commencement of employment. 
Evidentiary Breath Testing Device (EBT). A device approved by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) for the evidential testing of breath at 0.02 and 0.04 alcohol concentrations. Approved devices are listed in the NHTSA conforming products list. 
Medical Review Officer (MRO). A licensed physician (medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy) responsible for receiving laboratory results generated by the drug testing program who has knowledge of substance abuse disorders and has appropriate medical training to interpret and evaluate an individual's confirmed positive test result, together with the person's medical history, and any other bio-medical information. 
Negative dilute. A drug test which is negative for the five drug/drug metabolites, but has a specific gravity value lower than expected for human urine. 
Negative test result. For a drug test, a verified presence of the identified drug or its metabolite below the minimum levels specified in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended; for an alcohol test, an alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 Blood Alcohol Content (BAC). 
Non-negative test result. A test result found to be adulterated, substitute, invalid, or positive for drug/drug metabolites. 
Positive test result. For a drug test, a verified presence of the identified drug or its metabolite at or above the minimum levels specified in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended; for an alcohol test, a confirmed alcohol concentration of 0.04 BAC or greater. 
Prohibited drug. Marijuana, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, phencyclidine at levels above the minimum thresholds specified in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. 
Safety-sensitive functions include operating a vehicle owned or leased by the city, maintaining any vehicle operated by the city for city business (regardless of ownership), carrying a firearm for purposes of security or law enforcement, protecting people and property from fire, using equipment which can injure people or damage property in areas where other employees or the general public are present, and ensuring the quality and availability of water. 
Substance abuse professional (SAP). A licensed physician (medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy) or licensed or certified psychologist, social worker, employee assistance professional, or addiction counselor (certified by the National Association of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors Certification Commission or by the International Certification Reciprocity Consortium/Alcohol and other Drug Abuse) with knowledge of and clinical experience in the diagnosis and treatment of drug and alcohol related disorders. 
Substituted specimen. A specimen with creatinine and specific gravity values that are so diminished that they are not consistent with normal human urine. 
Test refusal. The following are considered a refusal to be tested if the employee: 
(1)  Fails to appear for any test (except pre-employment) within a reasonable time, as determined by the city, after being directed by the city to do so; 
(2)  Fails to remain at the testing site until the testing process is complete; 
(3)  Fails to provide a urine or breath specimen for any drug or alcohol test required by the city or by 49 CFR Part 40, as amended; 
(4)  In the case of a directly observed or monitored collection in a drug test, fails to permit the observation or monitoring of his provision of the specimen; 
(5)  Fails to provide a sufficient amount of urine or breath when directed and it is determined, through a required medical evaluation, that there was no adequate medical explanation for the failure; 
(6)  Fails or declines to take a second test the city or the collector of the specimen has directed the employee to take; 
(7)  Fails to undergo a medical examination or evaluation, as directed by the MRO as part of the verification process, or as directed by the DER as part of the "shy bladder" or "shy lungs" procedures; 
(8)  Fails to cooperate with any part of the testing process (e.g., refusing to empty pockets when requested, behaving in a confrontational or threatening manner so as to disrupt the testing process); 
(9)  Fails or refuses to sign associated testing documents; 
(10)  Test refusal also includes providing an adulterated or substituted specimen. 
Verified negative test. A test result reviewed by the MRO and determined to have no evidence of prohibited drug use above the minimum cutoff levels specified in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. 
Verified positive test. A test result reviewed by the MRO and determined to have evidence of prohibited drug use above the minimum cutoff levels specified in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. 
Validity testing. The evaluation of the specimen to determine if it is consistent with normal human urine. The purpose of validity testing is to determine whether certain adulterants or foreign substances were added to the urine, if the urine was diluted, or if the specimen was substituted. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 3)) 
Sec. 23-264. - Education and training. 
(a)  Every employee (including full time and part-time employees and volunteers) will receive a copy of this chapter and will have access to the corresponding federal regulations, including 49 CFR Parts 40, as amended, and 655. In addition, all employees will undergo a minimum of 60 minutes of training on the signs and symptoms of drug use, including the effects and consequences of drug use on personal health, safety, and the work environment. The training also includes manifestations and behavioral cues which may indicate prohibited drug use. 
(b)  All supervisory personnel who are in a position to determine employee fitness for duty will receive 60 minutes of reasonable suspicion training on the physical, behavioral, and performance indicators of probable drug use and 60 minutes of additional reasonable suspicion training on the physical, behavioral, speech, and performance indicators of probable alcohol misuse. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 4)) 
Sec. 23-265. - Prohibited substances. 
Prohibited substances addressed by this chapter include the following: 
(1)  Illegally used controlled substances or drugs under the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988; 
(2)  Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C. 812) as further defined by 21 CFR 1300.11 through 1300.15 is prohibited in the workplace at all times (unless the employee has a legal prescription for the drug or substance). Consequently, employees may be tested at any time they are on duty. These drugs and substances include, but are not limited to marijuana, amphetamines, opiates, phencyclidine, cocaine, and any drug not approved for medical use by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency or the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
(3)  Illegal use includes use of any illegal drug, misuse of any legally prescribed drugs and use of illegally obtained prescription drugs. Also, the medical use of marijuana or the use of hemp-related products which cause drug or drug metabolites to be present in the human body above the minimum thresholds is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 5)) 
Sec. 23-266. - Legal drugs. 
The appropriate use of legally prescribed drugs taken as prescribed and non-prescription medications is not prohibited. However, the use of any substance, drug or medication which carries a warning label stating that mental functioning, motor skills, or judgment may be affected must report his use to his supervisor and must provide a written release from his doctor or pharmacist indicating that the employee is capable of safely performing his job. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 6)) 
Sec. 23-267. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  All employees are prohibited from reporting for duty or remaining on duty whenever there is a quantifiable presence of a prohibited drug in his body above the minimum thresholds defined in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. All employees are prohibited from consuming alcohol while on the job (including immediately prior to reporting to work and during meal and break times) or while on call. If an on call employee has consumed alcohol, he must acknowledge the use of alcohol at the time he is called to report for work or submit to an alcohol test if the employee maintains his ability to perform the work. The city shall not permit the employee to perform or continue to perform work if it has actual knowledge that the employee is using alcohol. 
(b)  All employees are prohibited from reporting to work or remaining at work while having a BAC of 0.02 or greater. No employee shall consume alcohol for eight hours following involvement in an accident, or until he submits to a post-accident drug/alcohol test, whichever occurs first. No employee shall consume alcohol within four hours of performing work which has the potential to injure people or property. 
(c)  Employees shall not manufacture, distribute, dispense, possess, or use prohibited substances in the work place. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 7)) 
Sec. 23-268. - Drug statute conviction. 
Consistent with the Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988, all employees are required to notify their management of any criminal statute conviction for a violation occurring in the workplace within five days after such conviction. Failure to comply with this provision shall result in termination. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 8)) 
Sec. 23-269. - Testing requirements. 
(a)  Analytical urine drug testing and breath testing for alcohol will be conducted as required by 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. All employees shall be subject to testing prior to being officially hired by the city, as well as for testing for reasonable suspicion, after certain accidents, and randomly, as defined in this chapter and return-to-work/follow-up testing. 
(b)  All employees who have tested positive for prohibited substances, abuse of prescription drugs, or alcohol and who have successfully completed a treatment program recommended by the SAP and have been released to return to work will be tested prior to returning to work. Additionally, for a period of from one to five years after returning to work, follow-up testing will occur, including at least six tests within the first year. The duration of the testing period and the frequency of tests will be determined by the SAP. 
(c)  A drug test may occur any time an employee is on duty. An alcohol test may occur immediately before, during, or immediately after the performance of any work with the potential to injure any person (including the employee, other employees, or the general public) or damage any property. 
(d)  All employees will be subject to urine drug testing and breath alcohol testing as an ongoing condition of employment with the city. Any employee who refuses to comply with a request for testing shall be removed from work and his employment terminated. Any employee who is suspected of providing false information in connection with a drug test or who is suspected of falsifying test results through tampering, contamination, adulteration, or substitution shall be required to undergo an observed collection. Upon determining that an employee has engaged in one or more of these behaviors, the employee shall be removed from duty and his employment with the city shall be terminated. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 9)) 
Sec. 23-270. - Drug testing procedures. 
(a)  Testing shall be conducted in such a manner as to assure a high degree of accuracy and reliability, using techniques, equipment, and laboratory facilities approved by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). All testing will be conducted consistent with the procedures set forth in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. The testing will be performed in a private, confidential manner and every effort will be made to protect the employee, the integrity of the drug testing procedure, and the validity of the test result. 
(b)  The drugs that will be tested for are marijuana, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, and phencyclidine. After the identity of the donor (employee) is checked using picture identification, a urine specimen will be collected using the split specimen collection method described in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. Each specimen will be accompanied by a DOT Chain of Custody and Control Form and identified using a unique identification number that matches the specimen with the person being tested. The specimen analysis will be performed at a HHS-certified laboratory. An initial drug screen and validity test will be performed on the primary urine specimen. For those specimens which are not negative, a confirmatory Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GM/MS) test will be performed. A specimen will be considered positive if the amount of drug(s)/drug metabolite(s) identified by the GM/MS test are above the minimum thresholds established in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. 
(c)  The test result from the HHS-certified laboratory will be reported to the MRO. The MRO will review the test results to ensure the scientific validity of the test and will determine whether there is a legitimate medical explanation for a confirmed positive, substitute, or adulterated test result. The MRO will attempt to contact the employee to notify the employee of the non-negative test result and provide the employee an opportunity to explain the confirmed test result. The MRO will then review the employee's medical history/medical records, as appropriate, to determine whether there is a legitimate medical explanation for a non-negative test result. If no legitimate medical explanation is found, the test will be verified positive or classified as a refusal to test and reported to the DER. If a legitimate explanation is found, the MRO will report the test result as negative to the DER and no further action will be taken. If the test is determined to be invalid and there is no medical explanation, a retest will be performed under direct observation. 
(d)  Any employee who questions the results of a required drug test may request that the split sample be tested. The split specimen test will be performed at a second HHS-certified laboratory which has no affiliation with the laboratory that analyzed the primary specimen. This second test shall be conducted on the split sample which was provided by the employee at the same time as the primary sample. The method of collecting, storing, and testing the split sample will be consistent with the procedures set forth in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. The employee's request for a split sample test must be made to the MRO within 72 hours after the employee receives notice of a verified positive test result from the primary sample. Requests occurring more than 72 hours of notification will only be accepted at the discretion of the MRO if the delay was due to actual circumstances which were beyond the employee's control. The city will pay for the split sample test to ensure prompt analysis of the sample; however, the city will seek reimbursement from the employee for the costs of the split sample test. 
(e)  If the analysis of the split specimen fails to confirm the presence of the drug(s) detected in the primary specimen, if the split sample cannot be analyzed, or if the results of the split sample are not scientifically adequate, the MRO will declare the original test to be cancelled and will direct the city to retest the employee under direct observation. 
(f)  The split sample will be stored at the laboratory at which the initial sample was analyzed. If the primary specimen is negative, the split will be discarded. If the primary specimen is positive, the split will be retained for testing if the employee requests the MRO to arrange for split specimen testing. If the primary specimen is positive, it will be retained in frozen storage for one year and the split specimen will also be retained for one year. 
(g)  Consistent with 49 CFR Part 40, as amended, collection under direct observation by a person of the same gender as the employee and with no advance notice will occur if: 
(1)  The laboratory reports to the MRO that a specimen is invalid and the MRO reports to the DER that there was not an adequate medical explanation for the result; 
(2)  The MRO reports to the DER that the original positive, adulterated, or substituted test result had to be cancelled because the test of the split specimen could not be performed; 
(3)  The collector observes materials brought into the collection site or the employee's conduct clearly indicates an attempt to tamper with the specimen; or 
(4)  The temperature of the original specimen was out of the range normal for human urine. 
(h)  In addition, the DER may request a collection under direct observation of an employee if the drug test is a return to duty test or a follow-up test. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 10)) 
Sec. 23-271. - Alcohol testing procedures. 
(a)  Tests for breath alcohol concentration will be conducted using a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) - approved Evidential Breath Testing device (EBT) operated by a trained Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT). Alcohol screening tests may also be performed using a non-evidential testing device approved by NHTSA. If the initial test indicates an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater, a second test will be performed to confirm the results of the initial test. The confirmatory test must be performed by a BAT using an EBT at least 15 minutes, but no more than 30 minutes, after completing the initial test. 
(b)  The EBT will identify each test by a unique, sequential identification number. This number, time, and unit identifier will be provided on each EBT printout. The EBT printout, along with an approved alcohol testing form, will be used to document the test, subsequent results, and identity of the employee tested. The test will be performed in a private, confidential manner, as required by 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. The testing procedure will be followed as prescribed to protect the employee and to maintain the integrity of the alcohol testing procedures and the validity of the test result. 
(c)  A confirmed alcohol concentration of 0.04 or greater will be considered a positive alcohol test result and in violation of this chapter. Test results confirming an alcohol concentration of 0.02 to 0.39, while not considered a positive result, will cause the employee to be removed from duty for eight hours or the duration of the work day, whichever is longer, and the employee will be subject to disciplinary action. An alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 will be considered a negative result. 
(d)  The city affirms the need to protect individual dignity, privacy and confidentiality throughout the testing process. If at any time the integrity of the testing procedures or the validity of the test result is compromised, the test will be cancelled. Minor inconsistencies or procedural flaws not affecting the test result will not result in a cancelled test. 
(e)  The alcohol testing form (ATF) required by 49 CFR Part 40, as amended, shall be used for all required BAC tests. An employee's failure or refusal to sign step 2 of the ATF shall be considered a refusal to submit to testing. The ATF may be found on the world wide web at the following address: http://www.dot.gov/ost/ 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 11)) 
Sec. 23-272. - Pre-employment testing. 
(a)  All applicants for employment with the city shall undergo urine testing prior to beginning to work. 
(b)  All offers of employment shall be extended conditional on the applicant passing a drug test. An applicant shall not begin work unless the applicant has taken a drug test with verified negative results. 
(c)  If an applicant fails a pre-employment drug test, the conditional offer of employment shall be rescinded. Failure of a pre-employment drug test will disqualify an applicant for employment for at least one year. The applicant must provide the city proof of having successfully completed a referral, evaluation, and treatment plan as described in 49 CFR Part 655.62 of subpart G. The cost of the assessment, evaluation, and any treatment will be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(d)  If a pre-employment test is cancelled, the city will require the applicant to take and pass another pre-employment test. 
(e)  In cases where an employee is on extended leave for a period of 90 days or more, regardless of the reason, the employee will be required to take a drug test under 49 CFR Part 655 and have negative test results before returning to work. 
(f)  An applicant with a dilute negative test result will be required to be retested. 
(g)  Applicants are required to report the results of drug and alcohol testing required by previous employers. Failure to do so will result in the employment offer being rescinded. If the applicant tested positive on a drug or alcohol test required by a previous employer, the applicant must provide the city proof of having successfully completed a referral, evaluation and treatment plan as described in 49 CFR Part 655.62 of subpart G. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 12)) 
Sec. 23-273. - Reasonable suspicion testing. 
(a)  All employees will be subject to a reasonable suspicion drug or alcohol test when the city or the employee's supervisor has reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee has used a prohibited drug and/or engaged in alcohol or prescription misuse. Reasonable suspicion means that there is objective evidence based upon specific, contemporaneous, articulable observations of the employee's appearance, behavior, speech, or body odor that are consistent with possible drug use and/or prescription or alcohol misuse. Reasonable suspicion must be made by one or more supervisors who are trained to detect the signs and symptoms of drug use and the misuse of prescription drugs or alcohol and who reasonably conclude that the employee may be adversely affected or impaired in his work performance due to drug use and/or the misuse of prescription drugs or alcohol. A reasonable suspicion test for alcohol may be performed immediately before, during, or immediately after the performance of a safety-sensitive function. A reasonable suspicion test for illegal drugs or misused prescription drug may be performed any time the employee is on duty. 
(b)  The city will be responsible for transporting the employee to the testing site. Supervisory personnel must avoid placing themselves and others in a situation which might endanger those present. The employee shall be placed on administrative leave pending test results. An employee who refuses to submit to an alcohol or drug test shall not be permitted to finish his shift and shall immediately be placed on administrative leave pending disciplinary action. 
(c)  A written record of the observations which caused the reasonable suspicion shall be prepared and signed by the supervisor(s) making the observation. This written record shall be submitted to management and shall be attached to the forms reporting the test results. 
(d)  Where there is no reasonable suspicion, but the employee (who is not already a participant in a drug or alcohol treatment program) admits the use of illegal drugs or the misuse of alcohol to a supervisor in his chain of command, the employee shall be referred to the SAP for an assessment and shall be placed on administrative leave. Because the employee referred him to management, any testing or positive test result would not be considered a violation of this chapter. Self-referral would not, however, exempt the employee from all testing as provided for in this chapter and from the associated consequences. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 13)) 
Sec. 23-274. - Post-accident testing. 
(a)  All employees will be required to undergo drug and alcohol testing if they are involved in an accident while driving a vehicle owned, leased, or routinely used by the city. All employees involved in an accident while operating machinery or equipment will be required to undergo drug and alcohol testing. In accidents involving more than one employee, any other employee whose performance or behavior cannot be completely discounted as a contributing factor to the accident will be required to undergo drug and alcohol testing. 
(b)  As soon as practicable following an accident (as defined in this chapter), the supervisor investigating the accident will notify the employee operating the vehicle, equipment, or machinery and all other employees whose performance or behavior could have contributed to causing the accident of the need for testing. The supervisor will make the determination using the best information available at the time of the decision. 
(c)  The investigating supervisor shall ensure that an employee required to be tested is tested as soon as possible, but in any event, no later than eight hours after the accident, for the presence of alcohol and no later than 32 hours for the presence of drugs. If an alcohol test is not performed within two hours after the accident, the supervisor will document the reason(s) for the delay. If the alcohol test is not administered within eight hours or the drug test within 32 hours, attempts to perform the test must cease and the reasons for the failure to test documented. 
(d)  Any employee involved in an accident must refrain from alcohol use for eight hours following the accident or until he undergoes a post-accident alcohol test. 
(e)  An employee who is subject to post-accident testing who fails to remain readily available for such testing, including notifying a supervisor of his location if he leaves the scene of the accident prior to submitting to the test may be deemed to have refused testing. 
(f)  Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to require the delay of necessary medical care for the injured following an accident or to prohibit an employee from leaving the scene of an accident for the period necessary to obtain assistance in responding to the accident or to obtain necessary emergency medical care. 
(g)  In the event the employee involved in the accident cannot be tested under the city's auspices, the city may use the results of drug and alcohol post-accident tests administered by law enforcement officials. The officials must have independent authority for the test and be qualified to administer the test. The city shall obtain the result(s) in compliance with all applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 14)) 
Sec. 23-275. - Random testing. 
(a)  Employees performing a function which can cause injury to person or damage to property will be subject to random, unannounced testing. The selection of employees shall be made by a scientifically valid method of randomly generating employee identifiers from the appropriate pool of employees. 
(b)  Dates for administering unannounced testing of randomly selected employees shall be spread reasonably throughout the calendar year, day of the week, and hour of the day. 
(c)  The percentage of employees randomly selected for drug/alcohol testing during the calendar year shall be not less than the percentages established by federal regulations for employees performing safety-sensitive functions which are subject to random testing under regulations of the Federal Transit Authority FTA. Currently, the random testing percentages established for the presence of drugs by the FTA are 50 percent of the eligible employees; the random testing percentages established for the presence of alcohol by the FTA is ten percent of the eligible employees. 
(d)  Each eligible employee shall have an equal chance of selection each time the selections are made. Employees will not be removed from the pool of eligible employees because they have been previously tested during the calendar year. 
(e)  Random testing for drugs may be performed at any time during the employee's workday. Random testing for alcohol may be performed immediately before, during, or immediately after the performance of work which has the potential to injure people or damage property. 
(f)  Employees selected to be tested are required to proceed immediately to the collection site. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 15)) 
Sec. 23-276. - Return-to-work testing. 
(a)  All employees who tested positive on a drug or alcohol test or who refused to be tested must submit to testing; test results must indicate negative results for drugs and/or alcohol; the employee must be evaluated by and released for duty by a SAP before the employee may return-to-work. The SAP will recommend return-to-work testing only after the employee has successfully completed the required treatment (as recommended by the SAP), is known to be drug and alcohol free, and causes no undue concern for the safety of the public and fellow employees. 
(b)  For an employee who had an initial positive drug test, a return-to-work drug test is required and a return-to-work alcohol test is allowed. For an employee who an initial positive alcohol test, a return-to-work alcohol test is required and a return-to-work drug test is allowed. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 16)) 
Sec. 23-277. - Follow-up testing. 
(a)  Employees who have returned to work after successfully completing treatment recommended by the SAP and who have had negative results from the return-to-work testing will be required to undergo frequent, unannounced drug and/or alcohol testing. The follow-up testing will be performed for a period ranging from one to five years, with a minimum of six tests performed the first year. After the first year, the duration and frequency of follow-up testing will be determined by the SAP and will reflect the SAP's assessment of the employee's situation and recovery progress. 
(b)  The purpose of follow-up testing is to deter and detect relapses. For that reason, follow-up testing is considered separately from and in addition to random, post-accident, reasonable suspicion and return-to-work testing. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 17)) 
Sec. 23-278. - Result of drug/alcohol test or refusal to undergo testing. 
(a)  An employee having a negative dilute result from a drug test will be retested. 
(b)  An employee having a verified positive drug test shall be removed from his position, informed of educational and rehabilitation programs available and referred to a SAP for assessment. No employee shall be allowed to return-to-work without the approval of the SAP and the DER. In addition, the following disciplinary actions will occur: 
(1)  As soon as practical, upon receiving notice of a verified positive drug test result, or a refusal to be tested, the DER will contact the employee's supervisor and inform him that the employee must cease work. 
(2)  The employee shall be referred to a SAP for assessment. The SAP will evaluate the employee to determine what assistance, if any, the employee needs to resolve problems associated with the prohibited drug use. 
(3)  Refusal to undergo a drug test shall be considered a positive test result and an act of insubordination and shall result in termination. A refusal to undergo testing includes the following situations: 
a.  When an employee consumes alcohol within eight hours following an accident without having first submitted to post-accident drug/alcohol testing; 
b.  When, prior to submitting to drug/alcohol testing, an employee leaves the scene of an accident without a legitimate explanation; 
c.  When an employee provides insufficient volume of a urine specimen or breath sample without a valid medical explanation (Note: the medical evaluation should take place no more than five days after the initial test attempt); 
d.  When the employee refuses, either orally or in writing, to undergo testing, or behaves in a manner so as to obstruct testing, or is absent when testing is to occur; 
e.  When an employee provides a urine sample which the MRO verifies as being adulterated or a substitute; 
f.  When an employee does not remain at the testing site until the testing process is completed; 
g.  When an employee fails to provide a urine specimen for any drug test required by 49 CFR Part 40, as amended, or by DOT regulations; 
h.  When an employee does not permit the observation or monitoring of a specimen collection; 
i.  When an employee fails or refuses to take a second test the DER or the collector has directed him to undergo; 
j.  When an employee fails or refuses to undergo a medical examination or evaluation, as directed by the MRO, as part of the verification process or as directed by the DER as part of the "shy bladder" or "shy lungs" procedures; 
k.  When an employee fails to cooperate with any part of the testing process, e.g., refusal to empty pockets, behaving in a confrontational manner; 
l.  When an employee fails or refuses to sign Step 2 of the alcohol testing form. 
(c)  For the first instance of a verified test result of a sample submitted for random drug/alcohol testing, where the result indicates a BAC of 0.04 or higher, actions against the employee shall include: 
(1)  Mandatory referral to SAP for assessment, formulation of a treatment plan, and signing a return-to-work agreement. Note: Failure or refusal to sign or remain in compliance with the return-to-work agreement shall result in termination of employment. Compliance with the return-to-work agreement requires the employee to submit to drug/alcohol testing prior to returning to work; negative test results; the SAP finds that the employee is cooperating with the treatment program recommended by the SAP; and the employee agrees to undergo follow-up testing. 
(2)  Refusal to undergo follow-up drug/alcohol testing shall be viewed as a direct act of insubordination, resulting in termination of employment. 
(3)  During follow-up testing, a verified positive drug or alcohol test result (BAC is 0.04 or higher) from random, reasonable suspicion, or follow-up testing will result in termination of employment. 
(d)  A verified positive post-accident or reasonable suspicion drug/alcohol test result (BAC is 0.04 or greater) shall result in termination of employment. 
(e)  A verified drug/alcohol test result of 0.02 to 0.39 BAC shall result in the removal of the employee from duty for eight hours or the remainder of his shift, whichever is longer. The employee shall not be allowed to return-to-work until he submits to an alcohol test which results in a BAC of less than 0.02. 
(f)  If an employee has alcohol test results of 0.02 to 0.039 two or more times within a six-month period, the employee will be removed from duty and referred to the SAP for evaluation and treatment. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 18)) 
Sec. 23-279. - Self-referral and management referral. 
If the employee has not received any verified positive test results and requests assistance or management refers the employee to the SAP, disciplinary action will include: Note: Self-referral or management referral to the SAP which was not precipitated by a positive test result does not constitute a violation of Federal regulations and will not be considered a positive result in relation to discipline actions. However, a voluntary referral does not shield the employee from appropriate disciplinary action or guarantee continued employment with the city, nor does it exempt the employee from complying with this Drug and Alcohol Testing policy. 
(1)  Mandatory referral to SAP for assessment, formulation of a treatment plan, and signing a return-to-work agreement. Note: Failure or refusal to sign or remain in compliance with the return-to-work agreement shall result in termination of employment. Compliance with the return-to-work agreement requires the employee to submit to drug/alcohol testing prior to returning to work; continuing negative test results; the SAP finds that the employee is cooperating with the treatment program recommended by the SAP; and the employee agrees to undergo follow-up testing. 
(b)  Refusal to undergo follow-up drug/alcohol testing shall be viewed as a direct act of insubordination, resulting in termination of employment. 
(c)  Periodic follow-up drug/alcohol testing conducted as a result of the self-referral or management referral which produces a verified positive will be cause for termination of employment. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 19)) 
Sec. 23-280. - Grievance and appeal. 
The consequences specified in 49 CFR Part 40.149(c) for a positive test result or for refusing to submit to testing is not subject to arbitration. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 20)) 
Sec. 23-281. - Proper application of this chapter. 
The city is dedicated to assuring fair and equitable application of this substance abuse policy. Managers and supervisors are required to use and apply all aspects of this chapter in an unbiased and impartial manner. Any manager or supervisor who knowingly disregards the provisions of this chapter or who is found to misuse the policy deliberately in regard to subordinates shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 21)) 
Sec. 23-282. - Disclosure of information. 
Drug/alcohol testing shall be maintained by the DER and, except as provided below or by law, the results of any drug/alcohol test shall not be disclosed without the written consent of the tested employee. 
(1)  The employee, upon written request, may obtain copies of any records pertaining to his use of prohibited drugs or misuse of alcohol, including any drug or alcohol testing records, testing equipment calibration records, and records of testing laboratory certifications. Employees may not have access to SAP referral documents and follow-up testing plans. 
(2)  Records of a verified positive drug/alcohol test result shall be released to the DER, the employee's supervisor and the human resources manager on a "need to know" basis. 
(3)  Records will be released to a subsequent employer only upon receipt of a written request by the employee. 
(4)  Records of an employee's drug/alcohol tests shall be released to the adjudicator in a grievance, lawsuit, or other proceeding initiated by or on behalf of the tested individual arising from the results of drug/alcohol testing. The records will only be released if the parties agree to a stipulation that the records will be made available only to the parties in the proceeding. 
(5)  Records will be released to the National Transportation Safety Board during an accident investigation. 
(6)  Records will be released to the DOT or any DOT department or agency with regulatory authority over the city or any of its employees. 
(7)  Records will be released if requested by a federal, state, or local safety agency with regulatory authority over the city or any of its employees. 
(8)  If a party to a grievance or lawsuit seeks a court order to release a specimen or part of a specimen contrary to any provision of 49 CFR Part 40, as amended, the city shall take all necessary steps to contest the issuance of such an order. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 22)) 
Sec. 23-283. - Minimum thresholds. 
(a)  Initial Test Cutoff Levels (ng/ml): 

 
(b)  Confirmatory test cutoff levels (ng/ml): 

 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 8, § 23)) 
Secs. 23-284—23-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DISCIPLINARY ACTION 

Sec. 23-311. - Progressive discipline. 
Progressive discipline is a process in which disciplinary action is taken in degrees of increasing severity. The city shall use a policy of progressive discipline when applicable. An employee who fails to perform assigned duties adequately or who violates city policies will be disciplined. Disciplinary actions taken will depend on the degree and circumstances of the violation. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, all employees are employees at will and may be terminated without cause. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 9, § 1)) 
Sec. 23-312. - Causes for action. 
Listed below are some reasons which may be cause for disciplinary action but disciplinary action is not limited entirely to the offenses listed: 
(1)  Inexcusable absence without leave, abuse of sick leave or other categories of leave, and excessive tardiness or absences; 
(2)  Falsification of personnel or city records, including employment applications, accident records, work records, purchase orders, time sheets, or any other report, record or document; 
(3)  Negligence, incompetency or inefficiency in performing assigned duties; 
(4)  Inability or unfitness to perform assigned duties; 
(5)  Physical or mental disability which precludes satisfactory performance of duties, or refusal to be examined by a city authorized licensed physician when so directed; 
(6)  Discourteous, insulting, abusive or inflammatory language or conduct toward the public or co-workers; 
(7)  Improper racial or sexual comments, harassment or acts directed to any employee or the general public; 
(8)  Failure to complete employee performance evaluations in a timely manner; 
(9)  Deliberately or negligently misusing, destroying, or damaging any city property or property of an employee; 
(10)  Removal of city property or any employee's property from city facilities without proper authorization; theft of city property or any employee's property; 
(11)  Insubordination or the refusal to perform work assigned, or to comply with any legal written or verbal instructions of a supervisor; 
(12)  Refusal to fully and truthfully cooperate in an investigation conducted by or at the direction of the city; 
(13)  Threatening, intimidating, coercing, or interfering with city employees or supervision at any time, including abusive language; 
(14)  Failure to work overtime, additional assignments, standby duty, or special details after being scheduled according to overtime and standby duty policies without legitimate reason; 
(15)  Possession, use, sale, attempt to sell or procure illegal controlled substances at any time whether on or off city property or whether on or off duty; and possession, use, sale or attempt to sell or procure alcoholic beverages while on duty, on city property or while operating or riding in or on city equipment; 
(16)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages before and/or during regular working hours (including meal breaks) or while on call or called out; 
(17)  Unauthorized use or possession of a firearm, explosives or weapons in city property or when conducting city business; 
(18)  On or off the job conduct which adversely affects the ability of the employee to perform their duties and/or adversely affects the efficient operation of the city government or any department, division, or area of city government; 
(19)  Failure to report an accident or personal injury in which the employee was involved while on the job or in a city vehicle; 
(20)  Violating a safety rule or safety procedure; 
(21)  Personal use of the city tax exempt number for any reason; 
(22)  Improper use of city email or computer systems; 
(23)  Use of official position for personal advantage, including acceptance of a valuable gift or service in the performance of duty or under circumstances where the employee knew or should have known it was given with an expectancy of obtaining a service or favored treatment by a city employee, department or agency; 
(24)  Acceptance of gratuities in conflict with these personnel policies; 
(25)  Violation of city ordinances, city or departmental policies, rules, standard operating procedures or regulations; 
(26)  Commission of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude or other serious crimes; 
(27)  Conduct reflecting discredit on the city or any of its departments; 
(28)  Political activity in conflict with these personnel policies and/or federal or state laws; 
(29)  Instigation of, participation in, or leadership of any illegal strike, work stoppage, slow down, or artificial restriction of productive work; 
(30)  Other activities which adversely affect the safety, welfare, efficiency, or successful performance of vital services for the city; or 
(31)  Any other action or inaction not in the city's best interest. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 9, § 2)) 
Sec. 23-313. - Types of disciplinary action. 
(a)  Written reprimand. An employee may be issued a written reprimand, when an oral warning has not resulted in the expected improvement, or when more severe initial action is warranted. The employee shall be advised in writing of his right to answer and appeal the charges within ten work days. The reprimand should include the violations noted, action needed to correct deficiencies and likely result of not correcting the problem. Copies shall be filed with the city manager and in the employee's personnel file. Two reprimands for the same offense, within a 12-month period, may be grounds for dismissal. 
(b)  Training reprimand. An employee may be issued a training reprimand when warranted. The employee shall be advised in writing of his right to answer and appeal the charges within ten work days. The reprimand should include the violations noted, rationale for choosing a training reprimand and likely result of not correcting the problem. Copies shall be filed with the city manager and in the employee's personnel file. 
(c)  Suspension. An employee may be suspended without pay for disciplinary purposes, for up to ten work days for a violation of policies governing performance and conduct. A written statement specifically setting forth reasons for suspension shall be furnished to the employee. The employee shall be advised in writing of his right to answer and appeal the charges within ten work days. Copies shall be filed with the city manager and in the employee's personnel file. With the prior approval of the city manager, the length of the suspension may be extended beyond ten days. 
(d)  Reduction in salary. An employee's salary may be reduced for disciplinary purposes, within the range provided in the pay plan. A written statement specifically setting forth reasons for the action shall be furnished to the employee. The employee shall be advised in writing of his right to answer and appeal the charges within ten work days. Copies shall be filed with the city manager and in the employee's personnel file. 
(e)  Demotion. An employee may be demoted for disciplinary or other involuntary reasons if a lower position is open, and the employee is qualified to perform the work at the lower position. A disciplinary demotion must include a decrease in salary. A written statement specifically setting forth reasons for the action shall be furnished to the employee. The employee shall be advised in writing of his right to answer and appeal the charges within ten work days. Copies shall be filed with the city manager and in the employee's personnel file. 
(f)  Dismissals. An employee may be dismissed for disciplinary or other involuntary reasons when other actions did not solve the problem. A dismissal may also take place if the employee must be removed from the work place immediately and/or permanently. Non- probationary employees may be dismissed for causes outlined in these policies only after having been presented with the reasons for such action in writing along with a statement that the person discharged has the right to appeal to the city manager within ten days from the effective date of dismissal. Copies shall be filed with the city manager and in the employee's personnel file. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 9, § 3)) 
Secs. 23-314—23-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - NON-DISCIPLINARY ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE 

Sec. 23-341. - Relieving of duty. 
A department head with the approval of the city manager may place an employee in non-disciplinary, administrative leave status without loss of pay, benefits, seniority or other status, when it is necessary to conduct a fact-finding investigation around internal or external circumstances which required clarification regarding any possible wrongdoing or possible rule violations. An employee may also be placed on non-disciplinary, administrative leave status to protect his health, welfare or safety because of unfavorable or possible harmful work situations of a temporary nature. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 10, § 1)) 
Sec. 23-342. - Employee's status. 
When an employee is placed on non-disciplinary administrative leave every effort shall be made to protect the property and liberty interests of that employee so that there is not any loss of pay, benefits, seniority or status. The personnel records of the employee shall reflect only that the employee was placed on administrative leave for the period. Such action shall clearly indicate a nonprejudicial status which shall imply neither guilt nor innocence, and shall not reflect adversely on the employee's standing with the city in any further personnel action(s). 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 10, § 2)) 
Sec. 23-343. - Employee rights during administrative leave. 
During the investigation to determine facts or to clarify circumstances, the employee placed on non-disciplinary administrative leave shall be provided with a preliminary hearing if necessary, may be represented, or may present evidence as circumstances require. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 10, § 3)) 
Sec. 23-344. - Termination of administrative leave status. 
Following the findings of the investigation or the ending of unfavorable work situations, an employee shall be returned to duty promptly without penalty if cleared or shall be placed in disciplinary status if the circumstances so indicate. When an employee is placed in disciplinary status, he shall have the full rights to answer the charges, to be represented if necessary, to present evidence, and shall be afforded all appeal rights. Non-disciplinary, administrative leave shall not be charged to vacation, sick or other leave categories. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 10, § 4)) 
Secs. 23-345—23-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - EMPLOYEE GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS 

Sec. 23-371. - Grievance definition. 
(a)  A grievance is a complaint by an employee alleging inequitable treatment because of some condition of employment. The city shall make every effort to resolve grievances informally and formally if necessary. 
(b)  All parties to the grievance shall receive copies of all documents involved and no step in the grievance process may be eliminated unless authorized by the city manager. No employee shall be disciplined or discriminated against in any way because of the grievance procedure. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 11, § 1)) 
Sec. 23-372. - Grievance procedures. 
In presenting a grievance, the following steps shall be followed: 
(1)  An employee with a problem shall attempt to resolve it through discussion with those involved. 
(2)  After unsuccessfully taking informal means to resolve the grievance, an employee shall submit a written complaint to the immediate supervisor requesting redress. The immediate supervisor shall respond in writing within ten workdays to the employee. 
(3)  If settlement cannot be achieved the employee may forward the grievance in writing directly to the department head who shall respond in writing within ten workdays to the employee. 
(4)  If the grievance remains unresolved, the employee may appeal in writing to the city manager whose written decision within ten work days shall be final. 
(5)  If the complaint involves direct action taken by the city manager which exceeds the authority of an immediate supervisor or department head to resolve, or if the complaint is initiated by a department head, that person shall submit a written complaint directly to the city manager within ten days from the effective date. The city manager shall then respond in writing within ten workdays to the employee. If the grievance remains unresolved, the employee may appeal in writing within ten workdays to the city council whose decision shall be final. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 11, § 2)) 
Sec. 23-373. - Appeal rights. 
(a)  Any employee who has successfully completed probation and who subsequently received disciplinary action shall have the right to discuss the matter fully with the immediate supervisor and department head. If still dissatisfied, the employee may exercise the right of appeal within ten workdays from the effective date of such action to the city manager. The city manager shall provide the employee with a fair and objective hearing in which evidence may be presented, witnesses called, and the employee may be represented. The city manager shall respond in writing within ten workdays regarding his finding, which shall be final. 
(b)  Department heads who are subject to disciplinary action by the city manager may appeal such matters to the city council within ten workdays of the effective date. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 11, § 3)) 
Secs. 23-374—23-398. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SEPARATIONS 

Sec. 23-399. - Methods of separation, generally. 
An employee may be separated from the service of the city by any one of the different methods as described in these policies. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 12, § 1)) 
Sec. 23-400. - Resignation. 
An employee should give at least 14 calendar days prior notice of intention to resign to his department head. Failure to comply with this rule shall be entered on the service record of the employee and may result in a denial of reemployment rights. Exceptional circumstances may warrant exemption from penalty by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 12, § 2)) 
Sec. 23-401. - Abandonment of position. 
An employee who, without valid reason, fails to report to work for three consecutive workdays without authorized leave shall be separated from the payroll and reported as having abandoned his position. Such an employee is not ordinarily eligible for reemployment and such action shall be considered as a compulsory resignation. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 12, § 3)) 
Sec. 23-402. - Loss of job requirements. 
Any employee who is unable to do his job adequately because of loss of a necessary license or other requirement shall be separated by dismissal. Exceptional circumstances may warrant exemption from this requirement which would result in a layoff until such license or requirement is acquired as approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 12, § 4)) 
Sec. 23-403. - Layoffs. 
(a)  If it becomes necessary to reduce a department work force, employees shall be laid off based on the critical skills possessed by each in relationship to the needs of the city for continued performance of vital services. Layoff shall also be based in part on the length of satisfactory service in the class, the length of satisfactory service with the city, and in consideration of reports of performance for the last three years if available. 
(b)  When an employee possesses critical skills essential to the efficient operation of a department, he may be retained in preference to a person of greater seniority and with higher rating. Documentation and request for such action must be presented by the department head to the city manager who will make the final decision. The request shall set forth in detail the specific skills and abilities possessed by the individual and the reasons why such individual is essential to the effective operation of the department. Temporary probationary employees shall be laid off prior to permanent employees of the same class. 
(c)  If a permanent employee is scheduled for layoff, he shall be offered a demotion to a lower class if a vacancy exists and he is qualified to fill positions in the lower class involved. Permanent employees who are laid off shall be entitled to reinstatement to their previous status in reverse order of their reduction for a period of one year and prior to the appointment of any additional permanent employees of the same class. 
(d)  Whenever practical, permanent employees shall be given at least 14 days advanced notice prior to the effective date of layoff. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 12, § 5)) 
Sec. 23-404. - Disability. 
A department head with the city manager's approval may direct any employee under his supervision to be examined by a physician designated by the city. When a disability of any kind impairs or negatively affects the safe and successful performance of the job, the following action shall be taken: 
(1)  Temporary disability. If the disability is correctable the maximum time allowed shall be no more than 12 months in duration. Provided, however, that for most temporary disabilities of a routine nature, three months shall be the suggested maximum time allowed. For each case, the employee shall be allowed a specific time of 12 months or less to have the disability corrected as determined by the city manager upon consideration of the physician's recommendation. If the employee fails to have the disability corrected within the specific time, he shall be subject to disciplinary action or layoff. 
(2)  Permanent disability. If in the opinion of the examining physician the disability cannot be corrected, the city manager shall attempt to place the employee in another position which he can perform satisfactorily. If that cannot be accomplished successfully, the city manager shall take steps to separate the employee from the city service through retirement or layoff. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 12, § 6)) 
Sec. 23-405. - Retirement. 
Employees shall retire no later than the last day of the month following their 70th birthday or may voluntarily retire at any time prior to this date. When an employee intends to retire, advanced notice should be presented to the city manager so that proper recruitment and training of a replacement can be properly carried. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 12, § 7)) 
Sec. 23-406. - Dismissals. 
An employee may be dismissed for disciplinary or other involuntary reasons when other actions did not solve the problem. A dismissal may also take place if the employee must be removed from the work place immediately and/or permanently. Non-probationary employees may be dismissed for causes outlined in these policies only after having been presented with the reasons for such action in writing along with a statement that the person discharged has the right to appeal to the city manager within ten days from the effective date of dismissal. Copies shall be filed with the city manager and in the employee's personnel file. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 12, § 8)) 
Sec. 23-407. - Death. 
If an employee dies while in city service, his estate shall be eligible to receive payment for any earned and unused leave and other compensation due the employee. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 12, § 9)) 
Secs. 23-408—23-432. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - RECORDS AND REPORTS 

Sec. 23-433. - Establishment and maintenance. 
The city manager, his designee, or personnel officer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an official personnel file for each employee of the city. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 13, § 1)) 
Sec. 23-434. - Contents. 
Department heads are responsible for the forwarding of documents for inclusion in the personnel files of those employees assigned to their department. The following information shall be retained in a personnel records file throughout the association of an employee with the city: 
(1)  Employee application. 
(2)  Job description and specification information. 
(3)  Job performance information. 
(4)  Education/training information. 
(5)  Personnel action forms. 
(6)  Administrative correspondence relating to leave/vacation requests. 
(7)  Letters of appreciation, commendation or discipline. 
(8)  Other appropriate information for personnel administration purposes. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 13, § 2)) 
Sec. 23-435. - Access to personnel records. 
All information in an employee's personnel records shall be considered a public record in accordance with Georgia § 50-18-70 except those which by order of a court of this state or by law are prohibited or specifically exempt from being open for a personal inspection by the general public, and shall be open for inspection by any citizen of the state at a reasonable time and place. 
(1)  The employee, the city manager, or his designee may examine all materials in an employee's personnel record. 
(2)  Any person authorized by court order may examine specified materials in an employee's personnel record. 
(3)  An official agent of the state or federal government may inspect personnel records to accomplish a proper governmental function. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 13, § 3)) 
Sec. 23-436. - Redaction of employee information. 
Home addresses and telephone numbers, social security numbers, insurance information and medical information of all city employees shall be redacted from documents contained in their personnel record prior to release under a public records request. Police officer's home address or telephone number, social security number, insurance information, medical information and names of immediate family members or dependents shall be redacted from documents in the employee's personal record prior to release under a public records request. No records will be removed or expunged from an employee's personnel record except as allowed by state law. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 13, § 4)) 
Sec. 23-437. - Records of former employees. 
Regulations for personnel records and access to the records shall apply to former employees as they apply to present employees. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 13, § 5)) 
Sec. 23-438. - Objections to contents. 
An employee who objects to materials in his file may place in his file a brief statement about that which he considers to be inaccurate or misleading. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 13, § 6)) 
Sec. 23-439. - Penalty for unauthorized access. 
Any employee who willfully allows unauthorized access to personnel records shall be subject to disciplinary action. Any employee who examines a personnel record without proper authorization shall be subject to disciplinary action. 
(Ord. of 2016(3), att.(art. 13, § 7)) 
Chapter 24 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; littering, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-42 et seq., 16-7-51 et seq. 

Sec. 24-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.1, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-2. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.2, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bi-metal container means a container for carbonated or malt beverages made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum. 
Biomedical waste means all waste defined as biomedical waste by the Solid Waste Management Act, or by the rules and regulations promulgated by the environmental protection division under the authority of that Act. It also includes wastes such as human tissues, organs, and body parts and fluids that are removed during surgery or autopsy, or other medical procedures and specimens of body fluids and their containers. 
Brush means grass cuttings, weeds, hedge trimmings, tree trimmings and tree limbs not to exceed four feet in length and three inches in diameter. 
Bulk waste means items commonly handled in bulk form, including, but not limited to, household furniture; mattresses; wooden pallets; lumber; trees or tree limbs in excess of four feet in length and greater than three inches in diameter; tree stumps; large auto parts; any domestic and/or commercial large appliance that contains CFC or HCFC refrigerant gas; capacitors containing PCBs, mercury switches, or other hazardous components which may include, but are not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, ranges (electric or gas), humidifiers, dehumidifiers, hot water heaters, furnaces, and other similar large appliances and other oversized wastes whose large size precludes or complicates handling by normal solid waste collection methods. 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment house, business, retail, industrial, institutional, public or semi-public establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever. 
Commingled means a combining of nonputrescible source-separated recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling. 
Construction/demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations of pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, asbestos, asbestos-containing waste, wood, brick, metal, concrete wall board, paper cardboard, inert waste, landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes. 
Container board means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of shipping containers and related products. 
Director means the public works director or his authorized agent. 
Electronic waste means a computer central processing unit and associated hardware, including keyboards, modems, printers, scanners and fax machines, cathode ray tubes, cathode ray tube devices, flat panel displays or similar video display devices with a screen that is greater than four inches measured diagonally and that contains one or more circuit boards, including, but not limited to, televisions and cell phones. The term "electronic waste" also includes VCRs, radios and landline telephones. 
Foam polystyrene packaging means packaging made primarily from foam polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria: is designed for serving food or beverages; consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the packaged chapter in a shipping container; and/or consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged chapter in a shipping container. 
Food service establishment means and includes establishments for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. The term "food service establishment" includes, but is not limited to, restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, lunchrooms, places manufacturing, wholesaling or retailing sandwiches or salads, soda fountains, institutions, both public and private, food carts, itinerant restaurants, industrial cafeterias, school cafeterias, catering establishments, food vending machines and vehicles and operations connected therewith, and similar facilities by whatever name called. 
Garbage means household waste generated from normal everyday living including, but not limited to, food waste, kitchen scraps, metal cans, glass, glass containers, cookware, wax cartons, paper, paper and cardboard boxes, cellophane wrapper, excelsior, and any other small combustible items. This definition shall include both putrescible and nonputrescible matter, organic and inorganic matter, and combustible and non-combustible matter. 
Glass, food and beverage containers means clear, green and brown food and beverage bottles and jars, excluding, however, blue and flat glass commonly known as window glass. 
Green waste includes, but is not limited to, all accumulations of grass, shrubbery, weeds or cuttings from any of the foregoing, pine needles and other yard waste incidental to the growth, maintenance or care of lawns, shrubbery, vines, gardens and discarded Christmas trees. The term "green waste" shall not be taken to include trees or tree limbs in excess of 48 inches in length and greater than three inches in diameter, tree stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls or other wastes defined in this chapter. 
HDPE means high density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #2. 
Hazardous waste. See Special waste. 
LDPE means low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4. 
Litter means, intentionally or unintentionally, any discarded or abandoned garbage, junk, waste material, white goods, foam polystyrene packaging, recyclable materials, or dead animals that are not subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-5-4. 
Magazines means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper. 
Metal food and beverage containers means aluminum, bi-metal and steel food and beverage containers 2½ gallons or less in size, including empty aerosol cans. 
Newspaper means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint. 
Office paper means high grade printing and writing papers from offices in nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. The term "office paper" does not include industrial process waste. 
Other resins or multiple resins means plastic resins labeled by the SPI code #7. 
PETE means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code #1. 
PP means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code #5. 
PS means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code #6. 
PVC means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code #3. 
Paper products means newspapers with inserts, magazines, office paper, junk mail including shredded paper, telephone and paperback books, corrugated cardboard, and brown paper grocery bags. 
Pay-as-you-throw means a program that charges residents for waste removal services based on the quantity of material discarded. 
Plastic bottles and jugs means plastic containers imprinted with "PETE" or "HDPE" on the bottom, including food, beverage, health, beauty and cleaning products, and bottles 2½ gallons or less in size. 
Public works means the department of city government empowered by the council to direct the refuse collection and disposal activities of the city. 
Recyclable materials include lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, or PS; other resins or multiple resins; steel containers; waste tires; and bi-metal containers. 
Resident means the owner, lessee, or occupant. 
Residential means single-family, multifamily dwellings of four units or less, and mobile homes whether such mobile homes are registered as vehicles or assessed as real property. 
Rubbish. See Garbage. 
Solid waste means all waste defined under this Code section, including, but not limited to, the following types of wastes: garbage, rubbish, trash, construction/demolition waste, bulk waste, special waste, green waste and recyclable materials. 
Special waste means any material which meets the EPA designation for a hazardous chemical, hazardous substance, or hazardous waste, or any sharp object improperly containerized prior to disposal, including, but not limited to, hazardous solids and liquids, explosives, biomedical waste, household medical waste, pathological wastes, radioactive materials and electronic wastes. Special waste will not be collected by the city collection service. 
Trash. See Garbage. 
Weed. See Green waste. 
White goods means any domestic and/or commercial large appliance that contains CFC or HCFC refrigerant gas, capacitors containing PCBs, mercury switches, or other hazardous components. Examples include, but are not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, ranges (both electric and gas) humidifiers, dehumidifiers, water heaters, furnaces, and other similar large appliances. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.3, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-4. - Exclusive right and authority of city. 
(a)  Reservation of right. The city reserves the exclusive right and authority to collect and dispose of garbage, refuse, solid waste and/or trash within the city limits through its department of public works or duly approved and licensed independent contractors. The city shall service all properties located in the city for garbage unless an exception is made by the public works director at his discretion. 
(b)  Unusual wastes beyond city capability. In the event that an individual commercial, industrial or multifamily business location should require collection services outside of the capabilities of the city and a decision is made by the public works director to not provide service to the establishment, the business is authorized and required to obtain the service of a commercial collection provider that is licensed to conduct business in the city. Such authorization and requirement shall not relieve the business location from paying regular charges for collection to the city. These fees are assessed to offset the administrative costs associated with the oversight of the establishment to ensure that sanitation services are being performed in a manner that meets the requirements of this chapter, so as to ensure the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and to offset the costs of repairs to the city infrastructure for the placement of large vehicles upon the roadways. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.4, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-5. - Required fees; security deposit. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall establish and amend the fees for all city-provided sanitation services. These fees shall be maintained in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Classification for city-provided sanitation services will be determined by zoning classification of the property serviced. The public works director shall have the authority to amend a classification when determined to be in the best interest of the utility. 
(c)  All accounts shall be paid by the due date; a late fee will be assessed for all payments made after that date. A service charge shall be assessed for all dishonored checks or dishonored credit card charges. 
(d)  Any account that becomes 30 days in arrears shall have its service terminated. After 60 days, the security deposit shall be applied to such bill. In order to reinstate the service, the owner, lessee, or tenant of the property shall pay a reinstatement fee prior to the service being re-established. 
(e)  If an account becomes delinquent for more than 90 days, a lien may be placed against the property. Any further delinquencies may result in the city foreclosing on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.5, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-6. - Authority of city to enter into private contracts for collection and disposal. 
The mayor and council reserves the authority to enter into a private contract for garbage and trash collection and disposal, under such terms and conditions as the mayor and council shall deem reasonable and proper. Any person, firm, or corporation who contracts with the city for garbage and trash collection and disposal shall act as an independent contractor for the city pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.6, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-7. - Unauthorized removal of garbage and trash prohibited; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a duly authorized employee of the city to collect or remove any garbage or trash from garbage and trash receptacles used in the regular city collection service or from any container utilized in the city container collection service, unless otherwise authorized and licensed by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.7, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-8. - Collection. 
(a)  The public works director shall have the authority to make and modify, as necessary, collection schedules, the type of collection containers used, the location for collection and such other matters pertaining to the collection, transportation, and disposal of waste and recyclables in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Public works shall collect and remove all residential garbage one day per week, except in weeks when holidays occur or in the event of inclement weather. 
(c)  Public works employees shall not accept any money or other items of value for services rendered. 
(d)  Residents may request an additional unscheduled pick-up. This service will be provided at such fees or charges as the mayor and council may establish. 
(e)  The city shall charge an extra fee for call-back service to residential and commercial customers whose containers were not at the designated pick-up locations at the required times, or were not accessible by the city's collection vehicles. 
(f)  The public works director shall have the authority to require additional service charges of any residential or commercial establishment that requests and receives additional or special waste collection and disposal services greater than those normally provided by the department. Any such additional charges shall be based upon the cost to the city of providing such additional or special services. 
(g)  It is the responsibility of all new property owners acquiring residential units within the city to provide contact and billing information within 30 days of acquiring the property. For those property owners who lease or rent their residential units, the property owner must provide information to the city regarding who is residing at the residential unit. If there is a change in residents, the property owner has 30 days from the date the resident vacated the property to notify the city of the new resident's name and contact information. During times of vacancy of a rental property, the property owner is responsible for the monthly billing. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.8, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-9. - Container and handling requirements; residential and commercial. 
(a)  The following practices and procedures shall be followed in order to facilitate the collection of garbage: 
(1)  Every customer shall be provided one standardized container; unauthorized containers will not be serviced. Additional containers may be obtained from the city for an additional fee. The containers are not to be used for any other purpose. 
(2)  Each city issued container has an imprinted serial number that is assigned to a specific address (not resident). If the resident moves, the container must remain at the assigned address. 
(3)  Container damage or loss. The customer is responsible for keeping his assigned container secure and in good condition. If the container is stolen or vandalized, the customer must provide a valid police report before the container will be replaced. If a container must be replaced due to negligence, the customer shall be required to pay for a replacement container. 
(b)  Residential use. 
(1)  All garbage, disposable diapers, animal excrement and/or pet litter shall be placed in a securely tied, leak proof plastic bag of sufficient strength to resist tearing under normal handling before it is deposited in the container. 
(2)  All garbage filled plastic bags must be placed inside the authorized container; the container may be filled to capacity as long as the lid can be closed. 
(3)  Unauthorized containers and bags outside the assigned container will not be picked up. The only exception to this provision will be made during the period of December 25 through January 5. 
(4)  Containers shall be placed adjacent to the curb of the resident's property by 7:00 a.m. on the resident's scheduled collection date in such a position as not to obstruct the sidewalk, gutter, mailbox, free movement of traffic, or hinder collection. The container shall be securely sealed to control odors, prevent littering, and to keep out rain and animals. 
(5)  If a container is not placed out in time for collection, the resident may request a special pick-up for which a fee will be assessed. 
(6)  Containers shall be removed from the curb location no later than the day following the scheduled collection day and stored on the residential premises at a location not generally visible from the street. Containers shall be securely sealed at all times to control odors, prevent littering, and to keep out rain and animals. 
(7)  Any garbage that litters the ground because a container was not securely sealed, was overfilled, or was overturned shall be the responsibility of the resident. 
(8)  In no case shall special wastes, including medical and infectious waste, lancets, syringes and hypodermic needles as defined in section 24-3, be placed in city collection containers or collected by the city. 
(9)  Collectors will not service any container with commingled or bulk waste, construction debris, hazardous materials, green waste or improperly secured special wastes. State law prohibits commingling of household garbage with other types of waste. 
(c)  Commercial, industrial and multifamily use; city service. 
(1)  All garbage shall be placed in a securely tied, leak proof plastic bag of sufficient strength to resist tearing under normal handling before it is deposited in the container. 
(2)  All garbage filled plastic bags must be placed inside the authorized container; the container may be filled to capacity as long as the lid can be closed. 
(3)  Unauthorized containers and bags outside the assigned container will not be picked up. 
(4)  Containers shall be placed as directed by the public works director by 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection date in such a position as not to obstruct the sidewalk, gutter, mailbox, free movement of traffic, or to hinder collection. The container shall be securely sealed to control odors, prevent littering, and keep out rain and animals. 
(5)  If a container is not placed out in time for collection, a request for a special pick-up may be requested, for which a fee will be assessed. 
(6)  Containers shall be removed from the pick-up location no later than the day following the scheduled collection day and stored on the premises at a location not generally visible from the street. Containers shall be securely sealed at all times to control odors, prevent littering, and keep out rain and animals. 
(7)  Any garbage that litters the ground because a container was not securely sealed, was overfilled, or was overturned shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee, or tenant of the property. 
(8)  Collectors will not service any container with commingled or bulk waste, construction debris, hazardous materials, green waste or improperly secured special wastes. State law prohibits commingling of waste types. 
(9)  All requirements outlined in this chapter shall apply to commercial, industrial and multifamily establishments serviced by the city. 
(d)  Commercial, industrial and multifamily use; duly licensed commercial collection provider. 
(1)  Garbage, waste and recyclables originating in commercial establishments may be excluded from municipal garbage service at the owner's request and expense. The owners or their representative agents of such establishments shall have the responsibility of garbage, waste and recyclable removal, provided that such removal shall not be in conflict with the ordinances of the city or any related county or state ordinances. 
(2)  All containers and placement of containers must comply with city, county, and state rules and regulations. 
(3)  The city may, at its discretion, elect to provide sole collection services to commercial establishments. 
(4)  Commercial, industrial and multifamily establishments that elect to utilize services other than city-provided or are outside the capabilities of city-provided services are required to pay a monthly fee to the city for administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.9, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-10. - Bulk waste collection. 
(a)  The city will pick up bulk waste, as defined in this chapter, upon request from a residential customer on a case-by-case basis through the public works department. The city shall charge a bulk waste collection fee for this extra service based on the material collected, amount and disposal costs. 
(b)  All bulk waste must be placed curbside, but in no case placed in such a position as to obstruct the sidewalk, gutter, mailbox, free movement of traffic, or to hinder collection. City workers will not enter onto private property to pick up any materials. 
(1)  Items must be placed adjacent to the curb of the resident's property by 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day as not to obstruct the sidewalk, gutter, mailbox, free movement of traffic, or to hinder collection. 
(2)  No person shall leave outside in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator, or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing the door. 
(3)  All white goods shall have a tag signed by an EPA certified technician certifying that all environmentally hazardous materials have been removed. 
(4)  The public works director may limit the amount of bulk waste collected at any one location. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to commingle or mix green waste, garbage or other wastes described in this chapter with bulk waste. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.10, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-11. - Green waste collection. 
(a)  The public works director shall establish a schedule for collection of residential green waste. 
(b)  Green waste should be put in biodegradable paper bags and placed at the curb by 7:00 a.m. of the pick-up day. Bags shall not exceed 50 pounds. 
(c)  In no case shall yard debris be mixed with household garbage or placed in garbage containers. State law prohibits commingling of household garbage and other wastes. 
(d)  There is a limit of 15 bags per regular pick-up for green waste. 
(e)  All branches, limbs and shrubbery shall be cut into lengths of four feet or less, and no single piece shall exceed three inches in diameter nor weigh more than 50 pounds. 
(f)  Branch, limb and shrubbery piles shall be neatly stacked parallel to the street on the resident's property next to the curb, but in no case shall it be placed in such a position that obstructs the sidewalk, gutter, mailbox, free movement of traffic, or that hinders collection. 
(g)  There will be a limit of two piles per resident. Piles shall not exceed eight feet long by four feet wide by four feet tall. If the number of piles exceeds the limit, the resident can call public works for a special pick-up, for which there will be an additional fee. 
(h)  Crews and equipment often leave behind small debris, which is the responsibility of the resident to clean up. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.11, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-12. - Construction and demolition wastes from private property; building permit. 
(a)  Public works shall not be responsible for collecting, hauling or disposing of construction wastes or demolition wastes originating from private property of new, remodeled, or renovated structures. These materials shall be removed by the owner, lessee, or tenant of the property, or the contractor. 
(b)  The city building inspector shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for residential, commercial, or industrial developments until all construction and demolition waste is removed by the owner or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.12, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-13. - Special wastes and collection of dead animals. 
(a)  Public works shall not be responsible for the collection or disposal of any dangerous or hazardous material as described in this chapter. 
(b)  No food service or other type commercial establishment shall incorporate grease into any solid waste collection container. All grease shall be stored separately for recycling or disposal and shall be collected by an authorized service provider. 
(c)  No special wastes shall be placed or caused to be placed with garbage, bulk waste or other wastes as defined in this chapter, for collection by public works. 
(d)  The city is not responsible for removal and disposal of dead animals from private property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.13, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-14. - Recycling. 
In order to protect the environment by conserving natural resources and preserving rapidly dwindling landfill space as well as minimizing waste disposal costs, the city encourages recycling for all residential and commercial/industrial occupants within the city limits, to recycle all recyclable materials and implement reduction activities. The city has provided a centralized recycling drop-off center for use. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.14, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-15. - Anti-scavenging provision. 
It shall be unlawful for an unauthorized person to scavenge, touch, pilfer or disturb any solid waste materials or recyclables as defined in this section once those materials are placed for collection. Only persons authorized by the city, the property owner or an authorized agent of the property owner shall collect or handle solid waste or recyclable materials once those materials have been placed appropriately for collection. Each collected item by an unauthorized person in violation of this provision shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.15, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-16. - Littering. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place within the city except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(b)  Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. 
(c)  Sweeping litter into streets prohibited. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk and/or road right-of-way adjacent to and abutting their private property free of litter. 
(d)  Litter in lakes and streams. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water within the city. 
(e)  Litter on private property. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon any private property. The owner shall be responsible for the removal of litter from his property and shall not be permitted to allow such litter to accumulate. 
(f)  Distributing handbills. It shall be unlawful and constitute littering for any person to hand out, distribute or leave in any public parking area of the city any advertisement or other document advertising, promoting or offering to sell or rent any product, good, ware, merchandise or services unless such advertisement or other document is personally and directly handed to another individual. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.16, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-17. - Disposal of garbage and waste material not generated on property; nuisance. 
(a)  It is a violation of this chapter to transfer garbage or other waste material from the property upon which it was generated to any other property. 
(b)  When garbage or waste material contains identifying matter that depicts the name of a person, there is a presumption that that garbage or waste material belonged to the person identified and was under his control at the time it was discarded. The term "identifying matter" may include, but is not limited to, envelopes, letterhead or junk mail containing a person's name and address. 
(c)  Any accumulation of garbage, litter or other waste items on any lot, property, premises, public street, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance, regardless of whether the city provides municipal garbage collection service for same. Failure of the owner, resident or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of garbage, litter or other waste items after appropriate notice from the mayor and council or his designee shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this section. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action, proceeding, for abatement, removal or injunction thereof in the manner provided under the city's Code of Ordinances and in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.17, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-18. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who violates, has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to an enforcement action or such penalties as are outlined in this chapter, or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this chapter. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this chapter is discovered to contain any chapter, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the chapter belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this chapter. 
(3)  Newspapers or printed materials which are distributed, deposited or placed at no cost to the recipient thereof on public or private property and which, after a reasonable time for retrieval by the intended recipient, are allowed to lay, accumulate or disintegrate on or in such property or curbs and drainage ditches shall constitute litter. Any publisher of such materials must, within 48 hours, retrieve the same from private or residential properties upon notice from either the owner or inhabitant of any such private property or from the city. Failure to comply with this retrieval requirement shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Newspapers and printed materials which constitute litter as specified in this subsection (b)(3), on public property or curbs and drainage ditches, are a violation of this chapter, and the publisher of such material shall be subject to the penalties enumerated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.19, 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 24-19. - Enforcement. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of the state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of the state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003, § 21.21, 4-14-2014) 
Chapter 26 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-34-90 et seq.; general powers of governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RIGHT-OF-WAY USE AND ENCUMBRANCES 

Sec. 26-19. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Emerson Right-of-Way Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 1, 1-12-2015) 
Sec. 26-20. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of the city road rights-of-way, pursuant to the powers vested in the city by O.C.G.A. §§ 32-4-92 and 32-6-1. It is further the purpose of this article to: 
(1)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare by ensuring that new mailbox supports erected in the right-of-way are constructed so as not to pose a hazard to road users; and 
(2)  Prevent encroachments into the city rights-of-way and provide for removal of said encroachments, to secure the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 2, 1-12-2015) 
Sec. 26-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Encroach means to be within the right-of-way. 
Encroachments means any building, structure, or vehicle, or other object or thing (including, but not limited to, mailboxes, signs, cars, gates, walls, sprinkler systems, trees, posts, etc.) which is located in the right-of-way. 
Materially injure means damaging the pavement or right-of-way to the extent that a repair is or will be required by the city in order to bring the pavement or right-of-way back to city standards. It shall also mean causing more than $50.00 in damage to the right-of-way or pavement, considering the labor cost and materials to repair the injury, whether or not such repair is undertaken by the city. 
Obstruct includes, without limitation, the causing of any buildup of rock, gravel, mud, dirt, chemicals, or other materials by continued ingress or egress of vehicles or of any natural waters dammed or redirected by diversion to an extent which presents a hazard to the traveling public. It shall also include negligently or intentionally dropping objects onto the road that present a hazard to the traveling public, including ladders, trash, debris, branches, cement, etc. 
Right-of-way means any right-of-way that has been accepted by the city into the city roads, and such term includes the full width of the right-of-way, and not just the width of the pavement. The term "right-of-way" also includes rights-of-way acquired by prescriptive easement, or pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-5-163 or 32-3-3, or any other means. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 3, 1-12-2015) 
Sec. 26-22. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, encroach upon, or injure materially any part of any city right-of-way or city road pavement. 
(b)  No encroachments are permitted in any right-of-way of the city without permission of the city, unless otherwise permitted by this article. 
(c)  No building, structure, service area, or required off-street parking and loading facilities, except driveways, shall be permitted to encroach on city rights-of-way. 
(d)  The city shall owe no compensation for removal of illegal encroachments or obstructions. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 4, 1-12-2015) 
Sec. 26-23. - Permitted encroachments. 
(a)  Driveways. Driveways (including paved, masonry, asphalt, etc.) are permitted to encroach on the right-of-way. A driveway permit shall be required and the lot owner shall secure permission for any new driveway from the city. Driveways must meet sight distance requirements and must be constructed in compliance with city requirements for stormwater drainage/piping. 
(b)  Landscaping. Limited landscaping is permitted in the city right-of-way, including grass, flowers and shrubs not in excess of two feet in height. Trees shall not be planted in the right-of-way. Irrigation systems shall not be installed in the right-of-way. 
(c)  Mailbox support structures. The city permits limited encroachment of the right-of-way for mailbox support structures, which meet the following standards: 
(1)  The use of massive mailbox support structures that, when struck, could damage vehicles and cause serious injury to vehicle occupants are prohibited. Heavy metal posts, concrete posts, brick bases, and miscellaneous items such as farm equipment or supports filled with concrete are also prohibited and cannot be used for mailbox supports. 
(2)  Acceptable mailbox supports include: 
a.  A single four-inch by four-inch or four-inch diameter wooden post; 
b.  A metal post with strength no greater than a two-inch diameter standard strength steel hollow pipe; or 
c.  Other support of no greater strength, as approved by the city, as in accordance with the standards of the AASHTO Roadway Design Guidelines for mailbox structures, which are incorporated herein by reference. In the event the property owner has any question as to whether the proposed mailbox support will be permitted, the city should be consulted. 
(3)  Mailbox supports must be embedded no more than 24 inches into the ground. A metal post shall not be fitted with an anchor plate, but it may have an anti-twist device that extends no more than ten inches below the ground surface. 
(4)  Mailboxes. The post-to-box attachment details should be of sufficient strength to prevent the box from separating from the post top if a vehicle strikes the installation. The mailbox itself should be of lightweight steel, wood, or plastic/composite construction, and meet U.S. postal service regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 5, 1-12-2015) 
Sec. 26-24. - Nonconforming encroachments. 
(a)  All encroachments pre-existing the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived may remain as nonconforming encroachments, unless and until removal is ordered by the city for utility work, road work or other work necessitating access to the right-of-way. For pre-existing encroachments, the city shall give 30 days' notice of removal (unless the encroachment presents a safety hazard). 
(b)  Any structure pre-existing the ordinance from which this article is derived which is damaged or removed shall not be replaced in kind and must be replaced in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  The city shall owe no compensation for removal of nonconforming encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 6, 1-12-2015) 
Sec. 26-25. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Administration. This article shall be administered by the city. The city shall have the authority to issue permits for encroachments in the rights-of-way not specified above. The appeal of any decision by the city shall be to the city council. 
(b)  Enforcement powers. The city is empowered to enforce this article through the issuance of citations, seeking other civil relief, or issuing stop-work orders for violations of this article. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity who shall do anything prohibited by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be subject to an enforcement action. 
(c)  Right of removal. The city shall have the authority to remove, without notice, any encroachment or obstruction of the right-of-way. The city shall also have the authority to issue a notice of removal to property owners giving them up to 30 days to remove an unpermitted encroachment. 
(d)  Criminal prosecution. City staff, city police officers, or designated code enforcement personnel, or other authorized personnel, may issue criminal citations for violations of this article, or violation of any stop-work order. 
(1)  Criminal prosecutions for violation of this article shall be commenced by the completion, signing, and service of a citation by an authorized city official. No warning need be issued prior to a citation being issued. The original of the citation shall be personally served upon the accused, his authorized representative or, if a corporation, an officer of the corporation or its on-site representative or the person in charge of the activity on the property, and a copy shall be promptly filed with the municipal court. A stop-work order may be issued in conjunction with a citation. 
(2)  Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial in municipal court, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the police officer or other authorized representative who completes and serves it. 
(3)  Any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall thereafter be arrested on the warrant of the municipal court and be required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
(4)  The district attorney, city attorney, city prosecutor or another attorney designated by the city may act as prosecuting attorney for violations of this article. 
(5)  Minimum fines for violations of this article shall be $200.00 for the first violation, and $400.00 for subsequent violations. The municipal court may impose other penalties under its jurisdiction, including incarceration, probation, and restitution or reimbursement costs. 
(6)  Daily violations. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation, subjecting the offender to a new citation, or other civil or criminal proceeding. 
(e)  Civil fines and proceedings. In addition to, or in lieu of, any other remedy, the city may seek injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate relief in superior court to enjoin or prevent a violation of any provision of this article. Such action may also seek civil fines at the mandatory rates specified in subsection (d)(5) of this section for violation of this article, and may additionally seek the costs of restitution, and any other costs associated with the action to enjoin or prevent any violation of any provision of this article. The city shall be entitled to its reasonable attorney's fees and costs for bringing an action in superior court wherein any relief is granted or fine assessed. 
(f)  Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the city, work on any encroachment into the right-of-way that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing, and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the city shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work, with a written order to be provided within three working days. 
(g)  False statements. The city may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this article, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(h)  Permit revocation. The city may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this article, upon determination that the structure or encroachment for which the permit or approval was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this article. 
(i)  Notice of removal. Where the city determines that an encroachment must be removed from the right-of-way for construction, maintenance or safety purposes, the city may (but is not required to, unless otherwise specified herein) issue a notice of removal, giving up to 30 days to remove the structure. After the deadline, the structure may be removed by the city with the costs to be charged to the property owner. The owner may also be cited, fined or have other enforcement action taken against him to secure compliance with this article and/or reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 7, 1-12-2015) 
Chapter 28 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - State traffic code adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.) and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted with like effect as if recited herein. No person shall violate any of such provisions. 
Sec. 28-2. - Traffic signs, signals, etc., ratified. 
The location and existence of all traffic control signs, signals, devices and marking in place on the adoption date of this Code are hereby ratified and confirmed. 
Sec. 28-3. - Trucks prohibited in certain areas. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Local traffic means to and from any lot, location, residence or business place within the city. 
Prohibited area means that certain section and right-of-way of Old Alabama Road running in a generally easterly-westerly direction and beginning at the intersection of Old Alabama Road with the southbound lane of Highway 293 (which intersection is located west of Interstate 75) and extending westward along Old Alabama Road to its intersection with the city limits (which point is also at the intersection of the southwest corner of the South Central Middle School property and the north right-of-way of Old Alabama Road). A sign shall designate the prohibited area. 
Sign means the notice "No Through Trucks" posted at the east and west points of entrance to the prohibited area. 
Truck means any van, van-style, dump body, tractor trailer or tractor only or any truck together with a trailer when the truck or truck and trailer contains more than six wheels touching the roadway at any one time. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit, allow, drive or traverse the prohibited area of the city with any truck. 
(b)  No person shall operate a truck in the prohibited area. This subsection does not apply to local traffic. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1994) 
Sec. 28-4. - Unauthorized operation of certain vehicles. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to restrict the use of certain vehicles on public and private property. 
(b)  No person shall operate any unauthorized vehicle including, but not limited to, any type of motorized vehicle, motor scooter, motorcycle, go-cart, moped, racer, cart, bicycle, or skateboard on public or private property not designated and intended for such use without the express written permission of the property owner, the occupant of the property, the agent of the property owner or occupant, or the proper public official exercising control over the public property. 
(Ord. of 8-27-2007(2)) 
Secs. 28-5—28-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF OFF-ROAD VEHICLES 

Sec. 28-29. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Off-road vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrain and not intended for use predominantly on public roads. The term "off-road vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, four-wheel drive or low-pressure tire vehicles, two-wheel vehicles, amphibious machines, ground effect or air cushion vehicles, and any other means of transportation deriving power from any source other than muscle or wind. The term "off-road vehicle" does not include any motorboat; any military, fire or law enforcement vehicle; any vehicle used exclusively on airports; all farm machinery, farm tractors, and other self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transportation of forest products, for clearing land, for planting crops, for utility services and maintenance, for earth moving, construction or mining; and self-propelled lawnmowers, snow blowers, garden or lawn tractors, or golf carts, while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2007-014, § 1, 8-27-2007) 
Sec. 28-30. - Restrictions. 
Any person operating an off-road vehicle under the following conditions shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and subject to penalties provided elsewhere in this Code for ordinance violations. It shall be unlawful to operate an off-road vehicle: 
(1)  Without working brakes; without a muffler or other silencing equipment meeting standards set by law; or with a muffler cutout, muffler bypass, or similar device; 
(2)  On private property without the express written permission of the owner or occupant of the property or the owner's or occupant's agent; 
The absence of posted signs prohibiting trespass or the use of the property for off-road vehicles shall not be interpreted as giving consent for the trespass or use. 
(3)  On public property including, but not limited to, public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, and public recreational areas, without the express written permission of an appropriate official of the public authority exercising control over the property; 
(4)  In any manner which creates a loud or annoying noise which disturbs or interferes with peaceful enjoyment of other people; 
(5)  In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner which endangers the safety of any person or property; 
(6)  While under the influence of intoxicating beverages or any controlled substances or drugs, including prescription medications or drugs; 
(7)  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except on public highways and streets, if otherwise lawful to do so; 
(8)  On public highways and streets, unless the off-road vehicle complies with all state laws and requirements applicable to vehicles operating on public highways and streets. 
(Ord. No. 2007-014, § 2, 8-27-2007) 
Sec. 28-31. - Responsibility of vehicle owner. 
The vehicle owner shall not permit or authorize any other person to operate the vehicle in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-014, § 3, 8-27-2007) 
Sec. 28-32. - No dedicated areas of operation. 
There is not, and the city does not foresee in the future, any special area established or designated for the operation of off-road vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2007-014, § 4, 8-27-2007) 
Sec. 28-33. - Enforcement. 
The police department shall be responsible for enforcing the restrictions and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-014, § 5, 8-27-2007) 
Chapter 30 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Violations; penalties; liability for resulting damage. 
(a)  Notice of violation. The city reserves the right to not serve written notice for violations. Users of the system are responsible for all discharges to the system. The city may elect to provide written notice stating the nature of the violation and may provide a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. If provided, the offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently ease all violations. If no time period is provided, all violations shall be stopped immediately. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who shall violate this article may be assessed a penalty in an amount as allowed by law. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Liability for damages resulting from violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 39) 
Sec. 30-2. - Application for city-provided utility service. 
(a)  All applications for city utility service shall be made at the city clerk's office, on forms provided by said office, and the location of the premises shall be stated. 
(b)  Additionally, prior to the city issuing a new account or transferring an account to a new location to an individual or business for utility service, the applicant must provide the following: 
(1)  Individual. 
a.  One of the following forms of identification: if a U.S. citizen, a picture identification card, being a valid state-issued driver's license, or state-issued identification card. In the alternative, if not a U.S. citizen, a valid visa, employment authorization card, permanent residence card, or other approved immigration document indicating the applicant's legal right to be in the United States. 
b.  Social security card or a social security number that the city clerk's office has been able to verify as belonging to the applicant. 
c.  Other documentation as the city clerk may determine is necessary to determine the identity of the applicant. 
(2)  Business. The following forms of identification and authorization: 
a.  Authorization to create a utility account for the business. 
b.  Tax ID number or social security number of the business. 
c.  If an individual applying for a business account, one of the following forms of identification: if a United States citizen, a picture identification card, being a valid state-issued driver's license, or state-issued identification card. In the alternative, if not a U.S. citizen, a valid visa, employment authorization card, permanent residence card, visa or other approved immigration document indicating the applicant's legal right to be in the United States. 
(c)  In the event an entity or individual is unable to provide the requested information, the city clerk is not authorized to issue a new account or transfer an account to a new location, the city clerk is authorized to not accept said application and to refuse service. 
(d)  Additionally, in the event of an applicant's failure to provide the above requested items, the applicant may provide other valid state-issued or federal-issued documents to assist in determining his identity, and in the event the city clerk's office can verify said documents, the city clerk may authorize said account to be open. 
(e)  The city clerk may hold an application pending verification of the supplied documentation, for up to 30 days. After 30 days, the city must either accept or reject said application as provided for herein. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 30-3. - Accessibility of property to city employees. 
Where meters, meter boxes, clean-outs or other apparatus are placed on the premises of a customer, a suitable place shall be provided by the customer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times by the meter readers or other city employees having jurisdiction or authority in such matters. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 2) 
Sec. 30-4. - Interference with city property prohibited; responsibility. 
(a)  All persons are prohibited from interfering with or disturbing in any manner or form, any water meters, water boxes, switches, locks, cut-offs, corporation cocks, above- and below-ground utility lines and infrastructures which include fiber, gas, water, sewer, storm sewer, or electricity or other appliances of the city. Additionally, appropriation or use of any water, sewer or other city-supplied utility after service has been cut off or discontinued for the nonpayment of the charges therefor or for other cause is unlawful. The head of the household, property owner, or if a contractor is responsible, shall be held responsible for the violation of this section. 
(b)  Tampering with meters includes, but is not limited to, placement of any device that modifies, alters, nullifies or adjusts the accuracy of the city meter that is in place. This includes any device that is mechanical, hydraulic, or electric that creates a pulse, harmonic, or interference in any way with city meters. 
(c)  Additionally, anyone convicted of tampering with a meter is responsible for reimbursement of all lost charges and all taxes, costs and expenses for the use of said utilities due to said tampering. 
(d)  Unauthorized operation of a city owned hydrant will result in a fine. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 3) 
Sec. 30-5. - Trees or shrubs obstructing sewers or water services prohibited. 
It is unlawful to allow to grow any tree or shrub whose roots obstruct private sewers, public sewers or public water distribution lines and meters. Wherever such plantings are shown to be obstructing sewers or water lines or meters they shall be removed or otherwise remedied from obstructing said sewer or water lines and meters, at the expense of the property owner on which the planting grows. Such tree or shrub and associated roots may be removed by the city, at the expense of the property owner, after the property owner shall have failed or neglected to do so after official notice. In times of emergency or if deemed in the best interest of the utility, the city is authorized to make such repairs without first providing official notice when necessary. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 4) 
Sec. 30-6. - Title to extensions; refusal of extensions. 
Title to all extensions shall vest in the city upon completion. The city shall reserve the right to refuse any extension of utilities, or prescribe any additional conditions, if, in its judgment, the proposed extension would not promote the orderly, harmonious and efficient growth and development of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 5) 
Sec. 30-7. - Ownership and maintenance of lines. 
(a)  The city shall own and maintain the water line from the main to the meter box. The property owner shall own and maintain the service line from the meter box to the premises served. All work upon the service line shall be performed by a licensed plumber. 
(b)  The city shall own and maintain the sewer line from the main to the service lateral. The property owner shall own and maintain the service line from the service lateral to the premises served. A licensed plumber shall perform all work upon the service line. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 6) 
Secs. 30-8—30-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHARGES 

Sec. 30-33. - Charges for utility service; adoption of fee schedule. 
The city adopts and incorporates by reference as a part of this section, charges for the various utility services, fees and deposits for customers served by the city, those rates and charges as contained on the city fee schedule, as may be modified from time to time as approved by the city council, as if fully set out herein. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 26) 
Sec. 30-34. - Deposits for utility service; required. 
(a)  Upon the application for utility service by any consumer within the utility service delivery area of the city, the applicant shall pay to the city a deposit as set per the current city fee schedule. 
(b)  Required deposits are to be paid at the time of application for service to the city. 
(c)  Upon final termination of an account, the deposit will be applied to the balance of the account and the remainder of the deposit, if any, will be refunded. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 27) 
Sec. 30-35. - Meter reading and billing. 
All meters are read monthly and all active accounts are billed monthly. Bills may be mailed to the service address or to another mailing address, as requested by the customer whose name in which the account is established. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 28) 
Sec. 30-36. - Due dates of bills and delinquency penalty. 
Water meters shall be read on the 20th day of each month or as nearly as possible; and bills shall be mailed on the last day of the same month as meters were read or as nearly as possible. All water bills shall be due on or before the 20th day of the month following the reading of the meter, and if not paid by such date, a penalty of ten percent of the account balance shall be added thereto and paid by the water user. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 29) 
Sec. 30-37. - Discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills. 
If any bill for water, sewer, garbage or other utility provided by the city is not paid within 30 days of the due date, the water, sewer, garbage or other utility to that residence or business location shall be discontinued, and in no case shall it be reinstated to the same property until all delinquencies have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 30) 
Sec. 30-38. - Charges for turning water on. 
If the water supply to any premises is scheduled to be turned off for any reason, a charge shall be made for turning the water back on. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 31) 
Sec. 30-39. - Termination of water and sewer service. 
Violation of any rules or regulations of the city concerning usage of the water and sewer system, including nonpayment of rates and charges for more than 30 days, gives the city the privilege of terminating further services to the defaulting customer. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 32) 
Sec. 30-40. - Overpayment, refund or credit. 
(a)  In all cases of overpayment to the utilities department from whatever cause, the city manager or designee is authorized to return the overpayment either by refund to the customer or credit to the customer's account. 
(b)  Reasons for overpayment include, but are not limited to, meter malfunction, line breaks, meter tampering, lack of occupancy, clerical errors, and computer malfunctions. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 33) 
Sec. 30-41. - Convenience fee. 
City customers who pay for utility bills and other city invoices with a credit or debit card may be charged a convenience fee. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 34) 
Sec. 30-42. - Meter re-reads. 
(a)  Customers obtaining utilities from the city utility system are authorized one re-read without charge during a 12-month period. Re-reads in excess of this number will be charged a fee per occurrence. 
(b)  No charge will be made when it is found that an error has been made by representatives of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 35) 
Sec. 30-43. - Past due balance; collection. 
Customers that have a past due balance after disconnection are subject to collections and are required to pay for postage, second notices, collection fees, court processing fees, and attorney's fees. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 36) 
Sec. 30-44. - Non-water customers; private well customers. 
Non-water customers and those obtaining water from wells using the city sewer system may be required to meter well pumpage or install flow meters on the sewer service line, and shall be charged per the current city fee schedule. The property owners shall pay the cost of the meter and installation. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 37) 
Sec. 30-45. - Excessive waste discharges; fees. 
(a)  Fees associated with excessive discharges of conventional pollutants (BOD, TSS, COD) may or may not be punitive as deemed by the city. 
(b)  Fines for conventional pollutants (BOD, TSS, COD) can be waived, provided no harm occurred to the POTW, at the discretion of the city on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  Wastewater discharges between 300 mg/l and 850 mg/l of BOD will be assessed a surcharge. Enforcement shall be initiated for BOD discharges exceeding 850 mg/l. Wastewater discharges between 300 mg/l and 1,500 mg/l of TSS will be assessed a surcharge. Enforcement shall be initiated for TSS discharges exceeding 1,500 mg/l. 
(d)  For samples with an average COD value that is greater than 2½ times average BOD, surcharges will be based on COD. For samples with an average COD value that is less than 2½ times average BOD, surcharges will be based BOD. Wastewater discharges between 750 mg/l and 2,500 mg/l will be assessed a surcharge on COD as applicable. Enforcement shall be initiated in addition to surcharges for discharges exceeding 2,500 mg/l. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 38) 
Secs. 30-46—30-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER 

Sec. 30-64. - Supervision of municipal waterworks; right of entry for purposes of inspections. 
(a)  The municipal waterworks shall be under the supervision of the public works director, who shall perform all acts that may be necessary for the prudent, efficient, and economical management and protection of said waterworks, subject to the approval and confirmation of the city manager. 
(b)  The public works director, or his designee, may enter the premises of any water taker at any reasonable time to examine the condition of the water pipes, meters, and fixtures. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 61) 
Sec. 30-65. - Permission for attachments; reports. 
No plumber or other person shall make an attachment to any pipe or water fixture, nor to any pipe where the water has been turned off, unless permission has been granted by obtaining permission from the city, and in every instance, the plumber, after having tested his work, must turn the water off and make returns to the city within 48 hours after completing his work. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 62) 
Sec. 30-66. - Permission to turn water off or on at curb stop. 
Water shall not be turned on or off under any circumstances by the curb stop, located inside the meter box, to any premises for any purpose, but by the authority of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 63) 
Sec. 30-67. - Interfering with reservoirs. 
No person, except those having charge of the water works, or by permission of the same, shall be allowed to climb the ladders attached to the reservoirs in any way or manner, or interfere with the reservoir in any way. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 64) 
Sec. 30-68. - Opening hydrants, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to open any hydrant, fireplug or gate, or remove or lift the cover of the same without permission from the city, except in the case of fire, and then only under direction of the fire department. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 65) 
Sec. 30-69. - Repair of leaks in service pipes. 
If the service pipes through or in the premises of any person shall become leaky for want of repairs, it shall be the duty of such person to have the same repaired with 24 hours after notice; the supply of water on such premises shall be shut off and not let on again until all repairs are made. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 66) 
Sec. 30-70. - Wasting water. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly or unnecessarily, to waste the water on his premises. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 67) 
Sec. 30-71. - Taking water illegally after shut-off. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, by any false key, jumper, connection device or otherwise, after the water has been shut off from any premises, to cause said premises to be supplied with water. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 68) 
Sec. 30-72. - Separate taps. 
In no case shall two or more houses receive water through the same tap service pipe. To avoid complications arising from such service, each house shall have its own tap and service pipe, except by permission of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 69) 
Sec. 30-73. - Supplying water to others. 
It shall be unlawful for any water consumer to sell or permit the regular use of water by any other person or for other uses than that applied for. It shall be the duty of every person whose premises are supplied with water to prohibit persons from procuring, for any purpose, water from such premises, and the supply of water may be shut off from such premises and every person who shall so use the water shall be subject to punishment. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 70) 
Sec. 30-74. - Shutting off water by city; liability of city for damage. 
The city will not be liable for any damage that may result to consumers from the shutting off of a water main or service for any purpose whatever, even in cases where no notice is given, and no deductions will be made from water bills in consequence thereof. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 71) 
Sec. 30-75. - Meters. 
(a)  Water meters and meter boxes will be furnished by the city at the expense of the property owner. All meters shall be placed on the edge of the right-of-way, or as otherwise directed by the city. All water meters will be kept in repair, free of charge, by the city. It is unlawful for any person to remove the cover from a meter, meddle with, remove or damage any water meter or other apparatus under control of the city. 
(b)  No water shall be furnished to any premises except through meters, and shall be charged at the established rates. Each premises or separate business must have a separate water meter. When a building is subdivided, a separate water meter must be provided for each unit. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 72) 
Sec. 30-76. - Use of water by builders. 
It shall be the duty of all persons who may desire water for building purposes, to make application in writing to the city. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 73) 
Sec. 30-77. - Irrigation systems. 
All new irrigation systems, both residential and nonresidential, shall have installed a rain sensor irrigation shut-off switch to prevent operation of the system during or within six hours after an adequate rain event. The term "adequate rain event" shall mean at least one-half-inch of rainfall. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 74) 
Sec. 30-78. - Private wells. 
Any person proposing to drill or install a private water well or improve an existing water well within the city limits, must receive a permit from the city before proceeding with any work. No permit shall be processed or issued without the approval of the city council. Private water wells of any type may not be cross-connected with the city water system and must meet all rules and regulations required by the state. The permit application shall include a site plan indicating the proposed location of the well, any other wells within 200 feet of the proposed well location, and a description of the existing or proposed use of the subject property. A study by a professional geologist or engineer may be required showing potential impacts to the city water system. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 75) 
Sec. 30-79. - Outdoor watering. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plants, seeds, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand-watering with a hose with automatic cut-off or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydro-seeding. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 76) 
Sec. 30-80. - Emergency authority of city manager during water shortages. 
The city manager is authorized at all times when, because of drought or low water from any cause, or because of accident or any other cause, it becomes necessary for the public welfare to conserve the city water supply, to put into effect such reasonable limitations and regulations of the use of water as may, in his judgment, be necessary under the circumstances. He may prohibit the use of water for sprinkling streets, yards or gardens or washing of cars, and may establish such other and further regulations and limitations as he may deem necessary. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such regulations during the time they are in effect. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 77) 
Sec. 30-81. - Drought response plan. 
The city shall maintain a drought response plan as required by the state environmental protection division. A copy of said plan shall be kept on file at the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 78) 
Sec. 30-82. - Conservation plan. 
The city shall maintain a drought contingency plan as required by the state environmental protection division. A copy of said plan shall be kept on file at the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 79) 
Sec. 30-83. - Car wash water recycling. 
Conveyor car washes permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011 which utilize city water shall install, utilize, and maintain a water recycling system which recycles and reuses at least 50 percent of wash and rinse water. 
(1)  Exemptions. The following are exempt from this article: 
a.  Conveyor commercial car washes that were permitted or constructed before January 1, 2011. 
b.  Self-service car washes or in-bay car washes. 
(2)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Car wash means any commercial enterprise operated for profit and open to the public for the purpose of car cleaning, washing, waxing, vacuuming, polishing, detailing, or a combination thereof. 
Conveyor car wash means a commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash, and the driver of the vehicle remains in the vehicle or waits outside of the vehicle. 
In-bay automatic car wash means a commercial car wash that utilizes mechanical equipment to wash, rinse, and sometimes dry a stationary occupied vehicle. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through a tunnel. 
Owner means any and all persons who have any ownership interest in the car wash establishment. 
Self-service car wash means a car wash operating without the assistance of a full-time on-site attendant, where the customers wash their cars themselves with spray wands and brushes. 
Water recycling system means a plumbing system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 80) 
Sec. 30-84. - Private fire protection apparatus; fire lines. 
(a)  All fire service lines must be equipped with an appropriate backflow device. At a minimum this device shall be a double check valve installed in a vault at a point on the fire service line as near to the main as practical. Certain fire system configurations may require more extensive backflow prevention measures. Contact the city for a specific determination of backflow prevention requirements of a particular fire service system design. 
(b)  All fire service systems require the installation of an underwriter-approved detector meter installed as a component of the double check assembly or a factory mutual fire line meter immediately upstream of the double check valve assembly at the discretion of the city. 
(1)  All detector check assemblies shall utilize a meter equipped with a remote reading device as specified by the city. 
(2)  Factory mutual fire line meter systems shall utilize meters specifically designed for fire lines equipped with remote reading devices as specified by the city. 
(c)  Fire service charges shall be as specified in the current city fee schedule. 
(d)  When unauthorized water is used through a detector meter in three or more billing periods in one calendar year, it shall be replaced with a factory mutual fire line meter at the expense of the developer/owner. Unauthorized use of water is defined as non-firefighting water and/or water use without prior notification and approval of the city. 
(e)  All work to be performed by the developer. Installation of detector meters or factory mutual fire line meters as required by this article will be handled by the developer under supervision of the city's inspectors. The cost of installation will be the responsibility of the developer. 
(f)  The city shall have the authority to cut off water service to buildings whose owners refuse to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(g)  The customer shall have ownership and be responsible for maintenance and repairs of the fire service line beginning at the boundary with the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 81) 
Secs. 30-85—30-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WASTEWATER 

Sec. 30-112. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called a "house connection." 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or business, as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions in grams per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and hydrogen-ion concentration of ten. 
Properly shredded garbage means the waste from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwaters, stormwaters, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sewage means the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater." 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer) means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water, and is referred to as non-filterable residue. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludge; sometimes used as synonymous with the term "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant." 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 126) 
Sec. 30-113. - Requirement to connect to public sanitary sewer when available. 
(a)  Current structures. The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city, in which there is now located, or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, are hereby required, at their expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. 
(b)  New development. 
(1)  Except as provided below, all future buildings within the city's corporate limits that are to be utilized for occupancy or any other use such as commercial or industrial purposes which requires sanitary sewerage facilities shall be connected to the public sewer system. The cost of constructing the necessary facilities for connection to public sewers shall be at the expense of the developer. 
(2)  Waiver of the requirement to connect to public sewers will be considered on a case-by-case basis for non-subdivided, single-lot buildings when the nearest connection point to a public sewer is more than 200 feet from the property line, when such buildings are to be used for single-family dwellings or some other use where the wastewater loading is no more than that of a single-family dwelling. 
(3)  The city maintains the option of requiring developers of individual lots to construct main line extensions of up to 200 feet to avoid cutting pavement on existing streets for connection to the public sewer. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 127) 
Sec. 30-114. - Unsanitary deposits on property of others prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 128) 
Sec. 30-115. - Discharges to natural outlets. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 129) 
Sec. 30-116. - Private means of disposal generally prohibited; when public sewers are not available. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, or septic tank. If sewers are not available within 200 feet of the property line, the options available are: 
(1)  Do not develop. 
(2)  Extend city sewers to the area (at the developer's expense). 
(3)  In cases where the installation of sewer systems would not be in the best interest of the utility, the city may allow for the installation of septic tanks or other on-site treatment systems. (Requires council approval.) 
(b)  Private wastewater disposal. 
(1)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this section, if approved by the city. 
(2)  Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owners shall first obtain a permit from the city. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection fee shall be required. 
(3)  A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not be effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city. The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. 
(4)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of public health. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 10,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(5)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(6)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(7)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state, county, city or local health department. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 130) 
Sec. 30-117. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(c)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer for the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(d)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings if approved by the city. 
(e)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the city development regulations. 
(f)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drains shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(g)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, garbage drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the city for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(h)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the city development regulations. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation. 
(i)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the city. 
(j)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(k)  All contractors performing work on public sewers must comply with all pertinent OSHA requirements. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 131) 
Sec. 30-118. - Regulation of discharges to the public sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(b)  The following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, or public property, or constitute a nuisance. The city may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if, in the city's opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objections. In forming this opinion as to the acceptability, the city will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer, which shall not be violated without approval of the city, are as follows. 
(1)  Wastewater having a temperature higher than 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat, or grease. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers, with approval of the city, from homes, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the city. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a slug as defined herein. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other waters or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(c)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (b) of this section, and which, in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to be in compliance with federal pretreatment standards; 
(3)  Require control of the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the additional wastes. 
(d)  Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, the owner, at his expense, shall maintain them continuously in satisfactory and effective operation. 
(e)  When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(f)  The city may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period. 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters. 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and quality. 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquids, sludge, oil, solvents, or other materials important to sewer use control. 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility locations. 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities. 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of material through spills to the municipal sewer. 
(g)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the city. 
(h)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 132) 
Sec. 30-119. - Industrial cost recovery. 
Industrial users of the publicly-owned treatment works may be required to make payment for that portion of the cost of construction of the city's treatment works which is allowable to the treatment of such wastes. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 133) 
Sec. 30-120. - Protection of sewage works from damage. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment, which is a part of the wastewater facilities. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 134) 
Sec. 30-121. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Employees of the city and authorized representatives bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the community wastewater treatment system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Employees of the city and authorized representatives are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes, which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors. 
(c)  While performing the necessary work on private properties, employees of the city and authorized representatives shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions. 
(d)  Employees of the city and authorized representatives bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full in accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 135) 
Sec. 30-122. - Conflict. 
In the event a wastewater discharge is under the jurisdiction of an approved sewer use ordinance for another governing authority, the more constrictive requirement shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 202) 
Secs. 30-123—30-142. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMMERCIAL WASTE HANDLING 

Sec. 30-143. - Purpose. 
(a)  Excessive amounts of fats, oils, grease, grit, sand and other solid or viscous materials can cause blockage and obstruction in the sanitary sewer system, causing untreated wastewater to overflow into the environment. Much of the waste material that has the potential to cause blockage or obstruction originates from commercial facilities, such as food preparation and vehicle maintenance facilities. 
(b)  This article sets forth minimum and uniform requirements for the treatment and disposal of commercial waste into the sanitary sewer system, and the transportation and ultimate disposal of commercial waste sludge and byproducts. 
(c)  The objective of this article is to minimize the discharge of pollutants associated with commercial waste discharged into the sanitary sewer system that may interfere with normal operation of the system, and to ensure that the sludge and byproducts removed from commercial waste treatment systems are transported and disposed of in accordance with chapter 391-3-6-.24 of the Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia, department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
(Ord. No. 2015-016, § I, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 30-144. - Application of provisions not in article. 
Provisions of this chapter that are not in this article do not apply to this article. 
Sec. 30-145. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial facility means a facility constructed and intended to produce commercial, domestic, or industrial wastewaters, including facilities intended to collect, transport, and treat stormwater runoff. 
Commercial wastes means: 
(1)  Non-toxic, non-hazardous liquid wastewater from commercial facilities; 
(2)  Grease interceptor contents generated by a commercial food operation or institutional food preparation facility, including, without limitation, fats, grease, and food scraps; or 
(3)  Any oil waste residue produced from vehicle maintenance or washing that discharge to an oil-water separator or sand trap. 
Commercial waste discharge permit means a wastewater discharge permit issued to commercial facilities by the local governing authority (LGA). 
Commercial waste transporter permit means a permit issued by the city for an individual tank truck. 
EPD means the state environmental protection division. 
FOG means fats, oils, and grease. 
FOG separator means a structure or device designed to collect and retain oils, grease, and fatty substances usually found in kitchen or similar wastes. 
Grease interceptor means a structure or device designed to collect and retain oils, grease, and fatty substances usually found in kitchen or similar wastes. 
Grease trap means a FOG separator. 
Grit trap means a structure or device designed primarily for the accumulation and removal of grit. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste that has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the board of natural resources, chapter 391-3-11. 
Local governing authority means the city. 
mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
Oil-water separator means a structure or device designed primarily to collect and retain oily substances. 
Originator means the owner or operator of the grease or FOG interceptor, grit trap, oil-water separator, or sand trap from which commercial wastes are removed. 
Registered commercial waste transporter means a business/owner registered and permitted by the state environmental protection division. 
Sand trap means a receptacle designed for the accumulation and removal of sand, grit, rocks and other similar debris. 
Septic wastes means the contents of a septic tank. 
Tank truck means any vehicle that removes and transports commercial wastes. 
Transporter means any person or firm which owns or operates one or more waste tank trucks that receive or dispose of commercial waste in the state. 
User means any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of wastewater into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2015-016, § II, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 30-146. - Coverage and exclusions. 
(a)  This article applies to any facility that generates commercial wastes, to any person who removes commercial wastes, to any person who processes commercial wastes, and to any person who accepts commercial wastes for final disposal. 
(b)  This article applies only within the geographical and political boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-016, § III, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 30-147. - Requirements. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Limitations. No user shall introduce into the sewer system any materials in an amount, which would cause interference with the system. In addition to any limitations set forth in any other ordinance of the city, no user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the sewer system the following: 
a.  Solid or viscous materials in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow to the sanitary sewer system. 
b.  Petroleum or mineral oils in concentrations greater than 25 mg/l. 
c.  Trucked or hauled materials, except at approved points that may be designated by the city as commercial waste disposal facilities. 
d.  FOG of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l. 
(2)  Responsibility. It is the responsibility of the originator to ensure that the commercial waste removed from the originator's facility is properly treated before being discharged to the sewer system, and that wastewater, sludge and byproducts removed from grease traps and oil-water separators are transported by a permitted transporter, and disposed of at an EPD-approved commercial waste processing and disposal facility. The originator of commercial waste shall not allow a transporter to remove waste from his facility without verifying that the commercial waste transporter has a current permit issued by the EPD. 
(3)  Manifest required. All originators, transporters, and processing and disposal site operators involved in the removal, transport, and disposal of commercial wastes and commercial waste sludge and byproducts, shall participate in proper maintenance of manifests. The manifest will require signatures from the originator, transporter and disposer in order to maintain and establish accountability. The approved manifest is a multi-copy form. The originator shall: 
a.  Sign the received manifest form and maintain such record for a period of three years. 
b.  A manifest is considered complete after the commercial waste is delivered and disposed of at the commercial waste disposal or processing facility, and the manifest has been signed and completed by the disposal or processing facility. It is the originator's responsibility to ensure that a completed copy of the manifest is received with the signature of the disposal site operator within 30 days. 
c.  Any discrepancies in the manifest must be resolved by the originator. 
d.  Make the retained records available for inspection by the city. 
e.  Report any spills to the city upon becoming aware of a spill that could impact any surrounding areas such as storm drains, adjacent streams or ground surface where the transporter has removed waste from the facility's pretreatment system. Failure to notify the city of a spill will constitute a violation, and fines may be assessed to the commercial waste originator as well as the transporter. Notifying the city does not relieve the originator or transporter of his responsibilities to notify any state or federal agencies. 
(b)  Permits. 
(1)  In general. No portion of a trap, interceptor, or separator shall be installed, repaired, altered, modified or replaced until a permit has been issued by the city as outlined in the city development regulations. 
(2)  Commercial waste discharge permit. A commercial waste discharge permit shall be required by any commercial waste originator discharging to the city sanitary sewer. 
a.  The annual permit will be valid for one year from the date of issuance and is not transferable. 
b.  All commercial waste permits shall be issued annually from January 1 to March 31. Any existing facility obtaining a permit after March 31 will be charged a 25 percent penalty fee. 
c.  A new facility opening after the annual permit period will not pay a penalty unless it has been determined that the facility has been opened for more than 30 days. The 25 percent penalty fee shall apply. 
d.  The permit may contain conditions exclusive to the facility or originator. These conditions include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Permit duration. 
2.  Frequency of content removal. 
3.  Frequency of inspections. 
4.  Pretreatment requirements. 
5.  Maintenance requirements. 
6.  Compliance schedules. 
7.  Requirements for maintenance records and submission of reports. 
8.  Right of entry. 
9.  Other conditions deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this article or other applicable ordinances, laws, and regulations. 
(3)  Commercial waste transporter. Commercial waste transporters must obtain a permit through the EPD. The city has elected to delegate inspection authority and does not perform vehicle inspections. All commercial waste transporters must be in compliance with all state laws and rules and regulations of the department of natural resources environmental protection division. 
(c)  Originator. 
(1)  Food service establishments. 
a.  FOG separator required. All restaurants, institutional kitchens, or other food service establishments defined as commercial users of the system, shall provide approved FOG and settleable solids removal equipment or facilities sufficient to meet the limitations set forth in this article. The number and size of the system shall be determined by using good engineering practices and must meet or exceed the minimum requirements in the city development regulations. The number and size of each system proposed will be reviewed by the city for approval. Existing commercial users must also meet the standards set forth in the city development regulations. 
b.  Grandfathering of existing systems is not allowed unless the existing system meets the current standards. Upon notification by the city, an originator must bring an existing system into compliance within 90 days. 
c.  The separator shall exclude sanitary wastewater and be located outside of any building and accessible for proper maintenance and inspection. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the separator shall be installed with traffic bearing covers. Manhole openings must be provided for inspection and cleaning purposes. The layout and design of the system shall be determined by using good engineering practices and must meet or exceed the minimum requirements in the city development regulations. 
d.  The equipment or facilities shall be installed and maintained by the originator. 
e.  Alternative treatment methods. The use of any alternative method of treatment is prohibited without written approval of the city. Alternative treatment systems, such as mechanical grease recovery devices, shall be used only after a case-by-case evaluation and authorization of the city. 
f.  The use of chemicals, enzymes and bacteria is prohibited. The use of any additives shall not be considered as an alternative to an adequate treatment system or in lieu of regular maintenance, as prescribed in this article. 
g.  Maintenance required. All FOG separators shall be maintained at the originator's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents of the separator. All separators shall be pumped out at a minimum of once every quarter (three months) for food establishments with the capacity to serve at least one meal per day to a maximum of 500 meals per day, and monthly for all establishments with the capacity of serving over 500 meals per day, or at intervals established in the commercial waste discharge permit. More frequent pump-out intervals may be required by the city to achieve proper maintenance levels. An annual visual inspection of the structure interior by the transporter shall be documented and retained by the originator for review by the city. 
(2)  Maintenance and service facilities. 
a.  Sand/oil separator required. All maintenance or service facilities defined as commercial users of the system shall provide approved oil and solids removal equipment or facilities sufficient to meet the limitations set forth in this article. The type, number, and size of the system shall be determined by using good engineering practices and must meet or exceed the minimum requirements in the city development regulations. Each system proposed will be reviewed by the city for approval. 
b.  The separator shall exclude sanitary wastewater and be located outside of any building and accessible for proper maintenance and inspection. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the separator shall be installed with traffic bearing covers. A manhole opening must be provided over the discharge pipe for inspection purposes. A separate monitoring manhole may be required by the city. The layout and design of the system shall be determined by using good engineering practices and must meet or exceed the minimum requirements in the city development regulations. 
c.  The equipment or facilities shall be installed and maintained by the originator. 
d.  All separators shall be maintained at the originator's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents of the separator on a quarterly (three-month) interval, or more frequently as required by the city. Reintroduction of any portion of the waste into the separator is forbidden. An annual visual inspection of the tank by the transporter shall be documented and retained by the originator for review by the city. 
(d)  Transporter; general. Any transporter owning or operating one or more waste tank trucks that receive, transport or dispose of commercial waste in the city, must be registered with the EPD. Any transporter doing business within the city shall be required to show valid registration with the EPD when asked to produce such by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-016, § IV, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 30-148. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Inspection and entry. 
(1)  Representatives of the city, after providing proper identification, shall be permitted to enter the premises of any originator, transporter, processor, or disposal site in the city at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this article or the commercial waste transporter permit. 
(2)  Representatives of the city, during inspections of the originator, transporter, processor, and the disposal site, may review records to determine compliance with provisions of these regulations. 
(3)  The right of inspection shall include the right to measure, observe, sample, test and monitor discharges. 
(4)  The right of inspection shall include the right to record, review and make copies of all pertinent documents in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Monitoring. 
(1)  When required by the city for new construction, the originator shall install an approved manhole and provide a 120 VAC power source near the discharge sewer to allow observation, sampling and flow measurement. 
(2)  The originator shall provide a 120 VAC power source for use by the city during sampling and monitoring operations. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to install sampling and/or monitoring equipment without prior notification. 
(c)  Violations. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this article, or any term, condition, schedule of compliance or other requirement contained in the commercial waste discharge permit, shall be subject to enforcement proceedings by the city pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the city shall be authorized to impose a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Where the offense or violation of this article continues from day to day, each day will be considered a violation and deemed a separate offense. 
(3)  If a violation is deemed by the city manager to be one of an extreme nature, caused by gross negligence of the originator or detrimental to the city sewerage system, the city manager may direct the water department to terminate the originator's potable water service until such time as the city manager determines the facility is in compliance with this article. 
(d)  Permit revocation. 
(1)  Any permit issued by the city may be suspended, revoked or modified by the city, upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the terms of the permit or other conditions outlined in this article. 
(2)  The permit may be reissued by the city upon remedy of the noncompliance that caused the suspension, revocation or modification of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-016, § V, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 30-149. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
In the event a wastewater discharge is under the jurisdiction of an approved sewer use ordinance for another governing authority, the more constrictive requirement shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2015-016, § VI, 9-28-2015) 
Subpart B - LAND USE AND LAND DEVELOPMENT 
Chapter 101 - PLANNING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 101-1. - Application of chapter 1. 
The provisions of chapter 1 apply to this subpart. 
Sec. 101-2. - Legal status. 
While this subpart B of this Code is a codification of ordinances pertaining to land use and land development, and subpart A of this Code is a codification of general ordinances: 
(1)  The inclusion of a provision in subpart A that relates to land use or land development does not excuse noncompliance with such provision. 
(2)  The inclusion of a provision in subpart B that does not relate to land use or land development does not excuse noncompliance with such provision. 
Secs. 101-3—101-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

Sec. 101-23. - City planning and zoning commission; created and established. 
There is hereby created and established a city planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2015-015, § 18.1, 9-14-2015) 
Sec. 101-24. - Membership; terms of office; officers; vacancies. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall consist of five members, appointed by the city council to serve five-year terms. Initial appointments beginning on June 10, 1985, shall be as follows: one appointed for one year, one appointed for two years, one appointed for three years, one appointed for four years, and one appointed for five years. 
(b)  All planning and zoning commission members must be residents of the city and shall have resided in Emerson for a minimum of one year prior to selection of the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  The planning and zoning commission shall elect one of its members as a chairperson and one of its members as a vice-chairperson, who will serve for one year, or until the chairperson or vice-chairperson is re-elected, or a successor is elected. The city clerk shall serve as the secretary to take minutes of the planning and zoning commission's meetings, recording all motions and votes thereon as well as any other business of the planning and zoning commission conducted in a public forum. The planning and zoning commission shall maintain rules of procedure in accordance with state law. The city council shall approve the planning and zoning commission's rules of procedure or any amendment before they become effective. 
(d)  Resignations shall be in writing and delivered to the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission. Any member who is absent more than 50 percent of the regularly scheduled meetings or accumulates three consecutive absences shall be deemed to have resigned. 
(e)  Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be compensated as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-015, § 18.2, 9-14-2015) 
Sec. 101-25. - Duties and function of the planning and zoning commission. 
The duty and function of the city planning and zoning commission is to promulgate plans for the orderly development of the city and for recommendation of such plans and programs as the planning and zoning commission deems advisable for the progress and development of the city; said plans and recommendations shall be submitted to the city council for acceptance or rejection, at its discretion. It shall be the responsibility of the planning and zoning commission to: 
(1)  Review and recommend to the city council its approval, disapproval or approval with conditions on all requests. 
(2)  Review and make a recommendation to the city council in regard to all requests for conditional uses. 
(3)  Review and make a recommendation to the city council in regard to all requests for a variance. 
(4)  Review and make a recommendation to the city council in regard to the adoption of a comprehensive plan or an amendment thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2015-015, § 18.3, 9-14-2015) 
Sec. 101-26. - Powers and authority of the planning and zoning commission officers. 
(a)  The city planning and zoning commission shall be vested with all power and authority as provided by the laws of the state and such laws and ordinances as are now in force or hereinafter enacted. 
(b)  The chairperson shall preside over meetings and shall be responsible for conduct and decorum of the meeting. The chairperson shall have the responsibility to ensure that all parties receive a full and fair hearing before the planning and zoning commission, enforcement of the rules herein and applicable state laws. 
(c)  The chairperson shall be responsible for calling special called meetings and notifying the secretary of the planning and zoning commission so notice can be provided in accordance with state law. 
(d)  The vice-chairperson shall preside over meetings and assume the duties of the chairperson in the absence of the chairperson. In the absence of both the chairperson and the vice-chairperson, the first order of business shall be for the members present to elect a chairperson pro tem until the chairperson or vice-chairperson returns. 
(e)  The chairperson shall have the power to appoint subcommittees of the planning and zoning commission if he finds such committee necessary to carry out the functions of the planning and zoning commission. 
(f)  The secretary shall be responsible to maintain the minutes and records of the planning and zoning commission, and shall notify each commissioner 90 days prior to his term expiration. 
(Ord. No. 2015-015, § 18.4, 9-14-2015) 
Sec. 101-27. - Meetings. 
(a)  A quorum of three members shall be required to conduct business; an affirmative vote of three members voting on a question shall be sufficient for the adoption of the question. Members abstaining shall not be considered members voting in determining whether a question has been adopted. 
(b)  The regularly scheduled meeting of the planning and zoning commission shall be held on the date and time as set unless there is no cause to hold such meeting, in which case, the secretary shall inform the members of the planning and zoning commission at least 24 hours in advance of the regularly scheduled meeting time. 
(c)  Special called meetings may be called by the chairperson, provided at least 24 hours' notice of such meeting is given. 
(d)  Conduct of meetings. 
(1)  All meetings shall be open to the public. Meetings shall be closed only under specific circumstances in accordance with state law. 
(2)  Order of business shall be as follows: 
a.  Roll call. 
b.  Approval of minutes. 
c.  Hearing on text amendments, conditional uses and variances. 
d.  Committee reports. 
e.  Old business. 
f.  New business. 
(Ord. No. 2015-015, § 18.5, 9-14-2015) 
Sec. 101-28. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  Conflicts of interest. A planning and zoning commissioner shall have a conflict of interest if said planning and zoning commissioner, or his family, has a property interest in any real property affected by action on an application before the planning and zoning commission, or has a financial interest in any business entity that has a property interest in any real property affected by action on an application before the planning and zoning commission. Any planning and zoning commissioner having a conflict of interest shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of such interest in writing to the city council. These disclosures shall be made a public record. No planning and zoning commissioner shall vote or participate on a matter in which he has a conflict of interest. 
(b)  No planning and zoning commissioner shall represent an applicant before the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  No planning and zoning commissioner shall discuss any matter pending before the planning and zoning commission with anyone outside a public hearing. All letters or other material personally received by a planning and zoning commissioner shall be provided to each planning and zoning commissioner at the public hearing on the item in question. 
(Ord. No. 2015-015, § 18.6, 9-14-2015) 
Chapter 103 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 103-1—103-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State building code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 

Sec. 103-19. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Emerson Building Code Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.1) 
Sec. 103-20. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes heretofore adopted by the state and additional optional codes as hereinafter designated and adopted by the city. It is further the purpose of this article to: 
(1)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare by ensuring that new construction is built according to the standard building codes and in a safe and sound manner, so as not to pose a hazard to the occupants or other structures or persons; 
(2)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare by ensuring that existing repairs and renovation of existing buildings are constructed according to the standard building codes and in a safe and sound manner, so as not to pose a hazard to the occupants or other structures or persons; 
(3)  Achieve compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations; 
(4)  Provide for and require the erection of safe structures, to provide for adequate sanitation and health, and to provide for adequate fire protection, proper load bearing and other safety measures; 
(5)  Prevent the erection of unpermitted or unsafe structures and to prevent the unsafe repair of structures; and 
(6)  Prevent nuisances and to provide for abatement of nuisances, and to prevent public hazards, unsafe or unfit structures and the associated negative impacts on neighboring properties. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.2) 
Sec. 103-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory use means a use located on the same lot as the principal use, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the permitted use, and which does not change the character of such use, including, but not limited to, private garages, bathhouses, greenhouses, tool sheds, storage buildings, or similar. 
Building means any structure intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property, and usually having a roof supported by columns or by walls. 
Building, accessory, means a detached structure designed for the use of which is clearly incidental to and subordinate to the principal structure or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use. 
Building official means the city building official, or a duly authorized designee. 
Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which said building is located. 
City means the City of Emerson, and any authorized agents or employees of the City of Emerson. 
Commercial means an activity undertaken for profit, income, or other business purposes, including sales or manufacture of goods or items, sale of animals, and boarding, training, and breeding of animals, and similar activities. 
Department means the city building inspections department. 
Developer means the owner of, or person responsible for, a development. 
Development or to develop means subdividing a tract of land into three or more lots, whether for sale or rental, for commercial, industrial, office or residential purposes, or some combination thereof. The term "developer or to develop" shall also include redevelopment of existing development. The term "developer or to develop" shall also include the construction of any commercial, industrial, multifamily or office building or structure, even if on a single lot, and shall include the construction of a manufactured home park. 
Dwelling means a building or other structure designed, arranged, or used for temporary or permanent living quarters for one or more persons. 
Dwelling unit means a building or portion thereof, providing complete living facilities for one family. 
Family means an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption living together in a dwelling unit; or a group of not more than six persons who need not be related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together in a dwelling unit. For purposes of this article, the term "family" may include five or fewer foster children placed in a family foster home licensed by the state, but shall not include fraternities, sororities, nursing homes, or rest homes. 
Hazardous occupancy means any occupancy involving sufficient quantities of highly combustible or explosive materials which, because of their inherent characteristics, constitute a special hazard. The term "hazardous occupancy" also means buildings and structures occupied for the manufacturing, processing, dispensing, use or storage of hazardous materials. Also, the term "hazardous occupancy" means any occupancy defined as Group H in the standard building codes. 
Industrialized building means any structure or component thereof which is designed and constructed in compliance with the state minimum standard codes and is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation, or assembly and installation, on a building site, and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. 
Industrialized housing means a factory-fabricated dwelling or commercial unit built in one or more sections designed to fit together on a foundation, but which usually does not originally have wheels for movement, and which is constructed in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110), and which bears the seal of approval issued by the commissioner of community affairs. 
Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home or industrialized building on such foundation system. With regard to manufactured homes, the term "install" includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural operations and forestry. 
Land disturbance permit means a permit granted under the City of Emerson Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance that provides the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of that ordinance and this article. 
Line, lot, means the boundary line of a lot; a line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or property, or from a public or private street or any other public space. 
Line, yard, means a line drawn parallel to a lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required setback. 
Lot means a developed or undeveloped tract of land having defined boundaries and legally transferable as a single unit of land; the term "lot" does not refer to public rights-of-way. 
Lot, depth of, means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines. 
Lot of record means any lot identified on a final subdivision plat approved by the city and recorded in the office of the clerk of the county superior court is a lot of record. Any lot described in a deed, sales contract or survey, that was recorded in the office of the county recorder before September 30, 1993 is a lot of record. Any lot described in a deed, sales contract, or survey that was recorded after September 30, 1993 and the present, and which complied with the zoning requirements in effect at the time of its creation, is a lot of record. 
Lot, width of, means the distance between side lot lines measured along the front building line of the lot as determined by the prescribed minimum front setback requirement. 
Manufactured house (a.k.a. mobile home) means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term "manufactured house" shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition, except the size requirements, and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development, and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC section 5401 et seq. 
Occupancy means the use or intended use of a building or part thereof or a premises outside of the buildings. 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
Recreational vehicle means a camper, camp trailer, travel trailer, house car, motor home, trailer bus, trailer coach or similar vehicle, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy. Where a recreational vehicle is on or attached to a trailer used to carry or tow said vehicle, they shall together be considered one recreational vehicle. For parking purposes only, a recreational vehicle shall not include a pick-up truck used for transportation to which a camper shell has been attached. 
Residential industrialized building means any dwelling unit designed and constructed in compliance with the Georgia State Minimum Standard One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in a manufacturing facility and cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Any such structure shall not contain a permanent metal chassis and shall be affixed to a permanent load-bearing foundation. The term "residential industrialized building" shall not include manufactured homes as defined by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC section 5401 et seq. 
Setback means the open space between the lot line and the yard line, which shall be unobstructed by any structure other than as expressly permitted in the city zoning ordinance. 
Standard building codes means the state minimum standard codes as defined by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I) through (XI), as amended from time to time by the department of community affairs. Codes included are as follows: 
(1)  International Building Code (ICC); 
(2)  National Electrical Code (NFPA); 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC); 
(4)  International Mechanical Code (ICC); 
(5)  International Plumbing Code (ICC); 
(6)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC); 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC); and 
(8)  International Fire Code (ICC). 
Swimming pool means any artificial water-holding structure with a closed-loop circulation of water through a water treatment system with a return to the pool that is intended for swimming or recreational bathing and that is over 24 inches in depth at any point, and that has a water surface area exceeding 250 square feet, and/or a water volume exceeding 3,250 gallons. This includes in-ground, aboveground, and on-ground swimming pools. Swimming pools shall also comply with the applicable board of health regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.3) 
Sec. 103-22. - Adoption of codes. 
(a)  Standard building codes. The following standard building codes are in force in each county of the state as a matter of law, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, and are therefore in force in the city. See also subsection (c) of this section. 
(1)  International Building Code (ICC); 
(2)  National Electrical Code (NFPA); 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC); 
(4)  International Mechanical Code (ICC); 
(5)  International Plumbing Code (ICC); 
(6)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC); 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC); and 
(8)  International Fire Code (ICC). 
(b)  Appendices. Enforcement of the standard building codes listed above shall not include enforcement of appendices to such codes except when: 
(1)  Any provision of an appendix is specifically referenced in the code text; 
(2)  An appendix to a code is specifically included in an administrative ordinance adopted by the city; or 
(3)  An appendix to a code is specifically adopted by the department of community affairs with the approval of the board. 
(c)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the standard building codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(d)  Codes remedial. The standard building codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes of public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(e)  Quality and workmanship not regulated. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this article except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(f)  No warranty or guaranty. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this article shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan, or its adequacy, nor any guarantee of compliance with the codes. Neither the city, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(g)  Other applicable ordinances. The applicant is advised that other applicable provisions exist in the city zoning ordinance, and that other requirements contained in the City of Emerson Development Regulations, the City of Emerson Floodplain Damage and Flood Hazard Prevention Ordinance, and the City of Emerson Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance may apply, and the applicant is advised to check with the city. Issuance of a building permit is not a guaranty that the erection of the structure is lawful and in compliance with all other applicable ordinances. 
(h)  Supremacy and preemption. The provisions of this article shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or the city, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.4) 
Sec. 103-23. - Building department. 
(a)  Department established. There is hereby established the building permits and inspections department. The qualifications for the city building inspector and other code enforcement personnel, collectively known herein as the city, are those as may from time to time be determined by the city council. 
(b)  Records and reports. The city building permits and inspections department shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. 
(c)  Annual reports. The city building permits and inspections department shall submit annually a report covering the work of the department during the preceding year to the city manager. Said report shall include a summary of all variances and appeals received, and the decision of each. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.5) 
Sec. 103-24. - General requirements. 
(a)  Existing buildings alteration or rehabilitation. Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the standard building codes, provided that the alteration, repair, or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the standard building code for any new construction. The city building inspector shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the standard building codes for new construction. The city has not adopted the International Existing Building Code (ICC). 
(b)  Property maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the standard building codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(c)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent and requirements of the standard building codes as required by the city. 
(d)  Illegal lots. There are lots within the city, that, while their existence may be recorded in the office of the clerk of the county superior court, were not lawfully created in accordance with the laws of the city as described herein, or at the time of their creation, and are not lots of record. The city will not issue a building permit for such lots. 
(e)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the building codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state, county or city as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the city to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(f)  Requirements for safe work. All work performed relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures, including work on the building or structure itself, or the building's or structure's electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, shall be done in a safe manner, in compliance with the requirements of the standard building codes, and the International Property Maintenance Code, which is adopted by the city. Work not done in compliance with these requirements, whether or not it requires a permit, may be subject to citation, stop-work order, or other civil remedy by the city. 
(g)  Permit required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or change the occupancy of a building or a structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the standard building codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the city and obtain the required permit for the work, except as exempted below. Any time a new nonresidential business is beginning operation in an existing structure, or any time a new tenant is to occupy an existing nonresidential structure, such person or entity shall be required to notify the city and obtain an inspection prior to obtaining a business license and/or beginning tenancy (such requirements shall not apply to residential tenants such as apartment renters). It shall be unlawful to commence construction of a building or structure requiring a permit without first obtaining a permit, as required herein. It shall be unlawful to commence any land disturbance activity for the construction of any building, to commence construction of any building, to commence the moving or alteration of any building, or to commence the development of land for a use not requiring a building, until all necessary permits for such work have been issued. Building permits shall be required as listed in this article, and land disturbance permits as required by the City of Emerson Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance. All land development or construction shall comply with the codes and ordinances in effect in the city at the time the permit is issued. 
(h)  Other approvals as prerequisite. No building permits shall be issued unless the applicant can show all necessary approvals from other departments, including, but not limited to, a water tap permit, a sewer tap or septic tank permit, and a driveway permit. Final approval of the water and sewer system in a subdivision is required before any building permits can be released in that subdivision. 
(i)  Pending violations and stop-work orders. No building permit shall be issued to any applicant currently in violation of this article, or any other ordinance of the city. No building permit shall be issued to any applicant currently subject to a stop-work order under this article, or any other ordinance of the city. 
(j)  Manufactured homes. A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned or new manufactured home in the city. 
(1)  Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the city: 
a.  An application form signed by the applicant containing such information as is required by the city. 
b.  A signed affidavit that the pre-owned manufactured home meets, or will meet prior to occupancy, all health and safety standards required. 
c.  Photographs providing evidence that minimum health and safety standards are met (not required for new homes). 
d.  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (j)(4) of this section. 
(2)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, the applicant may relocate the manufactured home to a residential site for purposes of inspection. The applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held after the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(3)  Alternative inspection. At the request of the applicant, the city may, at its discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated, if the home is then located within the city. An on-site inspection surcharge shall be charged for this inspection in addition to the regular fees set forth in subsection (j)(4) of this section. The manufactured home shall still be required to be inspected after installation. 
(4)  Fees. A permit and inspection fee shall be charged to the application to cover the cost to the city to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home once installed. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow-up inspection. The applicant shall be charged a fee for each additional follow-up inspection that may be necessary. 
(5)  Certificate of completion. A certificate of completion shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building official certifies that the requirements of this article have been met. In the event the manufactured home, once installed, cannot meet the requirements of this article, it either must be repaired to comply with the standards herein or removed. 
(k)  Minimum health and safety standards for manufactured homes. All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of completion by the city: 
(1)  HUD code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 USC § 5401-5445 (the HUD code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD code. 
(2)  Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(3)  Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(4)  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure it is in good working condition. 
(5)  Heating systems. Heating systems shall be safe and in working condition. Unvented heaters shall be installed according to the manufacturer's instructions. Portable heaters cannot be used as an alternative to a fixed heating system. 
(6)  Electrical systems. Electrical systems (including switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. 
(7)  Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(8)  Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress, if necessary. 
(9)  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(10)  Smoke detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and one in the hall outside bedrooms (within ten feet of any bedroom door), which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(11)  Square footage. Manufactured homes installed in the city shall contain not less than 800 square feet of heated living space, including all additions. 
(12)  Existing homes. Existing manufactured homes located in the city that are lawful nonconforming homes as of September 1, 2010, but do not comply with the requirements of this section, cannot be relocated within the city; only homes that meet all requirements of this section can be relocated within the city. 
(13)  Additions to manufactured homes. Additional living space is prohibited to be added to a manufactured home unless a set of plans is submitted to and approved by the city building official. This must be done prior to obtaining a building permit. 
(l)  Installation of manufactured homes. Construction of manufactured homes is regulated by federal law and not this chapter; however, installation of manufactured homes must meet manufacturers' specifications and the requirements of this subsection (l) and the zoning ordinance before permanent utilities may be installed. An installation permit must be obtained prior to installation and an inspection must occur of the installation, including utility connections and underpinning, prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Installation requirements. Manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 and the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(2)  Utility connections. Utility connections prior to the final inspection of the installation will be considered temporary and will be approved only when arrangements for complete installations have been made. 
(3)  Entry landing. All manufactured home installations shall provide an adequate means of entry (including steps and a landing at each doorway). 
(4)  Sewage management. A septic permit or a sewer tap must be secured and provided to building inspectors before an installation permit for a manufactured home will be permitted. 
(5)  Underpinning. Except as otherwise provided herein, any manufactured home, whether on an individual lot or in a manufactured home subdivision, shall be required to be underpinned prior to occupancy. 
a.  The underpinning shall consist of one of the following: masonry, vinyl siding/panels or aluminum siding/panels, or such other material as may be approved by the building official prior to installation. The following types of materials are not permitted to be used, including, but not limited to, tin, wood (unless of a naturally decay-resistant type such as cedar), plastic sheeting or gypsum board (black board). 
b.  The underpinning must be adequately secured to the manufactured home and where necessary for stability, secured to the ground. Two access doors are required to be installed in a manner which will provide adequate access for inspections and maintenance. Provisions must be made for adequate ventilation for the crawl space underneath the manufactured home. 
(m)  Installation of industrialized homes. Construction of industrialized homes is regulated by the state department of community affairs and not this article. However, installation of homes must meet manufacturers' specifications and the specifications of the zoning ordinance before permanent utilities may be installed. An installation permit must be obtained prior to installation and an inspection must occur of the installation, including utility connections and foundation, prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Installation requirements. Industrialized homes must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2, art. 2, pt. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq.) and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(2)  Utility connections. Utility connections prior to the final inspection of the installation will be considered temporary and will be approved only when arrangements for complete installations have been made. 
(3)  Entry landing. All industrialized home installations shall provide an adequate means of entry (including steps and a landing at each doorway). 
(4)  Sewage management. A septic permit or a sewer tap must be secured and provided to building inspections before an installation permit for an industrialized home will be permitted. 
(5)  Foundations. The dwelling must be placed on a foundation, and a curtain wall, un-pierced except for required ventilation and access, must be installed so that it encloses the area located under the home to ground level. Such a wall shall have a minimum thickness of four inches and shall be constructed of masonry or similar material as approved by the building official. 
(n)  Swimming pools. Any swimming pool shall be enclosed with a fence that is in compliance with the standard building code (International Residential Code), including, but not limited to, appendix G. Public swimming pools must also comply with applicable regulations of the county board of health. 
(o)  Signs. Signs shall be constructed as permitted in Zoning Ordinance, Article VIII. 
(p)  Moved houses. A house moved to another location in the city (or a house moved into the city from another county) must have the necessary improvements made so as to be in compliance with the standard building codes that are in effect for new construction at the time the home is placed in its new location. Where any particular improvements that would be required to the moved house are technically unfeasible or impractical, or would be cost prohibitive (especially in relation to the benefit received or the purpose, goal, or intent of the standard or regulation at issue), a written request may be made to the city requesting an exemption from the particular standard or requirement, and detailing why the request for exemption is being submitted. The city may grant exemption, if reasonable, or may deny the exemption. The exemption granted should not impair the public safety purposes of the standard building codes and should be the minimum necessary. 
(q)  Prohibited exterior materials; temporary repair exception. It shall be unlawful to use roof or wall covering material that has not been approved by the applicable building code as exterior covering material, except in the event a building is damaged by natural or manmade disaster, or suffers a roof leak, other leak, or other damage. In such cases, temporary materials may be applied to a building to provide a temporary repair for no more than 60 days from the date of the damage. One 60-day extension can be requested from the city, for cause, if the structure is not able to be properly repaired with approved exterior covering material within 60 days. Examples of materials that are not approved as exterior covering materials include, but are not limited to, tarpaulins, plastic sheeting, and OSB. This restriction shall not apply to buildings that would not require a building permit to construct, such as outbuildings and storage buildings. 
(r)  Partially-built structures. The city finds that partially-built and subsequently abandoned homes and other buildings and structures are occurring more frequently and are an aesthetic harm to the community; they also reduce property values of adjacent and nearby property; they create a public safety hazard in that they can be dangerous; and they invite illicit activity. The city finds such structures to be a nuisance. Therefore, it shall be unlawful for a property owner to leave a residential, commercial or industrial structure in a partially-built status for more than six months with no substantial progress occurring on the construction. Partially-built means foundations that are poured or erected; basements that have been dug and partially completed; and structures that have been framed or dried-in (siding, roofing, windows and doors in place) but not completed. For homes that have been damaged by fire or disaster after completion, see the City of Emerson Zoning Ordinance. It shall be permissible to finish the exterior of a commercial shopping center or other commercial or industrial building without building-out the inside. It shall also be a violation for a partially completed building or structure to remain unfinished without a certificate of occupancy more than 30 days after the expiration of its building permit (building permits expire one year from issuance unless extended). The city shall be authorized to issue citations to the property owner or builder, and shall be authorized to seek abatement of the nuisance in the municipal court or superior court. 
(s)  Retaining walls. 
(1)  A building permit shall be required for any retaining wall that exceeds three feet in exposed wall height, or exceeds two feet in exposed wall height and supports a surcharge. A building permit application shall require a site plan showing the location, extent, and height of the retaining wall in relation to any building structure, pool, property lines, and public utility easements. It shall also require complete construction details of the retaining wall, and structural calculations for the wall, both stamped and signed by a professional engineer. 
(2)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Exposed wall height means the vertical distance measure from the finish grade at the bottom of the wall (lower soil grade) to the finish grade at the top of the wall (upper soil grade). This height does not include the wall and depth of footing below grade. 
Retaining wall means a wall designed to resist lateral earth and/or fluid pressures, including any surcharge, in accordance with accepted engineering practice. 
Surcharge means a vertical load imposed on the retained soil that may impose a lateral force in addition to the lateral earth pressure of the retained soil. Examples of surcharges include sloping retained soil, structure footings supported by the retained soil, adjacent vehicle loads supported by the retained soil, and solid fences that are attached or directly adjacent to a retaining wall when wind pressures act on the fence. 
(t)  Commercial car washes. Effective January 1, 2011, any commercial conveyor car wash (as defined in this subsection) that is permitted and constructed, shall install a recycled water system which captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. A minimum of 50 percent of the water utilized shall be recycled. The term "commercial conveyor car wash" means a commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash (regardless of whether the driver remains in the vehicle or not). These restrictions shall not apply to self-service car wash bays or in-bay car washes where the car remains stationary and the wash equipment moves around the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.6) 
Sec. 103-25. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits. The city is authorized to issue permits under the standard building codes, and to make inspections in relation to enforcing and administering those codes and this article. 
(b)  Exemptions. A building permit shall not be required for the following structures or mechanical work, provided all structures erected are in accordance with the proper zoning requirements: 
(1)  A personal storage building or personal garage which is less than 800 square feet and will not be used for income-producing activities nor as living quarters; 
(2)  A structure used for housing animals, poultry, etc., or for other agricultural practices, which is not open to the public; 
(3)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(4)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(5)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(6)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the code; 
(7)  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(8)  Any portable evaporative cooler; or 
(9)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg.) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(c)  Minor repairs exempted. Ordinary minor repairs may be made without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the standard building codes. 
(d)  Applications and review. All applicants for a building permit shall submit an application as required. The city shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, or such other data as is required by the city, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction appears to be in accordance with the requirements of the standard building codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(e)  Permit decision. The city shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay, within 30 days from the submission of an application deemed complete. If the city is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the standard building codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, a permit shall be issued to the to the applicant. 
(f)  Permit issuance. When the city issues a permit that requires plans to be submitted, the city shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Issuance of Construction Permit." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the city and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the city or authorized representatives. In the event the particular permit does not require plans to be submitted, only a copy of the permit shall be kept by the city. 
(g)  Permit duration. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the standard building codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the city from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this article. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is completed within 12 months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 12 months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 12 months, may be allowed for the permit. 
(h)  Permit posted. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such permits must be placed on a post or other structure at least three feet off the ground and no more than two feet back from the right-of-way, so as to be easily visible to the inspectors and passersby. The permittee shall be responsible for ensuring a clear and legible permit is on display at all times. If the permit is not properly posted, no scheduled inspections will occur, and a re-inspection fee will be charged before any further inspections will be scheduled. In the event of damage or loss, a replacement permit shall be immediately obtained and displayed. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the city. 
(i)  Denial of permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the standard building codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the city shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with a refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing, and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(j)  Special foundation permit. When an application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed, and pending issuance of such permit, the city may, at its discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the standard building codes. 
(k)  Compliance with licensing requirements. It shall be the duty of every contractor who contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with all state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the city has adopted. In cases where the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before he is permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with his license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.7) 
Sec. 103-26. - Application requirements; drawings and specs. 
(a)  Application requirements. Each application for a permit, along with the required fee, shall be filed with the city on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure. The application shall provide such information as is required to confirm compliance with this article and applicable codes, and shall be accompanied by drawings or site plans as are required for these purposes. The applicant is advised that special provisions exist in the City of Emerson Zoning Ordinance, and that other requirements contained in the City of Emerson Development Regulations, the City of Emerson Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, and the City of Emerson Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance may apply, and the applicant is advised to check with the city. Issuance of a building permit is not a guaranty that the erection of the structure is lawful and in compliance with all other applicable ordinances. 
(b)  Additional application requirements. Each application for a building permit shall also be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A septic permit from the health department (if on septic); 
(2)  A sewer tap permit, if on sewer and not in an approved subdivision (i.e., is on an existing lot); 
(3)  A water tap permit, if not in an approved subdivision (i.e., is on an existing lot); 
(4)  A driveway permit may be required from the department of transportation if the property fronts on a state highway or road or any access is desired to a state highway, or from the county road department if the property fronts on a county road or any access is desired from a county road, and those departments should be consulted; 
(5)  Such other information as may be requested for determining whether the provisions of this article are being observed and complied with; and 
(6)  Such other information as may be requested by the city or elsewhere in this article. 
(c)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings in residential zoning districts shall not require site plans. However, such applications must be provided with certification that such buildings will meet all applicable setbacks and comply with any relevant special agricultural zoning setbacks contained in the City of Emerson Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  Survey. 
(1)  Generally. In such cases as are deemed appropriate, the city, may require a boundary line survey prepared by a licensed surveyor in addition to the site plans and drawings described above, to ascertain precise dimensions. 
(2)  Drawings and specifications required. When required by the city, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information in the form of notes or otherwise as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the standard building codes. Such information shall be specific, and the standard building codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(e)  Additional supporting information. The city may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of the calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the city to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with its official seal. 
(f)  Professional certification. The design professional shall be an architect registered under the laws of the state regulating the practice of architecture and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the design, construction, enlargement, or alteration of a building or group of buildings and the space within and surrounding such buildings, which may have human occupancy or habitation: planning, providing preliminary studies, designs, drawings, specifications and other technical submissions, the architectural administering of construction contracts, and coordinating elements of technical submissions prepared by others, including, as appropriate and without limitation, consulting engineers, registered interior designers, and landscape architects. As part of the practice of architecture, a registered architect may perform such engineering work as is incidental to his work. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit a licensed engineer from coordinating technical submittals related to the practice of engineering. 
(g)  Exemption from professional certification. The state requires certain buildings to have the seal of an architect on the plans, and the architect must have a current registration to practice in the state and be competent in the subject matter of the documents by virtue of experience or education, or both. Certain structures are exempt from the seal of an architect. Such requirements are governed by O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 4, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 43-4-1 et seq.). For information purposes only, the following summary is provided, but state law controls this requirement: 
(1)  One- and two-family residences and domestic outbuildings; 
(2)  Any building classified as an agricultural occupancy upon any farm for the use of any farmer; any state-owned farmer's market; 
(3)  Any building which is a single-story building, not exceeding more than 5,000 square feet in area, except new or existing assembly occupancies, correctional or detention facilities, hotels, dormitories or lodging facilities, multifamily housing or apartment complexes, and care facilities; 
(4)  Pre-engineering buildings that are one story in height, except new or existing assembly occupancies, educational occupancies, health care occupancies, correction or detention facilities, hotels, or apartment complexes, care facilities and facilities classified as high hazard; provided, however, that the services of a duly registered architect shall be required for the design of any business or mercantile occupancies that exceed 5,000 square feet in area that are incidental to the operation in such building; and 
(5)  Non-load-bearing interior construction in existing or planned office structures which were designed by a registered architect, where drawings and specifications are prepared by a state-registered interior designer who also submits to the city a notarized and signed statement on letterhead from a person in a position of authority within the interior design firm certifying that the plans and specifications as submitted are in full compliance with the current building codes and regulations in effect. 
(h)  Fire integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. For structures that are also subject to the state fire marshal's inspections (pursuant to state laws and regulations), the plans must be submitted and approved by the state fire marshal's office prior to being submitted to the city. Such requirements are governed by O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.). For informational purposes only, the following summary is provided, but state law controls this requirement, and O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13(b)(1) should be consulted for full details: 
(1)  Buildings or structures more than three stories in height; 
(2)  Buildings with more than 15 sleeping accommodations for hire (hotels, motels, dormitories, etc.); 
(3)  Schools and academies for any combination of grades one to 12 having more than 15 children total enrolled as pupils; all state-funded kindergarten programs; 
(4)  Hospitals, health care centers, mental health facilities, nursing homes, jails, colleges, universities, technical schools, orphanages, convalescent homes providing lodging, personal care or nursing care for more than four persons on a 24-hour basis; 
(5)  Racetracks, stadiums, grandstands, theaters, and auditoriums; restaurants, bars, lounges, and nightclubs; dance halls and recreation centers; any other place of assembly having an occupant load of more than 300 people (or more than 100 persons, if alcohol is served); 
(6)  Churches having an occupant load of 500 or more persons in a common area or 1,000 or more persons based on total occupant load; 
(7)  Department stores, shopping centers, and retail shops with more than 25,000 square feet on any one floor (including multi-tenant shopping centers, unless separated by walls with two-hour fire resistance); 
(8)  Group day care homes and day care centers required to be licensed by the state and enrolling at least seven children; and 
(9)  Personal care homes required to be licensed by the state and having at least seven beds. 
(i)  Additional requirements. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by these codes or other standard building codes, shall be determined by the city. 
(j)  Alternative materials. The provisions of the standard building codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of the construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the city. The city shall approve any such alternate, provided the city finds that the alternate, for the purpose intended, is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the standard building codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The city shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(k)  Hazardous occupancies. For hazardous occupancies, the city may require the following: 
(1)  Site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire-rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid-tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(3)  Professional supervision. Any permit issued for a hazardous occupancy requires that a registered professional architect or engineer shall supervise such work. 
(l)  Safe loading of floors. 
(1)  Generally. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The city may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Professional certification required. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ an architect or engineer licensed in the state in computing safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.8) 
Sec. 103-27. - Fees. 
(a)  Generally. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the city have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until any additional fee has been paid. Re-inspection fees may be charged if a re-inspection is required. 
(b)  Time of payment. On all building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid at the time of filing the application, in accordance with the fee schedule as set by the city. An application where no fee has been paid may be refused or may be accepted and considered incomplete. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, or other system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to applicable fines as set forth by article, law or the municipal judge of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.9) 
Sec. 103-28. - Inspections. 
(a)  Generally. Before issuing a permit, the city shall examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, install, or change the occupancy of an existing building. The city shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. The city shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the standard building codes. A final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(b)  Inspections of off-site manufacturing or fabrication. When deemed necessary, the city shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the standard building codes. 
(c)  Required inspections. 
(1)  The city, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code. The city may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, provided that after investigation the city is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the standard building codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service, except that no inspection of water and sewer line connections may be made by anyone other than an official with the city. 
(2)  Typical order of inspections: 
a.  Building. 
1.  Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
2.  Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, and all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
3.  Insulation inspection. To be made after the rough-in approval of the framing, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical inspections, prior to the installation of the interior wall covering. 
4.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Temporary construction pole inspection, where applicable. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling insulation (i.e., prior to insulation inspection). 
3.  Temporary power release. To be made after the electrical service is made ready for the power to be turned on. At least one breaker and one receptacle protected by the breaker must be installed. 
4.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. An affidavit from a state-licensed plumber confirming compliance can be accepted in lieu of the underground inspection. The affidavit must be from the licensed plumber who installed the plumbing. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes and prior to insulation inspection. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Note: See the standard plumbing code for required tests. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping are installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes and prior to insulation inspection. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected, and prior to the insulation inspection. 
2.  Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to ensure compliance with all the requirements of this Code and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(d)  Approval for further work. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the city. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation. 
(e)  Work to be left exposed. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, plumbing, and work on any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the city. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the city after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the city has been received. 
(f)  Affidavit in lieu of inspections. The city may accept a sworn affidavit from a professional architect or engineer, licensed in the state, stating that the plans submitted conform to the standard building codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement, and if accompanied by drawings, showing the structural design by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the standard building codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The city may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the city copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed; and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, agrees to submit a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system (except for the lines connecting to the public system) has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the standard building codes. Where the city relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the standard building codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(g)  Supervision by engineer or architect. 
(1)  Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, or the permit relates to construction of any work or structures involving professional engineering which, by the nature of their function or existence, could adversely affect or jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the public, then the city shall require that a registered professional architect or engineer shall supervise such work. The city shall also require sealed plans and specifications from an architect or engineer, unless another exemption applies. This shall not apply to any construction costing $100,000.00 or less or which is used exclusively for private or non-commercial purposes, for private residences, or for non-commercial farm buildings, or residence buildings not exceeding two stories. 
(2)  In addition, said architect or engineer shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion, make and file with the city a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the standard building codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner may employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed and approved by the building official. 
(h)  Tests. The city may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance with the provisions of the codes. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.10) 
Sec. 103-29. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy required. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the city has issued a certificate of occupancy (C.O.). Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected and are in compliance with the standard building codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the city. 
(b)  Issuance of certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the standard building codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the city shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted. 
(c)  Temporary/partial certificate of occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(d)  Application requirements. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the city and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the standard building codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the city, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the standard building codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(e)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.11) 
Sec. 103-30. - Service utilities. 
(a)  Utility approval required. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the standard building codes for which a permit is required, until released by the city. 
(b)  Temporary utility connection. The city may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to a utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Disconnection in emergency. The city shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the standard building codes, in the case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The city shall notify the serving utility, and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system, of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.12) 
Sec. 103-31. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement powers. The city is empowered to enforce this article and the standard building codes. The city shall be empowered to issue citations, seek other civil relief, or issue stop-work orders for violations of this article. The city shall also have the power to revoke a certificate of occupancy and to order a building be vacated, in cases of threat to the public health, safety or welfare. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity who shall do anything prohibited by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be subject to an enforcement action. 
(b)  Right of inspection. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the city has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the city may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the city by these standard building codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, the city shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the city shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, including inspection warrants or search warrants. No warrant shall be required to investigate visible and open violations or uses. 
(c)  Interference with city. When the city shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the city for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. 
(d)  Persons who may be cited. Owners are ultimately responsible for the condition of their property and ensuring that their property and all activity occurring on such property is in compliance with this article. For any violation, both the owner of the property and/or the individual agent, tenant or invitee of the owner responsible for the violation may be cited, where appropriate. Agents of the owner would include, but not be limited to, developers, builders, contractors, and subcontractors. Tenants and invitees would include, but not be limited to, any renter, leaseholder, owner of any vehicle or structure on the property, or other person conducting an activity on the property who is not a trespasser. Corporations and companies responsible for the work may be cited in addition to or in lieu of citations issued to the actual individuals on-site committing violations. 
(1)  Daily violations. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation, subjecting the offender to a new citation, or other civil or criminal proceeding. 
(2)  Multiple violations. Each separate action, omission, or occurrence relating to any specific provision of this article shall be a separate violation, subjecting the offender to a separate citation. 
(e)  Criminal prosecution. The city, the city police department or designated code enforcement personnel, or other authorized personnel, may issue criminal citations for violations of this article, or violation of any stop-work order. 
(1)  Criminal prosecutions for violation of this article shall be commenced by the completion, signing, and service of a citation by an authorized city official or zoning enforcement officer. No warning need be issued prior to a citation being issued. The original of the citation shall be personally served upon the accused, his authorized representative or, if a corporation, an officer of the corporation or its on-site representative or the person in charge of the activity on the property, and a copy shall be promptly filed with the municipal court. A stop-work order may be issued in conjunction with a citation. 
(2)  Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear in the municipal court, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the authorized officer who completes and serves it. 
(3)  Any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall thereafter be arrested on the warrant of the municipal court and be required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
(f)  Civil fines and proceedings. In addition to or in lieu of any other remedy, the city may seek injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate relief in superior court to enjoin or prevent a violation of any provision of this article. Such action may also seek civil fines, and may additionally seek the costs of restitution, and any other costs associated with the action to enjoin or prevent any violation of any provision of this article. The city shall be entitled to its reasonable attorney's fees and costs for bringing an action in superior court wherein any relief is granted or fine assessed. 
(g)  Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the city, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the standard building codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the city shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work, with a written order to be provided within three working days. 
(1)  Stop-work orders shall affect all work being done on a project or development (including work done on other lots in the subdivision owned by the same violator). Stop-work orders stop not only the work in violation, but all other work by contractors or subcontractors on the same property. Only work to remedy the deficiency shall be allowed until the stop-work order is lifted. 
(2)  A stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(3)  Stop-work orders may be issued on their own, or in conjunction with criminal citations, or civil proceedings. 
(4)  Issuance of a stop-work order may be appealed, however, it shall remain in effect until overturned by the mayor and city council through the appeals process. 
(h)  Additional criminal penalties. Persons cited criminally are also subject to the other penalties within the jurisdiction of the municipal court, including incarceration, community service, and probation, as well as any other penalty as authorized by Charter. 
(i)  False statements. The city may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this article, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material facts in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(j)  Permit revocation. The city may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this article, upon determination by the city that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this article. 
(k)  Unlawful occupancy. It shall be unlawful to occupy a building or structure that fails to comply with the provisions and requirements of this article and the standard building codes. Furthermore: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to occupy unsafe buildings or structures. Unsafe buildings and structures are buildings and structures that: 
a.  Are unsafe due to failure to comply with standard building codes; 
b.  Are unsanitary; 
c.  Do not provide adequate egress; 
d.  Constitute a fire hazard; 
e.  Are otherwise dangerous to human life; 
f.  In relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health; or 
g.  Are unsafe because they contain an unsafe system, as defined in subsection (k)(2) of this section. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to occupy a structure without permitted electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems or with unsafe systems. An unsafe system is an electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that: 
a.  Is unsafe due to failure to comply with standard building codes; 
b.  Is unsanitary; 
c.  Constitutes a fire hazard; 
d.  Is otherwise dangerous to human life; or 
e.  In relation to existing use, constitutes a hazard to safety or health. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to occupy a structure without a certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to occupy a structure that is in violation of the standard building codes such that it is unfit or unsafe to occupy. 
(5)  It shall not be permitted to power one structure by a drop cord or other extension cord extended from an adjacent structure or lot. It shall be unlawful to occupy a structure powered in this fashion. During construction of a permitted structure, temporary power may be used where a temporary power permit has been issued. 
(l)  Remedies for unlawful occupancy. In cases of unlawful occupancy, the city has the following remedies available, which are not mutually exclusive; more than one remedy can be sought simultaneously: 
(1)  The city may issue a citation. 
(2)  The city may issue a stop-work order, if there is any work ongoing. 
(3)  The city may seek civil relief (injunction, fines, etc.) to prevent any unlawful occupancy or to remove occupants of an unlawful home. 
(4)  The city may seek to abate any unlawful occupancy that constitutes a nuisance under the general nuisance law. 
(5)  The city may seek repair and rehabilitation, or demolition of unsafe structures in accordance with provisions of the City of Emerson Unfit Property Ordinance. 
(6)  The city shall be empowered to revoke a certificate of occupancy where the structure is unsafe or contains unsafe systems. 
(m)  Unsafe work. Upon determination that any work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the standard building codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the city shall be authorized to issue a stop-work order, or a citation, or seek other civil relief, including injunctive relief. 
(n)  Methamphetamine production houses. Any structure used to produce methamphetamine is an unsafe structure, and the city shall have all remedies available in subsection (a) of this section to address the problem. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.13) 
Sec. 103-32. - Fines; schedule. 
Fines assessed under this article shall be assessed according to the schedule of fines set by the municipal court judge and approved by the mayor and city council, except those civil penalties assessed in the superior court. Fines may be increased by mandatory add-ons under state law. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.14) 
Sec. 103-33. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)  Variances. The planning and zoning commission, after receiving a request for variance and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provisions of the codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this article or standard building codes or the public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service systems involved and which are not applicable to others; 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant; 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this article to other building, structure or service systems; 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service systems; and 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this article and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  Time limits, conditions. In granting the variance, the commission may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this article. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(c)  Finality. The decision of the commission may be appealed to the mayor and city council. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
(d)  Appeals. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his contractor, may appeal a decision of the planning and zoning commission to the mayor and city council whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The city rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system; 
(2)  The provisions of the applicable code do not apply to this specific case; 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case; or 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of the codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(e)  Time for filing appeals. Notice of appeal of any decision of the city shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the city renders its decision. Appeals shall be in a form provided by the city. 
(f)  Finality. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.15) 
Secs. 103-34—103-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNFIT PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Unsafe buildings, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 

Sec. 103-55. - Title. 
This article shall be known as and cited as the "Unfit Property Ordinance of the City of Emerson." 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.31) 
Sec. 103-56. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is found and declared that in the city there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and are inimical to the welfare and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. It is further found and declared in the city that there is in existence conditions or uses of real estate which render adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, which such uses are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city, and that a public necessity exists for the repair of such conditions or the cessation of such uses. Therefore, it is the purpose of this article that whenever the city finds that there exists in the city dwellings, buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unfit, unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, the city may exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings, or structures in the manner provided in this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17. 
(b)  All the provisions of this article, including method and procedure, shall also be applied to private property where an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions shall create a public health hazard or general nuisance to the persons residing in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, building inspector, police officer, zoning administrator, city manager or his designee shall constitute prima facie evidence that said property is in violation of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.32) 
Sec. 103-57. - Scope and applicability. 
(a)  This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and sometimes referenced herein as the "statute" or "code." O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 specifies the scope and purpose of this article. All powers and authorities granted to public officers and public authorities by the statute are hereby incorporated herein by reference so as to be assumed, delegated and granted pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to both residential and nonresidential property, whether being occupied or not, and whether being developed or not, within the city. 
(c)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with the laws of the state, with applicable state minimum standard codes, with applicable city ordinances which regulate or prohibit activities on property, and with this article, which declares it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances, or under such conditions as would constitute an unfit property as defined herein. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.33) 
Sec. 103-58. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.) as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.), including all state minimum standard codes as defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B); and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to 1989, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq.). 
Dwelling, building, structure, or property means any building or structure or property, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any out-houses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwelling, building, structure, or property" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the City of Emerson, Georgia. 
Interested parties means: 
(1)  An owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means the governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes of the city and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, structure or property. 
Resident means any person residing in the city on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
State minimum standard codes means those codes as defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B). 
Undesirable vegetation means plants, which due to natural growth characteristics, constitute a negative effect on public safety, public health or public welfare by promoting rodents or potentially dangerous wild animals, or infestation of mosquitoes, fleas, insects or other vermin. 
Zoning administrator means the officer who is appointed by the governing authority and authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this article relating to the inspection for violations of this article's provisions and the issuance of complaints upon determining that a violation has occurred; the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.34) 
Sec. 103-59. - Authority and powers of zoning administrator. 
The following public officers have been designated with the responsibility to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. The zoning administrator is hereby authorized, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-11, to exercise such powers as may be necessary to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate; and 
(6)  To issue citations and complaints for violations of the provisions of this article. The zoning administrator shall also be authorized to request the city attorney or other designated attorney to prepare and file complaints under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.35) 
Sec. 103-60. - Standards for determining unfit buildings and structures. 
(a)  Any building or structure that has any of the following conditions (as listed below under subsection (b) of this section), such that the life, health, property, or safety of its occupants or the general public are endangered, are hereby declared illegal and unfit for human habitation or the building or structure's current commercial, industrial or business use (as applicable), and shall be abated by repair or demolition. The complaint and inspection of an unfit building or structure shall be as set forth in section 103-62. 
(b)  The zoning administrator is authorized to determine that a dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure, of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures, or of other residents of the city. Examples of such conditions include, but are not limited to, the following conditions of any building or structure: 
(1)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Severe uncleanliness, or rodent infestation; 
(7)  Damage by fire, flood, wind or other cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to damage, and is less than the minimum requirement established by the applicable state minimum standard codes for similar new buildings; 
(8)  Construction or maintenance in violation of a specific requirement of the state minimum standard codes, or of any other applicable city ordinance or of any other applicable state law; 
(9)  Decay, deterioration or dilapidation such that full or partial collapse is likely; 
(10)  The stress in any material, member or portion thereof, due to all imposed loads, including dead load, which exceeds the stresses allowed by the applicable state standard minimum code for similar new buildings; 
(11)  The means of egress are not of adequate size or are not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic, or the fire doors, closing devices and similar features, are in disrepair or in a dilapidated or non-working condition to render the building or structure unsafe in case of fire or panic; 
(12)  Exterior siding that is inadequate and unsecured, or is not weatherproof, waterproof, and windproof, such that the building would not pass existing state minimum standard codes for similar new buildings; 
(13)  Conditions such that the structure or portion thereof, for whatever reason, is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used; 
(14)  The dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation of the code enforcement personnel or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed; and 
(15)  Any other condition constituting a public nuisance, including, for example, maintaining stagnant or fetid water on the premises; an accumulation of trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary and unsafe conditions; the generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; and/or maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl or maintaining such a number of animals in such foul and unsanitary conditions as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.36) 
Sec. 103-61. - Undesirable vegetation. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of a lot or tract of land in the city, or for any agent or representative of any such occupant or owner, to permit or maintain on such lot any growth of undesirable vegetation or an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary, unsafe, or unfit conditions as to constitute an endangerment to public health or a general nuisance which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.37) 
Sec. 103-62. - Complaint and inspection; in rem proceedings. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the zoning administrator by a public authority, or by at least five residents of the city, that any dwelling, building, structure, or property: 
(1)  Is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(3)  Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
(4)  Has an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions constituting a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity; 
(5)  Constitutes a public nuisance; or 
(6)  Has one or more of the conditions defined in this subsection, 
the zoning administrator shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. The zoning administrator may also inspect properties on his own information or determination regarding potential violations of this or other city ordinances; 
(b)  The zoning administrator may, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists. A summons and the complaint shall be served on all interested parties in such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(c)  The complaint shall: 
(1)  Identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; 
(2)  Identify the interested parties; 
(3)  State with particularity the factual basis for the action; and 
(4)  Contain a statement of the action sought by the zoning administrator to abate the alleged nuisance, as well as other relief sought. 
(d)  The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain and at a place as specified, depending on whether the complaint is filed in municipal court or superior court. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(e)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, or otherwise constitutes a public nuisance, then the court shall state, in writing, its findings of fact in support of such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of said dwelling, building, structure, or property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, structure, or property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure, in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations, cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
a.  For purposes of this provision, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A (O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq.), qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
b.  In any action brought to enforce the provisions of this article, the city shall be entitled to its attorney's fees and other litigation costs, such to be a lien against the property, unless the court determines that the failure to comply with this article was substantially justified based on the record as a whole. 
(f)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the zoning administrator may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed, or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement, by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The zoning administrator shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building/property is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes, or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(g)  If the zoning administrator has the structure demolished, reasonable efforts shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any sale of such salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The zoning administrator and the governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(h)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, attorney's fees and expenses awarded by the court, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(i)  The lien provided for in subsection (h) of this section, shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located, and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under section 103-63(c). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes, to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(1)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred, the zoning administrator shall transmit to the tax commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the tax commissioner or other official who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.); provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall collect and enforce liens imposed pursuant to this article in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-359.1 and 41-2-9(b). The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority whose lien is being collected. 
(2)  Enforcement of liens may be initiated at any time following receipt by the tax commissioner of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
(3)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority or tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(j)  The governing authority may waive and release such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(k)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, but rather commences in municipal court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(l)  In addition to the procedures and remedies outlined above, the zoning administrator may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, and life safety codes adopted by the city, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem. 
(m)  Nothing shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.38) 
Sec. 103-63. - Service of complaints and orders. 
(a)  Complaints initiated under this article shall be served in the following manner. 
(1)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the zoning administrator or attorney filing the complaint shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. 
(2)  Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any. 
(3)  Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first class mail to the current owner of record shown on the tax records for the property to the attention of the current owner of the property, if different from the occupants. 
(4)  A copy of the complaint shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the local government once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.39) 
Sec. 103-64. - Demolition. 
No person shall begin demolition until a permit for demolition has been obtained and all utilities have been cut off and capped at the street. The person who has secured the permit shall remove from the property all debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and foundation exposed above the ground level; fill any excavation or other depressions to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than 25 percent stone or masonry; and adequately slope and drain all filled areas as determined by the zoning administrator within three months from the date the permit was obtained. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.40) 
Sec. 103-65. - Right to enter and inspect. 
The zoning administrator, or his designee, or any other person authorized to enforce this article, and any sworn officer of the city police department shall be empowered to enter any property and structure at reasonable times to inspect the condition or work being performed thereon or therein. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.41) 
Sec. 103-66. - Eminent domain. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of the state, or to permit any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of the state. Procedures under this article shall not constitute the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the city. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.42) 
Sec. 103-67. - Other remedies. 
This article shall not be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to ensure their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise, including other enforcement actions under other ordinances, or complaints filed under general nuisance law, or other measures. This article provides remedies in addition to and cumulative of all other existing remedies for the city. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.43) 
Sec. 103-68. - Records. 
The zoning administrator shall be the supervisor and custodian of the records on each property against which a complaint is issued, including, but not limited to, the investigative findings, course of action required, and, if applicable, citations and court findings. Such records shall be public records and made available to any party in interest and copies thereof provided upon the payment of such reasonable cost as may be incurred in duplicating or otherwise providing them. The records shall be preserved for not less than four years after the proceedings and action, if any, regarding the property are concluded. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, § 5.44) 
Chapter 105 - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-1. - Requirements for land development. 
No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 100, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-2. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Emerson Development Regulations," and may be referred to generally as "the development regulations," or as used herein, "these regulations" or "this chapter." 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 101.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-3. - Purpose. 
These regulations are intended to serve the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  To provide a system for the subdividing of land and the accurate recording of land titles. 
(3)  To encourage economically sound and orderly land development in accordance with the policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan of the city. 
(4)  To ensure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments in the city. 
(5)  To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments in the city. 
(6)  To ensure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments in the city through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes. 
(7)  To ensure protection of streams, waterways, and wetlands within the city. 
(8)  To ensure equitable review and approval of all subdivision and site plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 101.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-4. - Intent. 
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to provide for the harmonious development of the city and to ensure a coordinated layout with adequate provisions for traffic, recreation, drainage, water, sewers, and other technical elements of land development. This control is necessary to ensure the maximum return on the local and government investments and at the same time to assure the homeowner protection and the developer full consideration of his interests and responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 101.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-5. - Use of this document. 
(a)  This document is subject to periodic revision to meet changing requirements for materials, state and federal regulations, etc. At the beginning of a project the user should verify that he has the latest edition. 
(b)  This document is intended to convey the general design and construction requirements for a typical project. It also lists the specific city requirements relating to plan review, inspection, testing and acceptance of facilities. It is not intended as a substitute for site-specific engineering and construction techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 101.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-6. - Administration. 
This chapter shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 101.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-7. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 101.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-8. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 101.7, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-9. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 101.8, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-10. - Use of words and interpretation. 
(a)  For the purpose of this chapter, the following shall apply to the use of all words: 
(1)  When appropriate to the context, words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense, and vice versa. 
(2)  Words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine. 
(3)  The term "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(4)  The term "may" is permissive. 
(5)  Use of the term "and" is inclusive and requires that all of the component phrases so connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency. 
(6)  Use of the term "or" is not exclusive, and requires that at least one of the component phrases so connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency. 
(b)  The term "or" may allow more than one component phrase to be present or fulfilled, as is implied by the common term "and/or." The following shall control the interpretation of words and phrases as used in these regulations: 
(1)  Words and phrases defined in this chapter shall be interpreted as defined herein. 
(2)  Words or phrases not defined herein shall be interpreted as defined in other ordinances and codes of the city. Words or phrases not defined in the above-mentioned documents shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 101.9, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-11. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this chapter, which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Applicant means a person submitting an application (i.e., post-development stormwater management application and plan) for approval. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other floodprone areas. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
As-built drawing means a survey or other drawing based on a field survey, which shows existing features or components and horizontal or vertical information (grades or location of improvements). All as-built information submitted to the city in the form of electronic files must be in AutoCAD format and be drawn using state plane coordinates. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means sound conservation and engineering practices utilized to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets other than alleys. In cases where the plotting is incomplete or disconnected, the subdivider may determine the outline of the block. 
Board means the board of natural resources of the state. 
Buffer or buffer zone means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area lying adjacent to the stream; the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Building line means the zoning ordinance for the city. 
Building sewers (a.k.a. service laterals) means those pipes used to convey wastewater from the building or portions of a building to a main sewer. The minimum diameter for a service lateral is four inches. These sewers are privately funded and owned. 
CPESC means a certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert Inc. which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
City means the City of Emerson, Georgia or officials thereof. 
City of Emerson separate storm sewer system (MS4) means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Clearing means the removal of trees or other vegetation, but not including grubbing activities. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-82. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
Comprehensive plan means the Bartow County, Georgia Comprehensive Plan 1991-2011, Adairsville, Emerson, Euharlee, Cartersville, Kingston, Taylorsville, White, dated December 1991 as amended. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Construction plans means a set of engineering drawings of the proposed streets, drainage, and utilities. 
Contractor means a person, firm, or corporation with whom the owner of a property has employed or contracted to perform construction activity associated with the development. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "contractor" shall include all subcontractors who are under separate contract or agreement with the contractor for performance of a part of the work at the site. 
Cul-de-sac street means a street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated within the development by a vehicular turnaround. For the purpose of designation, a cul-de-sac street shall be interpreted to begin at the intersection of two or more streets nearest to the vehicular turnaround. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface; also known as excavation. 
Department means the state department of natural resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable state law governing professional licensure. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit who directs the undertaking or proposes to undertake development activities whether the development involves the subdivision of the land for sale to individual users, the construction of buildings or other improvements on a single land ownership, or both. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Drainageway means an area designated for the conveyance of stormwater runoff through real property, including both natural and manmade areas. 
Easement means a recorded authorization for a specified purpose by a property owner for the use of any designated part of the real property by another entity. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Encroachments means any building, structure, or vehicle, or other object or thing (including, but not limited to, mailboxes, signs, cars, gates, walls, sprinkler systems, trees, posts, etc.) which is located in the right-of-way. The term "encroach" means to be within the right-of-way. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and the requirements set forth in this chapter (a.k.a. the "plan") that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the City of Emerson Floodplain Ordinance dated October 8, 1982. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the City of Emerson Floodplain Ordinance dated October 8, 1982. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final plat means a plat of a tract of land which meets the requirements of the city for permanent recording in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Bartow County. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscaped areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Floodplain ordinance means a component of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
Force main sewers means pressure piping systems which convey sewage from a pump station to a main sewer. These sewers are constructed of ductile iron pipe and have a minimum diameter of four inches. Funding of force mains is by the developer. 
Frontage is as defined in the zoning ordinance for the city. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Georgia DOT means the state department of transportation. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Grubbing means the removal of stumps or roots from a property. 
Health department means the county health department. 
Heavy industrial development means any development that will contain a loading dock or will be subject to frequent truck traffic. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service Classification System in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city's separate storm sewer system, which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city's separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in this chapter. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
Industrial stormwater permit means a national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which, when properly recorded in the deed records, constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities, which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that does not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbing activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance; any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality, which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Lot means a lot of record, or any combination of lots of record, held in a single ownership by one person, or in common ownership by more than one, which has both lot area and lot dimensions equal to or greater than the lot width and lot area requirements established by the city zoning ordinance for the zoning district in which such tract of land is located and for the use proposed for the tract of land. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
MS4. See City of Emerson separate storm sewer system. 
Main sewers are located in streets or dedicated easements. They are gravity piping systems used to collect sewage from one or more service laterals to other main sewers. Main sewers are a minimum of eight inches in diameter and may extend beyond the property boundaries of a development. Funding of main sewers is by the developer. 
Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia means the manual published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, which is incorporated herein by reference (a.k.a. the "Green Book"). 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term "manufactured home" also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Materially injure means damaging the pavement or right-of-way to the extent that a repair is or will be required by the city in order to bring the pavement or right-of-way back to city standards. It shall also mean causing more than $50.00 damage to the right-of-way or pavement, considering the labor cost and materials to repair the injury, whether or not such repair is undertaken by the city. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. All topographic information submitted to the city as part of a proposed development must be reduced to mean sea level; temporary benchmark data will not be accepted. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law, referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the NPDES state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by the EPD to terminate coverage under the NPDES state general permit. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the state EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced after the City of Emerson Floodplain Ordinance dated October 8, 1982, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the City of Emerson Floodplain Ordinance dated October 8, 1982. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Obstruct includes, without limitation, the causing of any buildup of rock, gravel, mud, dirt, chemicals, or other materials by continued ingress or egress of vehicles or of any natural waters dammed or redirected by diversion to an extent which presents a hazard to the traveling public. It shall also include negligently or intentionally dropping objects onto the road that present a hazard to the traveling public, including ladders, trash, debris, branches, cement, etc. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Operator means the parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on-site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development or development activity; the authorization necessary to conduct land disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this chapter, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Plat means a property boundary map for the entire tract of land for a project prepared by a land surveyor registered by the state. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Post-development means the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development means the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Preliminary plat means an overall layout of the proposed development usually shown on one sheet which meets the minimum standards of the city. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Project , for the purposes of this article, means: 
(1)  A principal building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, planned and designed as an interdependent unit together with all accessory uses or structures, utilities, drainage, access, and circulation facilities, whether built in whole or in phases. Examples include, but are not limited to, a principal building on a lot, a residential subdivision, a multifamily development, a shopping center, or an office park. 
(2)  The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. The project includes all related off-site construction including driveways, access roads, utility extensions, etc. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Responsible party means, in the context of enforcement procedures, a person who is alleged to have committed, causes, continued or created a violation of the terms, requirements, regulations, or provisions of these regulations whether as a direct act, through lack of action, through neglect, or at the direction of or on behalf of others. A responsible party may be the owner of a premises where a violation has occurred; an occupant whether through ownership, lease or other tenancy; a contractor, builder or developer; an agent of or person otherwise acting on behalf of the aforementioned parties; or other person acting in violation of this chapter. 
Right-of-way means any right-of-way that has been accepted by the city into the city roads, and such term includes the full width of the right-of-way, and not just width of the pavement. Such term also includes rights-of-way acquired by prescriptive easement, or pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-5-163 or 32-3-3, or any other means. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Sediment solid means material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Service laterals (a.k.a. building sewers) means those pipes used to convey wastewater from the building or portions of a building to a main sewer. The minimum diameter for a service lateral is four inches. These sewers are privately funded and owned. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Site work means development activity to prepare a property for construction of buildings or finished structures, including clearing, grubbing, grading, and installation of soil sedimentation and erosion control facilities. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation; any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains stream flow; or 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Street classification will be defined in general as follows: 
Arterial means a street having a minimum right-of-way of 100 feet and which is used primarily for fast and heavy traffic flow, is of considerable continuity, and is used as a traffic artery for inter-transportation between large areas. 
Local means a street having a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet and which is used primarily in residential subdivisions for access to abutting properties as opposed to the collection and disbursement of traffic. 
Major collector means a street having a minimum right-of-way of 80 feet and which carries traffic from activity centers and minor collector streets to arterial streets. 
Minor collector means a street having a minimum right-of-way of 60 feet and which is primarily used as a link between local streets and major collectors or arterial streets. 
Street classification map means a comprehensive plan of arterial, major collector, minor collector, and local streets and roads for all or a portion of the city. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivider means any person, corporation or duly authorized agent, planner, designer, land surveyor, (landscape) architect or engineer, who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein. 
Subdivision. 
(1)  For purposes of this chapter, the term "subdivision" means: 
a.  The division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
b.  Any division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other parts for the purpose of immediate or future sale, legacy, or building development. 
(2)  The term "subdivision" includes re-subdivision and any division of land involving a new street, existing street, or a change in existing streets, and, as appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. 
(3)  The term "subdivision" does not include the combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots, where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots meet the standards of the city, or the division of land into parcels of five acres or more, where no new streets or new utility services are involved. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
a.  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
b.  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
(2)  For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(3)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the city, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision in which the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. 
(1)  Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. 
(2)  Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. 
(3)  First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting which produces long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding which produces short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding which covers areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Waiver means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter but which shall in no way make null the development regulations or the city zoning ordinance. 
Water and sewer system. The city water department provides water and sewer in portions of the city. Portions of the city are provided with water and sewer by the county and/or the City of Cartersville. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Zoning ordinance means the ordinance adopted by the mayor and council and known as the City of Emerson Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 101.10, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-12. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
No person shall perform any activities regulated by this chapter without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. In any case in which activities are undertaken in violation of this chapter, not in compliance with the provisions of a permit issued, or without authorization of a permit which would otherwise be required, the city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to suspend or invalidate such permits, order that all unauthorized or improper work be stopped, direct correction of deficiencies, issue summonses to any court of competent jurisdiction, or take any other legal or administrative action appropriate to the severity of the violation. Any such action or inaction, which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The following are the enforcement procedures authorized by this chapter: 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city determines that an applicant, developer, contractor, owner or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice may be delivered personally or sent by first class mail. The notice of violation shall contain at least the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, an approved plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, for continued violations or for violations that the severity is such that it justifies immediate action, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the applicant, developer, contractor, owner or other responsible person: 
a.  Stop-work order. The city may issue a stop-work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation described therein, provided the stop-work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation. 
b.  Notice to comply, forfeiture of surety. If, through inspection it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. The amount of time allowed to cure shall vary with the circumstances, from immediately in the case of an emergency, to 14 days maximum. No permits (building or otherwise) related to the project shall be issued while the permit holder is out of compliance. If the person engaged in the activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties and remedies described herein, he shall be deemed to have forfeited his surety as required under the provisions of this chapter. The city may call the surety or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and/or bring the site into compliance. 
c.  Withhold certificate of occupancy or completion. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy or completion for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
d.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
e.  Refusal to approve final subdivision plats. The city is authorized to refuse to approve final plats until the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. 
f.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains un-remedied after receipt of the notice of violation. Civil administrative fines shall be issued by the completing, signing and service of a civil violation notice from the city manager or his designee. A stop-work order may be issued in conjunction with a civil violation form. No permits shall issue or inspections shall occur until the civil administrative fine is paid. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. If said penalty is not paid within the time presented by the city, the city has the right to enforce said claim in a court of competent jurisdiction and/or in the alternative to pursue the criminal penalties detailed in subsection (2)g. of this section. Additionally, the penalty shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property in the amount of the assessment. 
g.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Citations for violations of this chapter may be adjudicated in municipal court and the municipal court judge may issue, in addition to monetary penalties of up to $2,500.00 per day per violation, any other remedy or punishment within the court's power and jurisdiction, including jail time, community service and restitution. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-15, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation, per day. 
h.  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within ten days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within five days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
i.  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
j.  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
k.  Other legal remedies. In any case in which a violation of this chapter has occurred, the city, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. The city may institute actions in the superior court for injunctive or other relief to enforce this chapter, prevent further violations, or seek other relief, and may simultaneously seek civil penalties in that court, or any other lawful remedy. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 101.11, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-13. - Appeals. 
(a)  The suspension, revocation, denial, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the city upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within 45 days after receipt by the city of written notice of appeal, which must be received by the city within 30 days of the complained-of action. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall present the reasons for the action and the applicant may speak in opposition. An appeal does not stay the action being appealed. If the appeal is regarding the denial of a permit, no permit shall be issued during the pendency of an appeal. If the appeal is regarding a revocation, suspension or modification of a permit, the revocation, suspension or modification of the permit shall be effective during the pendency of the appeal. 
(c)  If a permit has been suspended or revoked, no work shall proceed during the pendency of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 101.12, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-14. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter, nor the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city, city employees or officers, the district or department for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity or stormwater for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(d)  Approval of a permit is not a guaranty or warranty that sedimentation or soil erosion will not occur, and is not intended to provide any right or cause of action to any adjacent property owner who suffers damages as a result of sedimentation or soil erosion. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 101.13, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-15—105-31. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY REQUIREMENTS AND MEETING 

Sec. 105-32. - Procedure; minimum. 
At a minimum any person wishing to develop land in the jurisdictional boundaries of the city shall: 
(1)  Review the general development plans and detailed plans of the city that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it and review the zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city; and 
(2)  Attend an informal conceptual meeting with the city manager, and/or his designated representative, to present a general description and, if available, a preliminary plan of the proposed development project to evaluate the applicability of this and other ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 102, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-33—105-52. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLAN SUBMITTAL AND REVIEW 

Sec. 105-53. - Types of development. 
Plan review procedures are dependent on the type of the proposed development. There are three types of developments as follows: 
(1)  Subdivision developments (residential, commercial, and industrial) involving the subdividing of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots or building sites. 
(2)  Non-subdivision residential developments. 
(3)  Non-subdivision commercial/industrial developments. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-54. - Types of plans and required contents. 
The following is a general description of the various types of plans involved in land development in the city. This list does not constitute all of the types of plans that may be required but rather a general synopsis of the most utilized plan types. The city may require more information than what is listed under a specific plan type at its discretion. These listings are provided as a general guide. All plans must be submitted in English. 
(1)  Preliminary plat. Conceptual street and lot layout of a subdivision with topography of not more than two-foot intervals. A plat review fee shall be required. Approval of a preliminary plat shall expire and be null and void after a period of 12 months from the date of approval unless an extension of time is approved by the city. Subdivision plats shall contain the following information: 
a.  Subdivision name. 
b.  Name, address and 24-hour telephone number of developer. 
c.  Date including most recent revision date. 
d.  Graphic scale (not to exceed one foot equals 100 feet). 
e.  Location index map (approximate scale one inch equals 6,000 feet). 
f.  North arrow. 
g.  Land lot, district and section. 
h.  Maximum sheet size 24 inches by 36 inches unless otherwise approved. 
i.  Exact boundary lines of the entire tract indicated by a heavy line giving lengths and bearings. 
j.  Present zoning and zoning of abutting land. 
k.  Proposed street and lot layout. 
l.  Proposed street names. 
m.  Lot lines with approximate dimensions. 
n.  Location of bold lines for phased developments. 
o.  Lots numbered consecutively disregarding phasing. 
p.  General notes on the plat stating total project acreage, total number of lots and lot density, minimum size of lots, minimum lot width and frontage, and required setbacks for present zoning. 
q.  Existing streets, utilities, and easements on and adjacent to the tract. 
r.  Provisions for water supply, sewerage, and drainage. 
s.  Location of 100-year floodplain or statement that no part of the property lies within the 100-year floodplain. 
t.  Minimum building front yard setback line shown graphically on the plat. 
u.  Surveyors and/or engineer's stamp. 
v.  Any and all other information as may be required by the city. 
w.  Names of owners of record of adjoining properties. 
x.  Signature statement. Statement shall read as follows: 
PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL CERTIFICATE 
All requirements of the City of Emerson Development Regulations relative to the preparation and submission of a preliminary plat having been fulfilled, approval of this plat is hereby granted subject to further provisions of said regulations. This certificate is effective for 12 months from the date of signing. This preliminary plat approval does not constitute approval of final plat. 

 
(2)  Final plat. 
a.  Plan of subdivision, which conforms to the approved preliminary plat and the specifications required herein for recording at the clerk of the superior court. Final plats shall be required to meet the State Plat Act and the current city zoning ordinance. Prior to the submittal of the final plat for review, the following shall apply: 
1.  All street and utility construction must be completed, inspected and approved; 
2.  All property corner pins must be installed; 
3.  As-built drawings must be submitted; and 
4.  Bonding requirements, if applicable, satisfied. 
b.  Once the approval from the designated city departments have been obtained and the chairperson of the planning commission and mayor have approved and signed the final plat, the developer shall submit the plat to the clerk of the superior court of Bartow County for recording. Upon recording of the final plat, the developer shall provide four hard copies of the plat and an electronic version of the plat in AutoCAD (2004 or newer) format to the city. 
c.  The final plat shall contain the following information: 
1.  Sheet size no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches. 
2.  Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearings and distances determined by a field survey. 
3.  Field survey error of closure not to exceed one to 10,000. 
4.  Equipment used in field survey. 
5.  Calculated error of closure of plat. 
6.  Present zoning and zoning of abutting land. 
7.  Exact locations, R/W widths, and names of all streets that immediately adjoin the subdivision. 
8.  Appropriate data for all streets, lot lines, and centerlines as required by the city and according to the requirements of the state for professional surveyors and engineers. 
9.  General notes on the plat stating total project acreage, total number of lots and lot density, minimum size of lots, minimum lot width and frontage, and required setbacks for present zoning. 
10.  Lots shall be numbered consecutively; divisions shall be made by units or phases. 
11.  Each lot's area in square feet or acres. 
12.  Deed book and page number of protective covenants if any. 
13.  Accurate location, material, and description of all monuments and markers. 
14.  Location of sidewalks. 
15.  Location of all easements. 
16.  Required buffers and recreational areas (if any). 
17.  Land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
18.  All surveys and plats must be prepared by a state certified engineer and/or surveyor. 
19.  Location of 100-year floodplain or statement that no part of the property lies within the 100-year floodplain. 
20.  Any and all other information as required by the city. 
21.  The following certificate statements shall be shown on the plat: 
Owner's Certificate 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, that all state, city and county taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid, that all streets, water systems drains and drainage easements, and public places are dedicated to the use of the public forever. 

 
Surveyor's Certificate 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision, that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked "future" and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown, and that all requirements of the development and zoning regulations, including engineering requirements have been fully complied with. 

 
City of Emerson Certificate: 
In accordance to the City of Emerson Development Regulations and the city's Zoning Ordinance, all requirements of approval have been fulfilled; this plat was given final approval by the following city officials and personnel and on behalf of the City of Emerson: 

 
Covenants, if separately recorded: 
This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document attached hereto dated ____________ , which hereby become a part of this plat, and which were recorded in plat book ____________ , page ____________ . 
(3)  Conceptual plan. Conceptual layout of proposed construction where no subdivision of land is to occur. A review fee shall be required. Approval of a conceptual plan shall expire and be null and void after a period of 12 months from the date of approval unless an extension of time is approved by the city. Conceptual plans shall contain the following information: 
a.  Subdivision name (if applicable). 
b.  Name, address and 24-hour telephone number of developer. 
c.  Date including most recent revision date. 
d.  Graphic scale (not to exceed one inch equals 100 feet). 
e.  Location index map (approximate scale one foot equals 6,000 feet). 
f.  North arrow. 
g.  Land lot, district and section. 
h.  Exact boundary lines of the entire tract indicated by a heavy line giving lengths and bearings. 
i.  Present zoning and zoning of abutting land. 
j.  Proposed layout. 
k.  Topography of not more than two-foot intervals. 
l.  Location of bold lines for phased developments. 
m.  Existing streets, utilities, and easements on and adjacent to the tract. 
n.  Provisions for water supply, sewerage, and drainage. 
o.  Location of 100-year floodplain or statement that no part of the property lies within the 100-year floodplain. 
p.  Minimum building setback line shown graphically on the plan. 
q.  Any and all other information as may be required by the city. 
r.  Names of owners of record of adjoining properties. 
s.  Signature statement. Statement shall read as follows: 
Conceptual Plan Approval Certificate 
All requirements of the City of Emerson Development Regulations relative to the preparation and submission of a conceptual plan having been fulfilled, approval of this plan is hereby granted subject to further provisions of said regulations. This certificate is effective for 12 months from the date of signing. This conceptual plan approval does not constitute approval of construction plans. 

 
(4)  Construction plans. Detailed design plans of proposed infrastructure improvements. A review fee shall be required. Approval of construction plans shall expire and be null and void after a period of 12 months from the date of approval unless an extension is granted by the city. Construction plans shall contain the following information: 
a.  The project surveyor shall provide a signed statement indicating records of the property have been researched and no abandoned landfills or waste disposal sites are located in the proximity of proposed water line extension. 
b.  Site plan with streets, street names, topography with contour lines at two-foot intervals, location map, lot layout (if subdivision) or building location (if multifamily, commercial or industrial), proposed location of future sidewalks, land lots, district, and North arrow showing the water layout only. 
c.  Proposed pipe size and service lateral locations. 
d.  Location and size of gate valves and air release valves. 
e.  Thrust blocks at all bends, tees, and plugs. 
f.  Fire hydrant locations. 
g.  Water system materials. 
h.  Location and sizes of existing water mains surrounding the project, with nearest line valve in each direction of proposed tie in. 
i.  Detail of connection to existing lines. 
j.  Proposed meter sizes and locations. 
k.  Residential developments shall have the electric transformer locations indicated. (This is necessary to verify no conflicts exist with water meter and fire hydrant locations.) 
l.  Plan of fire line meters or detector meters, if applicable. 
m.  Any proposed off-site cross-county water mains or mains on existing right-of-way should be shown at a scale no smaller than 1:100. 
n.  Any other items incidental to the proposed system. 
o.  All plans must display the "Utilities Protection Center" logo and "Call Before You Dig" notice. 
p.  Preliminary plat or conceptual plan submitted with construction plans. 
q.  Sidewalks. 
r.  Show location of all wells within 100 feet of property or certify that there are no wells, if lots are served by septic tank. 
s.  Names of all utility companies. 
t.  Show location of any landfills or debris or garbage disposal sites on the property. 
u.  All plans for public sewer facilities shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of article IV of this chapter and as required in regulations promulgated by the state environmental protection division. The developer shall be responsible for submitting plans and other data to the state EPD for required approvals as described elsewhere in this chapter. The following requirements will apply to preparation of sewer construction plans: 
1.  The site plan shall show land lots, district and North arrow, lot layout, and existing and proposed building locations. The site plan shall also show all existing and proposed streets and their names, all streams, water courses, existing and proposed storm drains, and the discharge points for all drainage structures. The site plan shall accurately show the topography with contour lines at two-foot intervals. Elevations shall be referenced to mean sea level and plans shall note the location of the specific USGS Vertical Elevation Marker used for deriving site elevations. The site plan shall show the sewer layout with existing and proposed lines, manhole numbers, line designation and direction of flow, and proposed sewer easements and other utility easements. It shall also show the location of proposed services. 
2.  The design of cross country sewer lines and force mains shall be based on field run surveys. The site plan for cross country sewer lines and force mains need not show contour intervals on the plan view, but the profile views shall accurately depict ground level elevations and elevations of all relevant structures. Site plans for lift stations shall show existing and proposed contours. In the event the subdivision is developed in phases, the final construction plans for sewers may be submitted in phases or units. However, at the time the first phase is submitted, the engineer will submit one copy of the preliminary layout of the entire sewer system. This layout will show all lines required to serve any lots to be developed and any surrounding property that may be served through the property. The site plans for each phase or unit shall contain a location drawing showing the relationship of the phase or unit to the total project and to the surrounding streets and sewers. 
3.  Profiles should have a horizontal scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch for cross country lines and 50 feet to the inch for congested areas, and a vertical scale of not more than ten feet to the inch. The plan view should be drawn to a corresponding horizontal scale. The plan view should normally be shown on the same sheet as the profile. In any case both the plan and profile view should have line designations, station numbers, manhole numbers and any other indexing necessary to easily correlate the plan and profile view. 
4.  Plans and profiles shall show: 
(i)  Location of streets, sewers and utility easements. 
(ii)  Profile of ground surface, the grade of the sewer between each two adjacent manholes, size and material of pipe, length between manholes, invert of sewer in and out of each manhole, and ground surface elevation at each manhole. All manholes shall be numbered on the plan and correspondingly numbered on the profile and station numbers will be shown for each manhole. The profile of adjacent parallel stream beds and of adjacent lake surfaces, low buildings, and lots shall be shown on the profile. 
(iii)  Locations of all special features such as connection to existing sewers, concrete encasements, collar walls, ductile iron pipe sections, elevated sewers, piers, special manhole covers such as vented outfall covers or sealed covers, etc. 
(iv)  All known existing structures both above and below ground which might interfere with the proposed construction, particularly water mains, gas mains, storm drains, utility conduits, etc. 
(v)  The vertical datum used shall be the elevation above mean sea level with benchmarks shown on the plans. 
5.  Detail drawings/sewer details. Special detail drawings made to a scale to clearly show the nature of the design shall be furnished to show the following particulars: 
(i)  All stream crossings and storm drain outlets with elevations of the stream bed and of normal and extreme high and low water levels. 
(ii)  Details of special sewer joints and cross-sections. 
(iii)  Details of special sewer appurtenances such as manholes, service connections, elevated sewers, piers, pipe bedding, special highway crossings, railroad crossings, etc. 
(iv)  Additional notes below: 
A.  It is the developer's responsibility to address any wetland issues to the satisfaction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
B.  It is the developer's responsibility to abide by all the rules and regulations pertaining to the state national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit requirements. 
C.  It is the developer's responsibility to abide by all the rules and regulations pertaining to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service if applicable. 
Construction Plan Approval Certificate 
All requirements of the City of Emerson Development Regulations relative to the preparation and submission of construction plans having been fulfilled, approval of the plans is hereby granted subject to further provisions of said regulations. This certificate is effective for 12 months from the date of signing. This construction plan approval does not constitute approval of final plat. 

 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-55. - Outside agency approval. 
(a)  The developer is required to obtain approval of any outside regulatory agencies as required for the project. The developer shall notify the city before submittal to any outside regulatory agency. Upon approval from an outside regulatory agency the developer shall submit an original copy of the approved plans to the city. No permit shall be issued until copies of outside agency approvals have been received. 
(b)  Approval of a plan set by an outside regulatory agency does not constitute approval of a plan by the city. When a plan set requires modifications by the city extensive enough to warrant resubmittal the developer shall resubmit to that outside regulatory agency and obtain approval for the modifications. Examples of outside regulatory agencies include, but are not limited to, state soil and water conservation (NRCS), state environmental protection division (GAEPD water and sewer) fire marshal, state department of transportation, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-56. - Submittal packages. 
When a developer is prepared to submit plans for review to the city, a submittal package must be composed. A submittal package consists of, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Plan application. Applications for the varying plans may be obtained from the city. The developer shall complete the application in its entirety. 
(2)  Plan review fees. Fees should be submitted as outlined in the city fee schedule. If payment for the fees is not submitted at this time the city should not accept the plans nor should a review of the plans be made. Should the fees submitted not be sufficient to cover the cost, the city should not provide review comments or approval until such time as fees have been submitted. 
(3)  Permit application. Applications for the varying permits may be obtained from the city. The developer shall complete the application in its entirety. 
(4)  Plan sets. The developer shall submit a sufficient number of plans as dictated by the city. The number of plans required will be dependent on the type of plan submitted. A .pdf version of each plan submitted must be provided on CD. 
(5)  Outside agency approval. Any outside regulatory agency approval should be presented with the submittal package. No permit shall be issued without original copies of all outside regulatory agency approvals submitted to the city. 
(6)  Waivers. Any waivers required should be included for review by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-57. - Waivers. 
If the developer wishes to vary any of the requirements of the development regulations as a part of the plan approval procedure, those requested changes shall be set forth on a form as provided by the city. The city manager shall be authorized to grant waivers to the provisions of the development regulations. However, if a waiver is not specifically approved by the city manager, it shall not be considered to have been granted. For example, approval of the site plan shall not constitute approval of waivers depicted graphically but not approved by the city manager. The city manager may utilize the assistance of outside experts in the specific field of the requested waiver to assist with the decision. At the discretion of the city manager, a decision on a waiver may be placed on the city council agenda for a decision. A waiver is not transferable from one plan set to the next, excluding revisions to plan sets, even if a waiver was previously granted for the same tract of land, parcel, area or development. Each plan set, excluding revisions to plan sets, must establish the justification for a waiver. The application fee for a waiver will be as shown on the approved fee schedule as set by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-58. - Plan review. 
The city may utilize any resources deemed necessary to review plans to ensure conformance with this chapter. Unless required under law the time required to review plans shall be as deemed necessary by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-59. - Review fees. 
The city utilizes outside contractors to perform plan reviews for most types of plan sets. Plan review fees will be based upon the actual cost of plan reviews plus administrative costs associated with each review. The city maintains a fee schedule with average costs of plan review fees which are due at time of submittal. Actual costs may vary and any amount due will be required to be paid before any permits, approvals, etc., will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-60. - Plan approval. 
(a)  Approved plans shall be valid for a period not to exceed 12 months from the date of approval unless an extension in writing is granted. 
(b)  Approval of construction plans shall expire 12 months from the date of approval without the issuance of a building permit from the city. 
(c)  If a discrepancy occurs between the approved plans and the city's development standards, unless a waiver has been obtained, the development standards shall be the superseding document. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103.7, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-61. - Changes from approved plans. 
Any changes from the approved plans will require that the engineer submit revised drawings along with a request explaining the reason for the change prior to construction of the change. Any deviation from city standards will be considered a major change as will any change that will affect capacity, longevity, operation or maintenance of the facility. Any deviation from approved materials will not be accepted without prior approval. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103.8, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-62. - Pre-construction conference. 
The developer is required to schedule a meeting with the city and all public and/or private utilities for the purpose of discussing the construction and inspection of the proposed development. The pre-construction conference is required before the issuance of any permits unless waived by all affected city departments. 
(1)  Schedule a pre-construction meeting with the city manager or his representative and other city and regulatory agency representatives prior to start of any construction. The contractor's superintendent shall attend the meeting. The date and time of the meeting shall be as scheduled by the city manager. Such pre-construction meeting shall not relieve the contractor from cooperating should the city or other regulatory agencies desire additional meetings or visits. 
(2)  Submit a proposed construction schedule to the city at the pre-construction meeting. 
(3)  Perform work in a sequence to be agreed to at the pre-construction meeting, unless otherwise directed. 
(4)  Coordinate with related construction projects of the city or by others, if any. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103.9, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-63. - Insurance. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit which includes the construction or installation of infrastructure to be dedicated to the city within rights-of-way, easements, or other property either owned by, to be dedicated, conveyed, or used by the city said contractor, property owner, or entity working on said property for himself and for all subcontractors must provide the city a liability insurance certificate of $1,000,000.00 in general liability insurance listing the city as a co-insured or indicating that coverage under said policy is provided for the city. 
(b)  Said certificate shall be presented to the city manager prior to the issuance of any construction related permits, and must be approved by him prior to the issuance of any construction related permits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103.10, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-64. - Performance bonds. 
The city shall require the submittal of a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the infrastructure is installed by the developer or his contractor as required by the approved plan. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to function and perform as intended and for failure to complete such work as specified in the approved plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be for 125 percent of the total estimated construction cost. Construction costs shall be determined by cost tabulation sheets provided by the developer. The city reserves the right to verify the costs provided through utilization of outside sources. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103.11, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-65. - Permits. 
(a)  No construction shall be allowed until a construction permit has been issued by the city. The contractor shall submit one copy of the approved construction plans which have been stamped approved. The contractor shall furnish his name, address, and telephone number. He shall also furnish the name of the person in charge of the project and any subcontractors and the name and telephone number of a responsible person who can be contacted in case of emergencies during nonworking hours. 
(b)  The contractor shall notify the city 24 hours prior to doing any work. Once the contractor begins work, he shall proceed in a workmanlike manner and shall complete the work in a reasonable time without undue off days and periods of inactivity which make it hard for the city to keep up with his activity. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103.12, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-66. - Working hours. 
Developers and contractors shall limit work to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. The city may allow work outside of these hours on a case-by-case basis. Should the developer desire to work outside of these hours, a request should be submitted in writing to the city manager. If the request is approved, a written approval will be provided and must be displayed within the permit board. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 103.13, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-67—105-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION SITE 

Sec. 105-91. - Safety and security. 
(a)  Contractors are solely and fully responsible for the protection and safety of the site of the work, including the public, the workmen, the city's employees and representatives, and other regulatory personnel. 
(b)  Contractors shall provide all construction aids and equipment required for job safety, for protection of the public, to facilitate execution of the work and to facilitate access by the city representatives and regulatory personnel. 
(c)  Contractors shall provide fences, barriers, lights, signs, ladders, sheeting, shoring, railings, hoists, and other such facilities and equipment and maintain all such facilities and equipment in like new condition. 
(d)  Contractors shall comply with traffic control and safety requirements of local authorities and any state DOT permits applicable to the work. 
(e)  Contractors shall provide and operate traffic control and directional signals, barricades, warning signs, etc., to direct and maintain an orderly safe flow of traffic in all areas affected by the contractor's operations. 
(f)  All traffic control signs, barricades, etc., shall be clean, in a like new condition, and easily seen and read. Old, faded, and/or dirty signs will not be allowed at the site and shall be replaced. 
(g)  Contractors shall provide qualified and suitably equipped flaggers whenever and wherever construction operations encroach on traffic lanes, as required for regulation of traffic, and/or as required by applicable DOT permits, and/or the city representatives. 
(h)  Contractors shall provide lights at night and during periods of low visibility to clearly delineate traffic lanes and to alert traffic to construction operations underway. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 104.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-92. - Site conditions. 
(a)  Access to the existing facilities and private property shall be maintained at all times; provide crushed stone, cover plates, or temporary pavement as necessary to maintain roadways in a safe and passable condition at all times until the permanent roadway surface is repaired. 
(b)  All existing benchmarks, monuments, and other reference points shall be carefully protected. Replacement, if required, shall be by a licensed land surveyor at the contractor's cost. 
(c)  All work required on public rights-of-way will be conducted in strict conformance with rules, regulations, and permit conditions of governing bodies having jurisdiction. 
(d)  If articles of historical or archaeological value, including coins, fossils, and articles of antiquity are uncovered, all construction activities in the vicinity shall be stopped and the city shall be notified immediately. All such articles of historical or archaeological value found in the public rights-of-way shall remain the property of the city. 
(e)  Blasting operations for rock removal shall not be conducted within six feet of the edge of any public roadway pavement. All blasting operations will require approval of the city. 
(f)  Existing grades on the site must be checked prior to starting. Beginning of any grading shall constitute acceptance of the existing site conditions. 
(g)  Prior to starting any excavation, the Utilities Protection Center "Call Before You Dig" must be contacted; telephone number is 811. 
(h)  Allowable borrow or waste areas, unless designated on the drawings, shall be approved by the city prior to start of construction. 
(i)  All unsuitable excavated material must be properly disposed of in a manner acceptable to the city and in a manner that will not adversely impact the environment. 
(j)  The bypassing of raw wastewater onto the ground or into a receiving stream is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 104.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-93. - Temporary utilities. 
The following must be provided: 
(1)  Temporary electric power service to the site for the duration of construction activities as required. 
(2)  Temporary lighting for the site as necessary for safety, for construction operations, and for the contractor's and city's quality control inspections. 
(3)  Temporary telephone service to the site. The contractor's personnel shall have a functional cell telephone activated at the site at all times that construction activities are taking place. 
(4)  Trash containers for the site to properly dispose of all trash, debris and garbage as necessary to keep the site clean and sanitary at all times, including storage and parking area, along access roads, and haul routes. 
(5)  Temporary water as needed for construction activities on the site. 
(6)  Required toilet facilities and enclosures and maintained in clean and sanitary condition for workmen's use. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 104.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-94. - Environmental controls. 
The following environmental controls are required: 
(1)  Compliance with all local, state, and federal (OSHA) noise control requirements. Limit all operations, except during emergencies, to daylight periods when noise from operations will not disturb residential neighborhoods. 
(2)  Positive dust control methods at the site and all off-site borrow areas. Apply water or other dust control materials as required to minimize dust emissions from construction operations, and provide positive means to prevent air-borne dust from dispersing into the atmosphere at all times. Prevent dust being a nuisance to the public, the neighbors, and a detriment to the performance of work at the site. 
(3)  Methods to control surface water to prevent damage to the stored materials, installed work, the site, and adjoining properties. Control all earthwork filling, grading and ditching to direct surface drainage away from excavations, pits, tunnels and other construction areas; and to direct drainage to proper runoff. 
(4)  Maintenance of the site and all areas under the contractor's control free of extraneous debris and prevent accumulation of debris at construction site, storage and parking areas, or along access roads. 
(5)  Methods, means and facilities required to prevent contamination of soil, water or atmosphere by the discharge or spills of noxious substances from construction operations. Take special measures to prevent harmful substances from entering public waters. Prevent disposal of wastes, effluent, chemicals, or other such substances adjacent to streams, or in sanitary or storm sewers. 
(6)  No clearing or grading operations are to begin until a land disturbance permit has been issued. Periodically inspect excavated or disturbed areas to detect any evidence of the start of erosion, apply corrective measures as required to control erosion. Provide supplementary erosion and runoff control measures when it becomes apparent that additional problems exist. 
(7)  Removal of all temporary facilities and controls from the site promptly upon completion of the work. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 104.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-95. - Access to project. 
Authorized representatives of the city, which may include city employees, the city engineer or his representative, state or federal agencies, shall have access to the site for inspection at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 104.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-96. - City inspection. 
(a)  The developer's contractor will be responsible for the quality, accuracy and workmanship of his completed work. 
(b)  City personnel will visit the job site on a periodic basis and will make spot checks as they deem appropriate. The city shall have the right to review and inspect all construction and may reject any work that does not meet quality control standards. The city maintains the right to refuse performing inspections at unsafe worksites. 
(c)  The city inspector may direct that the contractor notify the city and receive inspection approval prior to concealing certain work such as manhole foundations, pipe bedding, tees, bends, service laterals, or other appurtenances. At the city's discretion, the city may require work to be uncovered which was not inspected prior to backfilling. 
(d)  Cost for all inspections and testing shall be paid for by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 104.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-97. - Other testing requirements. 
The city reserves the right to require further testing or more stringent inspections for any reason to ensure quality workmanship and materials. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 104.7, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-98—105-122. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CLOSE OUT 

Sec. 105-123. - Final inspection and conditional acceptance. 
(a)  The contractor shall request in writing a final inspection. This final inspection will generally include spot checks and a complete overview of the project. 
(b)  After any discrepancies are corrected and all other requirements of this chapter are satisfied, the city will issue a letter certifying conditional acceptance of any infrastructure intended to be dedicated to the city for non-subdivision developments. This letter shall commence the start of the 18-month warranty period which is required of the contractor. On projects having phased development, this letter will allow the developer to apply for a permit for the next phase of development. 
(c)  For subdivision developments the acceptance by the city council of the final plat shall begin the warranty period. 
(d)  The performance bond or letter of credit will be released by the city upon conditional acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 105.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-124. - Eighteen-month maintenance. 
(a)  The developer shall maintain the improvements in his development for a period of 18 months from the date the city issues approval of the final plat for subdivisions or a conditional acceptance letter for non-subdivision developments. At the end of the 18-month maintenance period, the city shall perform an inspection of the development and all improvements. The developer shall be notified by the city of the inspection results in writing within 30 days from the date of the inspection. The maintenance bond shall be released upon the issuance of a letter stating approval of the development by the city. (The final plat shall note said maintenance period and note the date that street dedication to the city shall occur.) 
(b)  If repairs are needed at the end of the 18-month maintenance period in order for the improvements to meet city specifications, the developer shall be required to make such repairs within 60 days, after written notification by the city. If the repairs are not completed within said time, and the developer fails to show a legitimate hardship, as determined by the city, which inhibits the completion of the repairs, the maintenance bond shall be called in to pay for the repairs. Should the amount of the maintenance bond be inadequate to pay for the repairs, the developer shall pay the remaining amount. The following procedures shall apply in this situation: 
(1)  The city shall notify the developer in writing of such action. 
(2)  Upon completion of necessary maintenance repairs, the developer shall request in writing to the city for inspection of the maintenance repairs. The city shall make said inspection and in turn notify the developer of the inspection results. 
(3)  If the work is free from defects, and the improvements are in compliance with city specifications, the city shall provide written approval to the developer of said compliance and the maintenance bond shall be released. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 105.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-125. - Maintenance bonds. 
(a)  The maintenance bond or letter of credit shall be for a period of 24 months. This covers the cost of maintaining the project for a period of 18 months from the date the city issues approval of the final plat or project plus six months, if needed, to complete necessary deficiencies. 
(b)  The maintenance bond or letter of credit shall be for a minimum of 50 percent of the total cost of the project. In its discretion the city may utilize an engineer to determine the amount of the bond or letter of credit. The bond or letter of credit shall be payable to the City of Emerson. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 105.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-126. - Certificate of dedication/deed of dedication and maintenance agreement. 
(a)  Upon issuance of the maintenance bond as provided above, the developer shall execute a certificate of dedication and maintenance agreement as provided by the city. All streets and rights-of-way shown upon the final plat, together with all other public improvements shall be dedicated to the city either in fee simple or by perpetual easement, as appropriate. The certificate of dedication shall be recorded by the developer in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Bartow County. The developer shall also furnish to the city an opinion by an attorney acceptable to the city that title records have been examined and that marketable fee simple title was vested in the developer at time of recording of the certificate. The city reserves the right to refuse said dedication for reasons related to construction or maintenance. 
(b)  The maintenance agreement shall obligate the developer, his successors and assigns to maintain the streets and improvements for a period of 18 months from date of written acceptance by the city and to correct or repair the same as required by the city. Furthermore, the developer, his successors and assigns, shall agree to hold the city harmless and indemnify the city from liabilities arising from defects in design, installation and/or maintenance during the maintenance period. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 105.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-127. - Easements. 
(a)  All areas containing infrastructure to be dedicated to the city or where access is required per this chapter a recordable executed easement shall be dedicated to the city. All easements shall include a plat. Easements required for a development that are off-site shall be obtained, approved and recorded before any plan approvals are issued. 
(b)  The city shall be provided a minimum 20-foot perpetual easement with the right to erect, construct, install, lay and thereafter use, operate, inspect, repair, maintain, replace and remove utility components and any other required equipment, together with the right of ingress and egress over the adjacent land of the development. Easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide, ten feet on each side of the line; except that when the depth of the utility exceeds ten feet, the required easement width shall increase such that the easement width is at least twice the depth from the ground surface to bottom of the pipe. 
(c)  During the period of construction, required future maintenance or reconstruction, said easement shall be enlarged to such reasonable width as to facilitate the operation, repair, or installation of equipment, after which installation, repair or reconstruction, the width of said easement shall be reduced, and the city shall, as soon as practicable, restore the condition in which said land was before construction or repair, insofar as reasonably possible, without expense to the undersigned; provided, however, the city shall not be responsible for any shrubbery, trees or other ornamentals planted or buildings, fences, sidewalks or other structures within said easement but shall only be responsible for reseeding the grass cover. 
(d)  The developer agrees that the easement is an exclusive agreement to the city and no other use whatsoever may be made of said easement nor shall any shrubbery, trees, plants, buildings, fences, sidewalks or other structures be placed upon said easement without the express written consent of the city. In the event any such shrubbery, trees, plants, buildings, fences, sidewalks or other structures are placed within said easement without written approval, the developer will remove the same at the developer's sole expense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 105.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-128. - As-built. 
(a)  Approved as-built drawings shall be required before the final plat is recorded for subdivisions or before a certificate of occupancy is issued for commercial and industrial sites and must be the same format as the original construction plans. 
(b)  All as-built drawings must be on standard 24-inch by 36-inch sheets with a maximum scale of one inch equals 50 feet. 
(c)  "As-Built" or "Record Drawing" is to be indicated in large clear print on the plans. 
(d)  All plans must be in English. 
(e)  Electronic files must also be submitted in AutoCAD (2004 or newer), Portable Document Format (PDF) and ESRI format. Files must be geo-referenced and include all construction and project details, which truly reflect the final project as it was constructed. 
(f)  All datum shall be Georgia West State Plane and NAVD88 respectively. 
(g)  The water system as-builts shall show locations of fire hydrants, lines, valves, valve elevation, fittings, water main sizes, and types of materials. 
(h)  Sanitary sewer system as-builts shall show locations of manholes, lines, services, line sizes, types of materials, profiles, manhole inverts, and line grades. 
(i)  Street as-builts shall show street layout, profiles, and grades. 
(j)  Storm sewer system as-builts shall show impervious surface, locations of drainage structures and lines, line sizes and types of material, profiles and detention ponds. 
(k)  Commercial site layout as-builts in addition to water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer, as-builts shall include, but not be limited to, the following final locations of buildings, entrances, parking, and grading. 
(l)  Casing location, material and elevation at end of pipe is required. 
(m)  Contour lines at two-foot intervals are required. 
(n)  Sprinkler system as-builts with head count are required. 
(o)  Road names and street/lot numbers are required. 
(p)  Lateral line ends must show distance from downstream manhole, depth and offset distance from the main line. 
(q)  Show elevations of manhole inverts and top. 
(r)  Show field-measured distance between manholes. 
(s)  For any sewer or storm lines, which are outside of paved streets, show the field-measured azimuth or bearing of the line from manhole to manhole. 
(t)  Show actual slope of all sewer and storm piping. 
(u)  Location sketch. 
(v)  Maximum error of as-built measurements shall be: 
(1)  Manhole inverts. Measure to 0.10 foot with maximum vertical error of 0.15 foot per 1,000 feet of horizontal traverse. 
(2)  Manhole tops. Measure to 0.10 foot with maximum vertical error of 0.50 foot per 1,000 feet of horizontal traverse. 
(3)  Horizontal locations. Measure to nearest one foot with allowable error of one foot per 1,000 feet of traverse. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 105.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-129. - Engineer/developer certifications. 
Before acceptance of a final plat or issuance of a conditional acceptance, the city may require various types of engineer and/or developer certifications depending on the type of development. The developer should ensure that these forms are obtained and completed prior to close out. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 105.7, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-130—105-156. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION OF LAND 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-157. - Minimum standards to be met; no land locked properties. 
The developer shall ensure that the subdivision of land meets the minimum standards set forth in the city zoning ordinance and development regulations. As well, the developer shall ensure that the proposed subdivision of land does not cause properties to become land locked. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 201, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-158—105-182. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEDICATION OF PUBLIC LAND AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 105-183. - Final approval by council required before dedication of public properties. 
No land dedicated as a public street or other public purpose shall be opened or accepted as a public street or for any other public purpose, and no subdivision of land shall be made, nor subdivision plat, nor part thereof, shall be recorded before obtaining final approval from the city council and recorded by the clerk of the superior court of Bartow County. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 202, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-184—105-204. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRANSFER OF LAND OWNERSHIP 

Sec. 105-205. - Conditions applicable to title transfers. 
No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, developer, subdivider or any other owner or agent shall transfer title or attempt to record the title to any land in the city, and no building permit may be issued on said land, unless: 
(1)  Said land existed as a single parcel of ownership, recorded as such in its entirety and present boundaries with the clerk of the superior court of Bartow County prior to the city development or zoning regulations; or 
(2)  Said land is shown in its entirety and present boundaries on a final plat as approved (under these or any previous applicable regulations) and duly recorded with the clerk of the superior court of Bartow County. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 203.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-206. - Sale of land by reference to unapproved final plat prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, developer, subdivider or any other owner or agent shall transfer title to any property by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of any map of plat illustrating the subdivision of land without a final plat of said land showing said property first having been duly approved under the procedures of this chapter or any previously applicable regulations and recorded with the clerk of the superior court of Bartow County. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 203.2, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-207—105-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-236. - Right-of-way; lot arrangement; building lines; lot frontage. 
(a)  Minimum right-of-way. Each lot shall front upon a dedicated public street having a right-of-way of not less than 50 feet. 
(b)  Arrangements. Side lot lines should be at right angles (90 degrees) to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. Side lot lines should be radial to the center points in all cul-de-sacs. Side lot lines may deviate up to five degrees if necessary to combine property corners. 
(c)  Building lines. Building lines shall conform to the city zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Double frontage lots. Access shall be restricted to the interior streets for all residential subdivisions. 
(e)  Minimum lot frontage. The minimum width of frontage of any lot shall be as required by the city zoning ordinance for the specific zoning district in which the lot is located. The lot width at any point from the road right-of-way to the building line shall not be less than the minimum required frontage width. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 204, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-237—105-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MONUMENTS 

Sec. 105-266. - Guidelines for marking. 
All corners shall be marked with an iron pin, one-half-inch in diameter or greater and 18 inches long and driven so as to extend not less than one inch above the finished grade. If unable to penetrate ground 18 inches, then set other permanent monuments (PK nail in asphalt, spike, chiseled x, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 205, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-267—105-295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ROADS AND SIDEWALKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-296. - Subdivisions; streets. 
(a)  Classification of proposed streets. Prior to submission of preliminary plat, the developer shall meet with the city manager and his designee to have the proposed street classified, in order that it can be accepted into the city's system. In some cases, it may be desirable for a street to have a higher classification based upon ultimate development of the entire area, which is not necessarily just the one development being submitted. This is particularly true in the more outlying areas around the city. Street continuity may require that a cul-de-sac street be provided in a current development at the property line, such that it can be extended in the future. In a case of this nature, the current development would provide the street to the property line. The future development would pick up at the property line and continue the street. 
(b)  Existing streets. When development is proposed on an existing street, all improvements required under these standards shall apply to the side of the street which the development abuts. 
(c)  Relation to adjoining street system. The proposed street system shall extend existing streets, but to current city standards. If lots front on the existing city street, it shall be improved out to an acceptable city or county road by the developer. 
(d)  Alleys. Alleys may be provided to the rear of all lots except lots with double frontage. 
(e)  Restriction of access. When a subdivision fronts on an arterial or major collector, double frontage lots shall be provided with frontage on an interior street with no access to the arterial or major collector. 
(f)  Dead end streets. All dead end streets shall have a cul-de-sac as defined in the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(g)  Conformity to the city street classification map. The location and width of all streets and roads shall conform as specified. Street plans and profiles shall be approved by the city. 
(h)  Intersections. 
(1)  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible. 
(2)  No intersection shall be at an angle of less than 75 degrees. 
(3)  The property line at street corners shall be mitered adequately to permit construction of a 13-foot clear shoulder behind the curb and gutter. 
(4)  Sight distance at intersections shall meet requirements of this regulation. (See City of Emerson Standard Details.) 
(5)  Islands at intersections shall be subject to individual approval by the city. In no case shall anything extend more than two feet above the back of the curb within the right-of-way of the street to be intersected. 
(6)  Landings shall be required for all intersections. These landings shall be as defined in the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(7)  Opposing tee street intersections shall be directly aligned or shall be offset at least 200 feet. 
(8)  Intersections shall have a minimum radius as measured to the face of the curb of 40 feet for residential and commercial subdivisions and 75 feet for industrial subdivisions. 
(i)  Names. 
(1)  Proposed streets that are obviously in alignment with other already existing and named street shall bear the name of such existing street. 
(2)  No proposed street name shall duplicate an existing street name within the city or the county regardless of the use of the suffix "Street," "Avenue," "Boulevard," "Drive," "Place," "Way," "Court," or however otherwise designated. 
(3)  All street names are subject to the approval of the city. 
(j)  Traffic studies. The city may require that a traffic study be performed prior to the issuance of any permits to evaluate the current capacity of streets expected to carry the traffic volumes from the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 301.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-297. - Rights-of-way. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  The minimum width of right-of-way, as measured from lot line, shall be as shown in the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(2)  Adequate right-of-way shall be provided to allow the construction of a 13-foot cleared shoulder behind the curb line except industrial streets shall have a 16-foot cleared shoulder. 
(3)  When the development (residential or commercial) is located on only one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way as measured from the centerline of the existing right-of-way, shall be shown on the plan and is required to be dedicated to the city. 
(b)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, encroach upon, or injure materially any part of any city right-of-way or city road pavement. 
(2)  No encroachments are permitted in any right-of-way of the city without permission of the city, unless otherwise permitted by this article. 
(3)  No building, structure, service area, or required off-street parking and loading facilities, except driveways, shall be permitted to encroach on city rights-of-way. 
(4)  The city shall owe no compensation for removal of illegal encroachments or obstructions. 
(c)  Permitted encroachments. 
(1)  Driveways. Driveways (including paved, masonry, asphalt, etc.) are permitted to encroach on the right-of-way. A driveway permit shall be required and the lot owner shall secure permission for any new driveway from the city. Driveways must meet sight distance requirements and must be constructed in compliance with city requirements for stormwater drainage/piping. 
(2)  Landscaping. Limited landscaping is permitted in the city right-of-way, including grass, flowers and shrubs not in excess of two feet in height. Trees shall not be planted in the right-of-way. 
(3)  Irrigation systems. Irrigation systems shall not be installed in the right-of-way. 
(4)  Mailbox support structures. The city permits limited encroachment of the right-of-way for mailbox support structures, which meet the following standards: 
a.  The use of massive mailbox support structures that, when struck, could damage vehicles and cause serious injury to vehicle occupants are prohibited. Heavy metal posts, concrete posts, brick bases, and miscellaneous items such as farm equipment or supports filled with concrete are also prohibited and cannot be used for mailbox supports. 
b.  Acceptable mailbox supports include: 
1.  A single four-inch by four-inch or four-inch diameter wooden post; 
2.  A metal post with strength no greater than a two-inch diameter standard strength steel hollow pipe; 
3.  Other support of no greater strength, as approved by the city, as in accordance with the standards of the AASHTO Roadway Design Guidelines for mailbox structures, which are incorporated herein by reference. 
In the event the property owner has any question as to whether the proposed mailbox support will be permitted, the city should be consulted. 
c.  Mailbox supports must be embedded no more than 24 inches into the ground. A metal post shall not be fitted with an anchor plate, but it may have an anti-twist device that extends no more than ten inches below the ground surface. 
d.  The post-to-box attachment details should be of sufficient strength to prevent the box from separating from the post top if a vehicle strikes the installation. The mailbox itself should be of lightweight steel, wood, or plastic/composite construction, and meeting U.S. Postal Service regulations. 
(d)  Nonconforming encroachments. 
(1)  All encroachments pre-existing the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived may remain as nonconforming encroachments, unless and until removal is ordered by the city, for utility work, road work or other work necessitating access to the right-of-way. For pre-existing encroachments, the city shall give 30 days' notice of removal (unless the encroachment presents a safety hazard). 
(2)  Any structure pre-existing the ordinance from which this article is derived which is damaged or removed shall not be replaced in kind and must be replaced in accordance with the requirements of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(3)  The city shall owe no compensation for removal of nonconforming encroachments. 
(e)  Removals and notice. 
(1)  Right of removal. The city shall have the authority to remove without notice any encroachment or obstruction of the right-of-way. The city shall also have the authority to issue a notice of removal to property owners giving them up to 30 days to remove an unpermitted encroachment 
(2)  Notice of removal. Where the city determines that an encroachment must be removed from the right-of-way for construction, maintenance or safety purposes, the city may (but is not required to unless otherwise specified herein) issue a notice of removal, giving up to 30 days to remove the structure. After the deadline, the structure may be removed by the city with the costs to be charged to the property owner. The owner may also be cited, fined or have other enforcement action taken against him to secure compliance with this chapter and/or reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 301.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-298. - Entrances. 
(a)  Maximum lots served. Subdivision developments with 100 or more lots shall be required to have at least two entrances. 
(b)  Street access; curb cuts in other than residential districts. Curb cuts for service drives, entrances, exits, and other similar facilities on public streets in other than residential districts shall not be located within 50 feet of any intersection. 
(c)  Driveways. No more than two combined entrances and exits shall be allowed on any parcel or property when the frontage of which is less than 200 feet. Additional entrances or exits for parcels or property having a frontage in excess of 200 feet shall be permitted only after showing of actual requirements of convenience and necessity. 
(1)  Angle. The angle of driveways shall not be less than 45 degrees with the edge of the road or street, except on divided highways the entrance angle to roadside commercial establishments may be reduced to 30 degrees. Exit drives from roadside commercial establishments on divided highways shall have an angle of not less than 60 degrees with the roadway. 
(2)  Driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(d)  Entrance requirements. Subdivision developments shall construct entrance widening to the following requirements: 
(1)  Residential subdivisions. 
a.  Residential subdivisions not exceeding 20 lots whose entrance is on a local or minor collector, shall install offset radii and 50-foot tapers as shown in the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
b.  All other residential subdivisions shall construct full deceleration lanes to conform to the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
c.  Residential subdivisions exceeding 200 lots shall be required to install entrance with a center turn lane and longer deceleration lanes if it is located on a minor collector, major collector or an arterial street. Entrance shall conform to the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(2)  Commercial/industrial subdivisions. 
a.  Full acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be installed per the City of Emerson Standard Details. Paving section shall correspond to the street classification of the existing road. 
b.  Commercial/industrial subdivisions shall be required to install an entrance with a center turn lane and longer acceleration/deceleration lanes if it is located on a minor collector, major collector or an arterial street. Entrances shall conform to the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(3)  Access onto a state road shall meet existing state DOT requirements. Such an application for a DOT permit shall be submitted to the city prior to submittal to the DOT. Once approved by the DOT, a copy shall be provided to the city. All such entrances shall be paved. 
(4)  Sight distance. The developer shall be required to upgrade the existing city or county road to meet the sight distance requirements of this article. 
(5)  The developer shall install any catch basins and drainage pipe which must be constructed when an existing city or county road is required to be modified as a result of proposed development at his expense. 
(6)  Existing or proposed water mains, storm sewers and any other utilities shall be relocated at the developer's expense, to a point outside of the entrance widening. 
(e)  State department of transportation approval. All entrances or exits of any street or drive, public or private, from or to any state highway shall be approved by the state department of transportation prior to the construction of such street or drive, or the issuance of any development permit for any improvement to be served by such street or drive. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 301.3, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-299—105-329. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDIVIDUAL COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL/MULTIFAMILY SITES 

Sec. 105-330. - Development entrances. 
In addition to the following, parking lots shall not drain onto a city street except as approved by the city engineer: 
(1)  The city shall approve the number of entrances to a proposed development. 
(2)  On minor collector streets, offset radii and tapers shall be provided except in a downtown business district (DBD). 
(3)  Industrial developments, commercial businesses and multifamily developments shall install full acceleration/deceleration lanes if accessing a major collector or an arterial street except in a downtown business district (DBD). 
(4)  Industrial developments on corner lots which have frontage on interior subdivision streets shall have access only from the interior subdivision street. 
(5)  Developments on corner lots which have frontage on a local or minor collector city road shall install an additional lane pursuant to the specifications of the city engineer except in the downtown business district (DBD). 
(6)  The city may require a center turn lane or a longer deceleration lane if the city determines the traffic the project generates and the existing city street warrants it. 
(7)  Access onto a state road shall meet existing state DOT requirements, except for the entrance must be paved. 
(8)  Sight distance. No entrance shall be allowed in a location that does not provide adequate sight distance as specified in the City of Emerson Standard Details. The developer may choose to upgrade the existing city or county road to meet the sight distance requirements of this article. 
(9)  Fire lanes shall be designed with proper space for fire vehicles movement. Fire lanes shall be approved by the county fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 302.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-331. - Off-street automobile parking. 
Parking layout shall conform to the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 302.2, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-332—105-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STREET DESIGN CRITERIA 

Sec. 105-351. - AASHTO standards. 
Road design shall conform to AASHTO (American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials) requirements as published in "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 2011 edition," as amended, unless otherwise noted herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 303.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-352. - Minimum design speed and maximum grade. 
Minimum design speeds and maximum grades for proposed streets in the city by street classification shall be as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 303.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-353. - Minimum street grade. 
Minimum grade on cul-de-sacs shall be 1½ percent to maintain one percent in curb line. Minimum street grade outside of cul-de-sacs shall be one percent. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 303.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-354. - Sight distance at entrances. 
(a)  Sight distance requirements along existing city roads shall be determined using the posted speed limit and the corresponding stopping sight distance as shown in the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(b)  The sight distance for crest and sag vertical curves is the distance measured along the roadway from a driver's eye 3½ feet above the pavement to an object two feet high at the intersection as shown in the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(c)  The sight distance for horizontal curves is determined by the line of sight available 2.0 feet above the road surface. The sight distance is measured along the existing edge of pavement beginning at the centerline of the proposed entrance and ending where the line of sight intersects it. The line of sight is the projected line of visibility beginning at the entrance centerline and tangent to an obstruction two feet above the road surface. Examples of obstructions are vegetation, ground cover, signs, existing topography, etc. (See the City of Emerson Standard Details.) 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 303.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-355. - Curves. 
(a)  Vertical curves. The length of vertical cures, both crest and sag, shall be based upon AASHTO standards corresponding to the design speed for the classification type of the street proposed. 
(b)  Horizontal curves. Streets shall be designed to have a centerline radius of curvature of no less than 100 feet. Proposed minor collector streets shall have a minimum 300-foot centerline radius of curvature. All other streets horizontal curvature shall be designed according to AASHTO standards. 
(c)  Tangent distance between reverse curves shall be as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 303.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-356. - Street cross-section. 
(a)  Street cross-sections shall be as shown in the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(b)  Curb and gutter shall be as shown in the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(c)  Cul-de-sac radius shall be as shown in the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 303.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-357. - Street paving. 
Pavement thickness for streets shall be as specified in the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(1)  GAB refers to graded aggregate base, as specified in the Georgia DOT in Standard Specifications, section 815. 
(2)  Type B refers to type B asphalt concrete, as specified in the Georgia DOT in Standard Specifications, section 828. 
(3)  Type E refers to type E asphalt concrete, as specified in the Georgia DOT in Standard Specifications, section 828. 
(4)  Type F refers to type F asphalt concrete, as specified in the Georgia DOT in Standard Specifications, section 828. 
(5)  All local commercial/industrial and minor collector commercial/industrial streets shall have the same paving section as the major collector street type. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 303.7, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-358. - Dam supporting road. 
No city street shall be designed to cross an existing or proposed dam that is regulated by the Safe Dams Act. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 303.8, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-359. - Curb and gutter. 
Curb and gutter shall be required on all paved streets. (See the City of Emerson Standard Details.) 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 303.9, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-360. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be required on at least one side of all new streets. In addition, they shall be required on all existing streets where new building construction occurs if required by the city. In addition, they shall be required on all existing streets where new building construction occurs if requested by the city. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall be constructed and located in accordance with the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(c)  Sidewalks shall be backfilled and landscaped. 
(d)  Sidewalks shall include handicap ramps at all street intersections to meet the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 303.10, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-361. - Traffic signs. 
The design professional shall show the location of all required traffic signs. The developer shall furnish and install all street signage in the project. Unless otherwise noted, design of traffic signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), latest edition, published by the United States Government Printing Office. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 303.11, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-362—105-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MATERIALS 

Sec. 105-381. - Compliance. 
All materials shall comply with Georgia DOT Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges, latest edition, as amended, with supplemental specifications and standard details, unless otherwise noted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 304.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-382. - Streets. 
(a)  Graded aggregated base (GAB) course shall consist of mineral aggregate and may be a combination of natural deposit or a blend of the materials specified in the Georgia DOT in Standard Specifications, section 815. 
(b)  Black base shall consist of asphalt concrete conforming to Type B specifications of the Georgia DOT in Standard Specifications, section 828. 
(c)  Prime. After the base has been placed, mixed, compacted, shaped, inspected and accepted, it shall be primed with suitable asphalt materials as specified in Georgia DOT in Standard Specifications, section 412. 
(d)  Tack. Tack coat shall be applied on a prepared road surface according to the requirements of the Georgia DOT in Standard Specifications, section 413. 
(e)  Surface course. Type E asphalt concrete as specified in the Georgia DOT in Standard Specifications, section 828. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 304.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-383. - Curb and gutter. 
Concrete shall be class "A" as defined by the Georgia DOT in Standard Specifications, section 500, and have a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi at 28 days. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 304.3, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-384—105-409. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 105-410. - Compliance. 
All construction shall comply with Georgia DOT Standard Specifications Construction of Road and Bridges, with Supplemental Specifications and Standard Details, 1993 edition, as amended, unless noted otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 305.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-411. - Clearing and grubbing. 
Grading sections shall be cleared and grubbed of all trees, bushes, stumps and debris. Such debris shall be disposed of in a lawful manner. There shall be no burial of such debris on site. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 305.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-412. - Grading. 
(a)  Grading shall be accurately done to the lines and grades shown on the plans. Embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed six inches and compacted to a density of 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHTO Method T-99. The contractor shall add moisture to the material as required as it is placed to obtain required compaction. 
(b)  Compaction test shall be provided by the developer and shall be performed by a geotechnical engineer licensed in the state. Required test shall be every two feet vertically and 500 feet horizontal. 
(c)  Maximum construction cut and fill slopes are as follows: 

 
The depth of cut referred to shall be constructed to the maximum cut or fill occurring in any one section of cut or fill. The slope on cut or fill slopes shall be uniform throughout for each section or cut or fill. When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, the slope may be changed to vertical slope upon the written approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 305.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-413. - Subgrade. 
(a)  After the earth work has been completed, all storm drainage and other underground utilities have been installed under the roadbed, and the backfill in all such ditches thoroughly compacted, the subgrade shall be brought to the lines, grades and cross-section shown on the plans. 
(b)  If any sections of the subgrade are composed of unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed to the depth directed by the authorized representative of the city and replaced with suitable, thoroughly compacted material. 
(c)  When the street is to be used for construction traffic before the paving work is completed, a layer of GAB can be laid as a traffic surface. 
(1)  This material shall not be used as part of the base material. 
(2)  It may be worked into the subgrade, or it shall be removed before the base course is set up for paving. 
(3)  Provision shall be made to drain low points in road construction when the final paving surface is delayed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 305.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-414. - Curb and gutter. 
(a)  Line and grade shall be set by the developer's engineer, landscape architect, or land surveyor. 
(b)  One-half-inch expansion joints or pre-molded bitumastic expansion joint material shall be provided at all radius points and at intervals not to exceed 50 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. 
(c)  Cross-section shall be in accordance with the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 305.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-415. - Street cuts. 
(a)  The city's policy is no existing streets can be open cut unless unusual circumstances warrant it. No street shall be cut or bored without a written permit issued by the city. Application for such permit shall be made at least two business days prior to the desired time for starting work. 
(b)  All trenches shall be backfilled and compacted the same day the trench is opened. Compaction requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Trenches under paving shall be backfilled with GAB and returned to 100 percent compaction. 
(2)  Trenches elsewhere shall be returned to 95 percent compaction. 
(c)  If the city allows open cutting, all trenches under existing paving shall be backfilled and compacted in six-inch lifts and excavated to allow for concrete and asphalt to be placed as shown in the City of Emerson Standard Details. The edges of the paving cut shall be saw cut smooth. 
(d)  Compaction test on cuts shall be made at two per cross cut. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 305.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-416. - Underground utilities. 
(a)  All utilities within the curbs shall be installed and the ditches backfilled and thoroughly compacted before any pavement or base is installed. 
(b)  All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought to the finished grade within the roadway section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 305.7, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-417. - Foreign materials on streets. 
(a)  The developer, builders, and/or homeowners shall be responsible for keeping dirt, mud, building materials, concrete, etc., off the pavement and curbing of existing city or county roads during construction of buildings in all developments covered by these regulations. 
(b)  Before the streets are accepted by the city, all litter and trash shall be removed from the dedicated rights-of-way and surrounding areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 305.8, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-418—105-447. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PRIVATE STREETS 

Sec. 105-448. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City engineer means the individual designated by the city manager to perform said functions. 
City of Emerson Development Standards means the City of Emerson Zoning Ordinance, City of Emerson Development Regulations and all codes and ordinances adopted by the city. 
Subdivision , for the purpose of this section, means only the following uses: 
(1)  Single-family residential units; and 
(2)  Fee simple town home units, fee simple condominiums or other fee simple ownership of the individual residential units. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 306.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-449. - Private streets permitted. 
Private streets may, upon application, be permitted by the city council within subdivisions, subject to the requirements of this article. Applications for approval of private streets shall be considered by the city council at the time of preliminary plat approval. Following a recommendation by the city to authorize private streets in a major subdivision, the city council shall consider the application and may impose conditions on the approval of private streets to ensure various public purposes and to mitigate potential problems with private streets. No final plat involving a private street shall be approved unless said final plat conforms to the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 306.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-450. - Engineering plans required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct a new private street or alter an existing private street or to cause the same to be done without first obtaining approval of engineering and construction plans from the city in accordance with the requirements of this section and the City of Emerson Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 306.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-451. - Standards. 
All private streets shall be constructed to all standards for public streets including all related appurtenances as required by the City of Emerson Development Standards, applicable construction specifications of the city, and as approved by the city engineer. 
(1)  If a gate or other controlled access is installed at the entrance to the development, a place which provides emergency access to the development by emergency agencies must first be approved by the emergency agencies of the city. Access must also be provided to anyone providing utilities to said development; there shall be an automatic gate opening on any power disconnect. 
(2)  All provisions of the zoning ordinances of the city shall apply to the development of said development. 
(3)  There shall be only one entrance/exit from the development to a public street unless otherwise recommended by the city engineer, fire and police department or other emergency services and approved by the city council. In no event shall a private street be constructed so as to permit said street, in any configuration, to serve as a connecting street between two public streets. Other than the entrance/exit to the private development, no private street shall adjoin any property outside the limits of the private development. 
(4)  There shall be an independent certified inspector approved by the city provided by the developer, at the developer's cost to determine compliance with the specific rules and requirements for streets and utilities during the entire project. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 306.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-452. - Street names and signs. 
Private streets shall be named, subject to the approval of the city council. The subdivider of land involving a private street shall install street signs with content containing the street name and the designation "private," as approved by the city council. The sign signifying the private street may be required by the city council to be a different color than that of street signs provided for public streets, in order to distinguish maintenance responsibilities in the field. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 306.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-453. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements for private streets shall be designated on final plats as general-purpose public access and utility easements, along with the name of said private street. Said easement shall, at minimum, be of the same width as that required for the right-of-way of a public street by the major thoroughfare plans and the city engineer for the type of public street (local, collector, etc.) most closely resembling the proposed private street. Easements for private streets shall not be included in any calculation of minimum lot size or density limitations established by local land use regulations. In the cases of private streets, the general-purpose public access and utility easement for the private street shall either: 
(1)  Be shown in a manner on the final plat such that each lot fronting the private street shall extend to the edge of the curb, right-of-way, or easement for said private street. No lot shall be permitted to be divided by the general purpose public access and utility easement required and established for a private street; or 
(2)  Shall be drawn as its own discrete parcel to be dedicated to a private homeowners association (i.e., not shown to be a part of any lot); 
(b)  All utility easements as required by the City of Emerson Development Standards must be installed and dedicated to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 306.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-454. - Maintenance. 
The city shall not maintain, repair, resurface, rebuild, or otherwise improve streets, signs, drainage improvements or any other appurtenances within general-purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. A private maintenance covenant recorded with the Bartow County clerk of the superior court shall be required for any private street and other improvements within general-purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. The covenant shall set out the distribution of expenses, remedies for noncompliance with the terms of the agreement, rights to the use of easements, and other pertinent considerations. The covenant shall specifically include the following terms: 
(1)  The covenant shall establish minimum annual assessments in an amount adequate to defray costs of ordinary maintenance and procedures for approval for additional needed assessments. The covenant shall also specify that the funds from such assessments will be held by a homeowners or property owners association in all cases. 
(2)  The covenant shall include a periodic maintenance schedule. 
(3)  The covenant for maintenance shall be enforceable by any property owner served by the private street. 
(4)  The covenant shall establish a formula for assessing maintenance and repair costs equitably to property owners served by the private street. 
(5)  The covenant shall run with the land. 
(6)  The city council may, at its discretion, as a condition of approving private streets, require a performance bond and/or maintenance bond and/or letter of credit be submitted by the subdivider and held by a homeowners or property owners association, or the city council may require that the subdivider pay an amount of money as recommended by the city engineer into an escrow account or other suitable account for the maintenance and repair of private streets and stormwater management improvements, to be drawn from by the homeowners or property owners association as maintenance and repair needs may arise. 
(7)  All agreements, restrictive covenants and other documentation related to the development shall be furnished and approved by the city council prior to commencement of development. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 306.7, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-455. - Specification for final plats involving private streets. 
The city council shall not approve for recording any final plat involving a private street unless and until it shall contain the following on the face of the plat: 
(1)  Deed book and page reference to the recorded covenant required by this section. 
(2)  "Warning: The City of Emerson, Georgia has no responsibility to build, improve, maintain, or otherwise service the private street, drainage improvements and other appurtenances contained with the general purpose public access and utility easement or easements for private streets shown on this plat unless otherwise indicated hereon." 
(3)  "Grant of easement. The general purpose public access and utility easement shown on this plat for private street is hereby granted and said grant of rights shall be liberally construed to provide all necessary authority to the City of Emerson, Georgia and to public or private utility companies serving the subdivision, for the installation and maintenance of utilities, including, but not limited to, electric lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, sewer lines, cable television lines, and fiber optic cables, together with the right to trim interfering trees and brush, together with a perpetual right of ingress and egress for installation, maintenance and replacement of such lines. 
____________ 
Signature of Property Owner" 
(4)  The following certificate of dedication shall be required by the city unless the mayor and city council waives the dedication requirement. The city may add to said dedication as may be required for the particular project: 
"Certificate of dedication. All water and sewer lines and other utilities installed within the general purpose access and utility easement shown on this plat for private streets are hereby dedicated to City of Emerson, Georgia. 
____________ 
Signature of Property Owner" 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 306.8, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-456. - Requirement of purchaser's acknowledgement of private responsibilities. 
Prior to the sale or as a condition of the closing of a real estate transaction involving any lot served by a private street in the city, the subdivider or seller of said lot shall execute a notarized purchaser's acknowledgement of private street construction and drainage maintenance responsibilities as set forth below. A copy of the purchaser's acknowledgement shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be required to be submitted as a condition of a building permit for a principal building on said lot: 
"Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Street and Drainage Maintenance Responsibility 
(I)/ (We) have read the Declaration of Covenant which pertains to the lot that is the subject to this real estate transaction ____________ (insert address or attach legal description). 
(I)/(We) understand that the Declaration of Covenant applies to the lot that (I am)/(we are) purchasing and requires (me)/(us) to provide a specified percentage or amount of the financing for the construction and maintenance of any private street and drainage facilities serving the lot which (I am)/(we are) purchasing, and that owners of other lots in this plat may sue for and recover those costs which this covenant requires (me)/(us) to pay, plus their damages resulting from (my)/(our) refusal to contribute, plus reasonable attorney's fees. 
(I)/(We) further understand that the City of Emerson, Georgia has no obligation to assist with the maintenance and improvement of the private street, drainage facilities, and other appurtenances within the general purpose public access and utility easement for the private road serving the lot in question. (I)/(We) understand that a copy of this purchaser's acknowledgement shall be required as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for a principal building on the lot (I am)/(we are) purchasing. 
____________ 
Purchaser 
____________ 
Purchaser" 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 306.9, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-457. - Other requirements. 
All agreements, restrictive covenants and other documentation related to the development shall be furnished and approved by the city council prior to commencement of development. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 306.10, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-458—105-482. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-483. - Use of this document. 
(a)  This document is subject to periodic revision to meet changing requirements for materials, environmental regulations, etc. At the beginning of a project the user should verify that he has the latest edition. 
(b)  This document is intended to convey the general design and construction requirements for a typical project. It also lists specific city requirements relating to plan review, inspection, testing and acceptance of facilities. It is not intended as a substitute for site-specific engineering and construction techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 401.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-484. - Connection to existing sewers. 
(a)  Except as provided below, all future buildings within the city's corporate limits that are to be utilized for occupancy or any other use such as commercial or industrial purposes which requires sanitary sewerage facilities shall be connected to the public sewer system. Cost of constructing the necessary facilities for connection to public sewers shall be at the expense of the developer. 
(b)  Waiver of the requirement to connect to public sewers will be considered on a case-by-case basis for non-subdivided, single-lot buildings when the nearest connection point to a public sewer is more than 200 feet from the property line, when such buildings are to be used for single-family dwellings or some other use where the wastewater loading is no more than that of a single-family dwelling. 
(c)  The city maintains the option of requiring developers of individual lots to construct main line extensions of up to 200 feet to avoid cutting pavement on existing streets for connection to the public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 401.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-485. - When public sewers are not available. 
If sewers are not available within 200 feet of the property line the options available are: 
(1)  Do not develop. 
(2)  Extend city sewers to the area (at the developer's expense). 
(3)  In cases where the installation of sewer systems would not be in the best interest of the utility the city may allow for the installation of septic tanks or other on-site treatment system. (Requires council approval.) 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 401.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-486. - Administrative procedures. 
The design, construction, testing and approval of sanitary sewerage facilities intended to convey sewage to the City of Cartersville sewer system (Red Top Sewer), shall comply with current ordinances and regulations of the City of Cartersville, or City of Emerson, whichever are more stringent, as determined by the City of Emerson. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 401.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-487. - Utility locations. 
All utilities shall be buried in a residential subdivision unless otherwise required by the city. This requirement may only be waived by the city; said waiver must be in writing. All utility locations shall correspond to the typical layout shown in the City of Emerson Standard Details. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 401.5, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-488—105-512. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS AND SUBMITTALS 

Sec. 105-513. - General. 
All projects, which involve construction of main sewers and/or force mains and pumping facilities, shall have detailed construction plans and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer or licensed surveyor licensed in the state. Developments, which only involve building sewers, may have plans and specifications prepared by the project architect. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 402.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-514. - Preliminary review. 
Preliminary plans will be prepared and submitted for review as described elsewhere in the development regulations. Questions relating to availability of sewers and proposed location of connection should be resolved at this stage before proceeding with final planning. A submittal for preliminary review must include all land to be developed although the land is to be developed in several phases or units. Availability determinations will be made only for the phases of the project proposed for current construction. Availability determinations will be valid for a period of one year from the date of project approval. The developer must submit any data required for accurately projecting sewer flow quantities and rates. The developer is also responsible for furnishing any other information deemed necessary for evaluating service feasibility. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 402.2, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-515—105-536. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN CRITERIA AND MATERIALS FOR SEWERS 

Sec. 105-537. - General. 
The criteria listed herein is not intended to cover all aspects of design, but rather to mention the basic guidelines and those particulars that are required by the city water department. For more detailed criteria, the reader should refer to standard references such as Ten States Standards, Georgia EPD rules, Water Pollution Environment Federation Manual of Practice No. FD-5, and other available literature. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-538. - Types of sewers. 
All sewers for the conveyance of wastewater shall be designed as separate sanitary sewers in which groundwater, stormwater or other runoff from roofs, streets, parking lots, foundation drains and any source other than wastewater are excluded. Overflows from sewers shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-539. - Design period. 
Gravity sewer pipelines should, as a minimum, be designed with capacity sufficient to handle the estimated tributary population. Tributary population is considered to be all areas upstream of the discharge point of the system being designed as well as any anticipated pumped flow from other basins. Sewers will be designed and installed to the uppermost property line of the development being served. Consideration should be given to the maximum anticipated capacity of institutions, industrial parks, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-540. - Capacity and size determination. 
(a)  In determining the required capacities of sanitary sewers, the following factors should be considered: 
(1)  Maximum hourly sewage flow. 
(2)  Additional maximum sewage or waste flow from industrial plants. 
(3)  Groundwater infiltration. 
(4)  Topography of the area. 
(5)  Depth of excavation. 
(b)  New sewer systems shall be designed on the basis of an average daily flow of sewage of not less than 400 gallons per household per day. Normally, all sewers shall be designed for a peak flow of not less than 2½ times the average flow; this peak factor will be higher for smaller basins (see design guides). Sewers should be designed to carry the peak flow when flowing at a depth of two-thirds pipe diameter. The city land use plan should be consulted and special consideration given to commercial and industrial areas. Where developers are installing major trunk lines or interceptor sewers, the city's long range plan should be consulted as a guide and the sewer should, as a minimum, be of the size called for in the long range plan. 
(c)  If proposed land use conditions have changed subsequent to the plan, these changes should be factored into the determination. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-541. - Special city requirements. 
(a)  Distance between manholes. Maximum distance between manholes shall be 400 feet. 
(b)  Depth. Any sewers installed in the street shall, topography permitting, be sufficiently deep to provide five feet of cover over service laterals at the street right-of-way, and over any part of the main or service within the street right-of-way. The maximum depth for PVC pipe shall be 15 feet, depths in excess of this shall be ductile iron. Sewers installed in streets shall have maximum depth of 12 feet. Any sewers on off street easements shall have a minimum of three feet of cover unless ductile iron pipe is used. Filling over the pipe to obtain minimum cover is not allowed. 
(c)  Drop across manholes. All manholes shall be provided with a minimum vertical drop across the manhole (between in and out pipes) of 0.20 feet. 
(d)  Detection tape. Detection tape shall be installed over all sewer pipes. Bury tape 18 to 24 inches below grade. Use detection wire on all service laterals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-542. - Slope. 
(a)  All sewers shall be so designed and constructed to give mean velocities, when flowing full, of not less than two feet per second based on Manning's formula using an "n" value of 0.013. The following are the minimum slopes, which should be provided; however, slopes greater than these are desirable: 

 
(b)  These minimum slopes will be used only when sufficient flows are expected to maintain a velocity of two feet per second and maintain a cleaning action in the line. Sewers shall be laid with uniform slope between manholes. Sewers on 20 percent slope or greater shall be ductile iron pipe and shall be anchored securely with concrete anchors (see Standard Details) to prevent displacement by erosion or shock. Maximum slope of sewers shall be 30 percent and sewers shall be designed at less than 20 percent whenever possible. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-543. - Increasing size. 
When a small sewer is connected to a large one, the connection shall not be lower than matching the top of both sewers to the same elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.7, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-544. - Gravity sewer pipe materials. 
The city reserves the right to disallow any manufacturer that does not have a consistent, long-term record of quality control and successful product performance. Gravity sanitary sewer pipe up through 15-inch diameter will normally be ductile iron pipe (DIP). Polyvinyl chloride (PVC), solid wall type SDR 26 thickness meeting ASTM D3034 may be used in certain circumstances. For 18-inch diameter pipe and above, the contractor may have the option of using either polyvinyl chloride (PVC), reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) or ductile iron pipe. The city may approve other types of pipe on a case-by-case basis and may limit the options of type of pipe depending on site conditions. This should be addressed at the preliminary review stage. 
(1)  Ductile iron pipe (DIP). 
a.  Ductile iron sewer pipe shall be required at all utility crossings with less than two feet of clearance, in locations where cover is less than three feet, at stream crossings, where slopes exceed 20 percent, and where cover exceeds 15 feet. 
b.  Shall be manufactured in the U.S.A. in conformance with AWWA C151 (or ASTM A746). 
c.  Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings, Pressure Class 350 for four-inch to 12-inch diameter pipe; class 250 for 14-inch to 20-inch diameter pipe; and class 200 for all larger diameters. Nominal laying length shall be 18 to 20 feet. 
d.  Fittings may be cast or ductile iron manufactured in accordance with AWWA C153 or C110 with interior lining same as pipe. 
e.  Interior linings shall be cement mortar lined in accordance with AWWA C104, standard thickness with seal coat, unless epoxy lining is otherwise specified. Where epoxy lining is indicated, use epoxy coating as specified by the city. 
f.  Joints shall be push-on joint with lubricated rubber gaskets provided by the pipe manufacturer in accordance with AWWA C111. 
g.  Compression joint sealers and flexible couplings shall be provided for joining DI pipe and fittings to different types of pipe less than 15 inches in diameter. Couplings shall be by Fernco Joint Sealer Company, or equal approved by the city. 
h.  Restrained joint (RJ) pipe, where specified or indicated on drawings, shall be push on compression type joint with a locking gasket with stainless steel locking segments vulcanized into the gasket to grip the pipe to prevent joint separation. Restrained joints shall be Fast Grip Gasket by American Cast Iron Pipe Co. or Field-Lok Gasket by U.S. Pipe Co. or equal approved by the city. 
(2)  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe. 
a.  Shall be manufactured in USA. Type PSM Pipe, which is 15 inches or less in diameter, shall conform to requirements of ASTM D3034 for SDR 26. Pipe 18 inches in diameter or larger shall conform to requirements of ASTM F679, T-1 wall. 
b.  Length of sections not less than ten feet or greater than 14 feet. 
c.  Integral bell and spigot "O" ring joints conforming to ASTM D3212 with gaskets conforming to ASTM F477. Material for seal ring shall be specifically formulated for wastewater service. 
d.  Fittings for PVC sewer pipe shall have PVC push-on joints manufactured in accordance with the same specifications as pipe and pipe joints. 
e.  Pipe and fittings shall be marked in accordance with applicable ASTM specification. Spigot ends shall be marked to indicate position of spigot in bell has been attained. 
(3)  Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP). 
a.  General. The use of reinforced concrete pipe for sewers will be subject to approval on a case-by-case basis depending upon size of the sewer and site conditions. When approved for use, concrete gravity sewer pipe shall meet all materials and testing requirements of ASTM C-76, ASTM C-443, and ASTM C-497 (except where modified herein). 
b.  Quality assurance. The contractor must submit to the owner and engineer the concrete pipe manufacturer's evidence of a working quality control program for approval, prior to any pipe being manufactured. The program and standards of manufacturing must be established and well defined. The program must include the minimum following requirements: 
1.  A full time quality control technician. 
2.  A complete and working quality control laboratory capable of testing and recording the requirements set forth in these specifications for concrete pipe. 
3.  A zero defect program for daily material testing and finished product testing to ensure quality control as the pipe is being manufactured and shipped for this particular project. 
c.  Guarantee. The contractor shall provide a guarantee against defective materials and workmanship in accordance with the requirements of the section entitled "Guarantees and Warranties" of these specifications. 
d.  Material. 
1.  All concrete pipe and fittings 12 inches in diameter and larger shall be reinforced concrete sewer pipe conforming to the latest requirements of ASTM C-76 with the following modifications: All concrete pipe with zero to 20 feet of fill shall be a minimum of class III with 4,500 psi concrete. All pipe with 20 to 30 feet of fill shall be class IV with 4,500 psi concrete. All pipe with 30 feet of fill and over shall be class V with 5,500 psi concrete. 
2.  Pipe shall have circumferential reinforcement as required for the particular class of pipe furnished. The bell and spigot of the joint shall contain circumferential and longitudinal reinforcement. Reinforced concrete pipe shall be centrifugally cast or vibrated, horizontally or vertically cast or made on a Packerhead machine and shall be furnished in lengths not more than 20 feet and not less than eight feet, except where short lengths are required for construction conditions. Reinforced concrete pipe shall have bell and spigot joints suitable for the use of a rubber gasket to be provided as a part of this item. 
3.  Concrete pipe for sanitary sewers shall have bell and spigot joints consisting of self-centering steel joint rings securely attached to the pipe reinforcing steel. The steel joint rings shall be suitable for use with a rubber O-ring type gasket to be provided as part of this item. 
4.  Bell and spigot joints consisting of self-centering steel joint rings shall have the joint rings securely attached to the pipe reinforcing steel. The rings, which form the joint, shall be made so that they will join with a close, sliding fit. The joint surfaces shall be such that the rubber gasket shall be confined on all sides and shall not support the weight of the pipe. The spigot ring shall have an external groove accurately sized to receive the gasket. Special section steel for spigot rings shall conform to ASTM A-283, Grade A, or ASTM A-306, Grade 50. The bell ring shall be flared to permit gradual deformation of the gasket when the joint is assembled. Minimum thickness of bell rings shall be 3/16 inch. Bell rings one-fourth-inch or thicker shall conform to ASTM A-283, Grade A, or ASTM A-306, Grade 50. Bells less than one-fourth-inch thick shall conform to ASTM A-570, Grade A. Each ring shall be precisely sized by expansion beyond the elastic limit of the steel and then gauged on an accurate template. All exposed surfaces of both rings shall be protected by a corrosion-resistant coating of zinc applied by an approved metalizing process after proper cleaning. 
5.  Exterior coating shall be as specified by the city. 
e.  Lining. 
1.  The interior concrete or mortar surfaces of pipe and fittings are to be sandblasted and painted with one coat of a high-build, coal tar epoxy system or two coats of a standard coal tar epoxy system. The dry film thickness of the total system shall be 16 mils minimum on concrete or mortar surfaces and on steel joint ring surfaces. 
2.  Sandblasting shall result in a clean dry surface free of oil, grease, or other contaminants. Any air pockets over one-fourth-inch in diameter and one-eighth-inch deep appearing on the concrete surface after sandblasting will be filled with an epoxy sand patching material such as those sold by Sherwin-Williams, Glidden, or Moran. The epoxy sand patch should be troweled prior to the application of the coal tar epoxy. 
3.  Any steel surfaces to be painted should be sandblasted, solvent cleaned, or wire brushed prior to painting. 
4.  Application of the coal tar epoxy shall be by brush, roller, or spray system using equipment recommended by the manufacturer of the coal tar epoxy system. The temperature during application and curing of coal tar epoxy shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the coal tar epoxy. Time between coats (if applicable) shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the coal tar epoxy. 
5.  If the inside joint recess will be mortared and painted with coal tar epoxy in the field, the pipe supplier shall not paint the inside vertical surfaces at the ends of the pipe. When the inside joints will not be mortared in the field, the pipe supplier shall paint the inside vertical concrete or mortar surfaces at each end of the pipe. 
6.  The paint shall be extended continuously over the front lip of the steel spigot ring and a minimum of two inches onto the sealing surface of unrestrained bell rings so that all interior joint surfaces which can be exposed to the fluid inside the pipe are coated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.8, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-545. - Manholes and accessories. 
All products and materials shall be new. Used or reconditioned products and materials are not acceptable and shall be removed from the site. The city reserves the right to disallow any manufacturer or supplier that does not have a consistent, long term record of quality control and successful product performance. 
(1)  Pre-cast manholes. Materials and manufacture shall conform to ASTM C478. All manholes shall be wet-precast and furnished by the same manufacture, unless otherwise approved by the city. All manholes shall comply with the Emerson Standard Manhole Details. 
a.  Riser sections. Four, five, or six feet in diameter as required, with reducer rings for base sections of diameters greater than four feet. 
b.  Top sections. Eccentric cone top for manholes deeper than 5½ feet; and flat top slabs for manholes 5½ feet or less in depth. Flat top slabs to be reinforced concrete, designed for HS-20 traffic loading in accordance with ASTM C890, with eccentric manhole opening. Concentric cone top sections are not allowed. 
c.  Base sections. Four, five, or six feet in diameter. Provide monolithically cast wall and bottom slab for all new sewers. Minimum height of bases shall be 48-inches, unless special manholes are required. Use precast dog-house section with poured-in-place bottom for manholes on existing sewers. 
d.  Steps. Polypropylene plastic reinforced by a one-half-inch diameter steel rod, ASTM A-615, Grade 60. Steps shall meet requirements of ASTM C478 and shall be installed by the manhole manufacturer. 
e.  Exterior coating. As specified by the city. 
(2)  Frames and covers. Equal to manhole frame and cover Model R-1736 or R-1777 by Neenah Foundry Co.; USF 363 DS by U.S. Foundry and Mfg. Corp.; or V-1480-1 by East Jordan Iron Works, Inc. Provide mud ring. Provide solid cover concealed pick holes and "CITY OF EMERSON SANITARY SEWER" lettering (or "WATER" lettering if used for a water system appurtenance). All manhole frames and covers for the project shall be furnished by a single manufacturer and shall not be delivered to site until submittals are approved by the city. 
a.  Vented cover. Only use when designated, identical to those provided for standard frames and covers, except that cover shall have six, equally spaced, drilled holes one-half-inch in diameter. Lettering same as for standard frame and cover. 
b.  Waterproof. Equal to Model R-1915-G2, Type P with bolted cover, by Neenah Foundry Company; USF 363 DS-BWT by U.S. Foundry and Mfg. Corp.; or V2480-1 by East Jordan Iron Works, Inc. Provide solid lid with four stainless steel bolts, one-eighth-inch neoprene single-piece gasket, and lettering same as for standard frame and cover. 
c.  Flat slab tops and manholes in unpaved areas. Frame shall be precast in the top slab or manhole cone. Covers shall be standard, vented or waterproof, as designated and lettering the same as for standard frame and cover. 
(3)  Joints. 
a.  Riser section joint seals. Butyl rubber rope equal to Ram-Nek, ConSeal CS-30R, or Kent-Seal No. 2 joint sealer. 
b.  Riser section external seals. Flat butyl rubber sheet not less than 1/16 -inch thick and six inches wide applied to the outside perimeter of the joint, Polywrap by RuVan Inc. or equal approved by the city. 
c.  Pipe-to-manhole connectors. Kor-N-Seal as manufactured by NPC Systems, Inc., or equal specifically approved by the city prior to shipment of manholes. 
(4)  Grout. Embeco 167 Mortar, or equal non-shrink mortar specifically approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.9, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-546. - Epoxy coating. 
For exterior coating, coal tar-epoxy hi-build tneme-tar epoxy by Tnemec or Bitumastic No. 300-M Hi-Build by Carboline applied in accordance with the coating manufacturer's recommendations or equal approved by the city shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.10, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-547. - Boring and jacking pipe. 
(a)  Casing pipe. Welded steel, smooth wall, un-coated pipe conforming to ATSM A139, Grade B shall be used, except that the hydrostatic test is not required. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specified on the drawings, casing wall thickness shall be 0.25-inch for 12-inch NPS and smaller, 0.375-inch for 14-inch NPS through 24-inch NPS, and 0.50-inch for 26-inch NPS and larger. 
(2)  Casings for railroad crossings shall be standard weight (STD) for sizes up to 24-inch NPS and Extra Strong (XH) Weight for 24-inch NPS and larger. 
(3)  Diameter shall be NPS size as indicated on the drawings. 
(4)  Pipe shall be furnished with beveled ends for field butt-welding. 
(b)  Carrier pipe. Ductile iron pipe with push-on joints, conforming to other sections of these specifications, as applicable, except that carrier pipe 24-inch diameter or less shall have Field-Lok Gaskets by U.S. Pipe or Fast Grip Gaskets by American Cast Iron Pipe Co. 
(c)  Casing spacers. Type 304 stainless steel spacers with PVC liners and abrasion resistant, low friction polymer runners. Center restrained type, as manufactured by Cascade Waterworks Mfg. Co., PowerSeal Type 304, the BWM Co. Model SS, or Advance Products and Systems, Inc. (Two spacers per pipe joint). 
(d)  End seals. Flexible Rubber End Seal by Maloney, or an equal approved by the city shall be used, and all stainless steel hardware. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.11, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-548. - Bedding and backfill. 
(a)  Bedding and backfill material shall be subject to approval of the city. For approval of imported backfill or bedding material, give at least five working days' advance notice of intent to import material and designate the proposed borrow area. Allow the city's testing laboratory to sample as necessary from the borrow area for the purpose of making acceptance tests to prove the quality of the material. 
(b)  Native material suitable for backfill. Soils excavated on-site which do not contain unsuitable material as defined herein may be approved for general backfill. Excessively wet or dry soils may not be used until moisture is adjusted to optimum level to permit proper compaction. 
(c)  Granular material for bedding and embedding or initial backfill. An approved manufactured aggregate or coarse-grained, clean soil which are classified as Class IA, IB, or II soils per ASTM D2321 shall be used. Acceptable materials which may be approved include sand, chert, crushed stone, gravel, or mixture of these, all of which meets the requirements of ASTM C33 for coarse aggregate, or Graded Size No. 57 stone, all free of unsuitable material, may be acceptable for bedding, embedment or initial backfill. 
(d)  Stone (crushed stone or GAB) for trench bottom stabilization or backfill under pavement areas shall be used. Sound, durable crusher run rock, all of which passes a 1½-inch sieve, free of unsuitable material, graded 1½ inches down per GA DOT specifications. Graded Size No. 57 stone is not an acceptable alternative to crusher run rock. 
(e)  Unsuitable material includes any fine-grained soil, Group PT, OH, OL, CH, ML or MH, classified per ASTM D 2487, silt, highly organic soil, topsoil, roots, vegetable matter, trash, debris, asphalt, frozen or excessively wet soil, and stone or gravel larger than three inches in maximum dimension. Unsuitable material shall include any material with greater than five percent passing No. 200 sieve. 
(f)  Rock definition for trenching. For trenching, the term "rock" means any material which cannot be excavated with an excavator having a bucket curling force rated at not less than 33,000 pounds (Caterpillar 225B or equivalent). 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.12, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-549. - Wastewater lift stations. 
(a)  Lift stations serving two or more buildings. All wastewater lift stations installed in the city which serve two or more buildings shall be designed and constructed in strict conformity to the city standards defined below. Engineering plans shall be prepared for all wastewater lift stations, and such plans shall be approved by the city prior to construction. Following the construction and acceptance by the city of a wastewater lift station, title to the lift station shall be conveyed to the city. 
(b)  Lift stations serving a single building. Unless otherwise approved by the city, all wastewater lift stations serving a single building shall be owned, operated and maintained by the building owner. 
(c)  Minimum requirements. The following minimum requirements apply to wastewater lift stations: 
(1)  General. 
a.  Minimum pump size for pump stations shall be 150 GPM with ten HP motors. Lift stations shall utilize two submersible centrifugal pumps each having a capacity equal to the design flow. Provide a spare pump of identical capacity. 
b.  Lift stations having a capacity of 500 GPM or more shall be reviewed on an individual basis and may have requirements differing from those outlined herein. 
c.  Force mains shall be sized to provide a velocity of at least two feet per second. 
d.  The design shall allow for easy removal of any pump or equipment item without the need of shut-down of the entire lift station. 
e.  The design engineer should consult with the city after preliminary design data has been developed for information on approved pump manufacturers. The city reserves the right to review each application on an individual basis and to reject the use of non-approved manufacturers or designs. 
(2)  Submittals. 
a.  Lift station information. Submittal of construction plans shall include the following lift station information: 
1.  Capacity calculations. Use one GPM capacity per house on residential developments of less than 200 units, except that the minimum pump capacity shall be 150 GPM. 
2.  System head calculations, tabulated and plotted on the pump curve. Include a plot of force main velocity. 
3.  Standard drawings, details and specifications sufficient to ascertain compliance with these regulations. 
4.  Cycle time. Calculations showing determination of wet well volume and cycle time at design conditions. Wet well volume should be sufficient to provide a cycle time of no less than five minutes from a pump-on to the next pump-on time. 
5.  Storage volume. Calculations showing volume of storage available in the event of a power outage. The storage zone shall be delineated on plan and profile drawings of the sewer system. (See subsection (c)(4), standby power, of this section.) 
6.  Construction drawings and specifications in sufficient detail to ascertain compliance with this chapter. 
7.  Buoyancy computations showing that structures are protected against flotation. 
b.  Shop drawings. After construction plan approval but before purchasing any lift station equipment, shop drawings shall be submitted including the following information: 
1.  Manufacturer's catalog sheets, performance curves, installation drawings, specifications and list of options for the specific pump that is offered for approval. 
2.  Similar catalog data for controls, valves, hatches, yard hydrants, precast wet well and other manufactured items. 
c.  Certification. After installation and before placing the system into full operation, the work must be inspected by the developer's engineer who must then issue a certification to the city verifying that all work has been done in accordance with approved plans. After acceptance of the work by the city, a factory representative shall inspect and start up the system certifying rotation, capacity, amperage draw, lack of vibration and other standard check points. This certification shall state the beginning date of the warranty and include a copy of the warranty. The factory representative shall provide a minimum of four hours of training. 
d.  O&M manuals. On or before the date of start-up, five sets of factory O&M manuals shall be delivered to the city. These shall include the name of the purchaser, the serial numbers of pumps, detailed wiring schematics, telephone number and address for purchase of parts. 
(3)  Spare parts. Lift stations shall be supplied with a spare complete pump plus a complete set of the manufacturer's recommended spare parts. 
(4)  Standby power. 
a.  The minimum requirement for standby power for lift stations shall be that each station have a permanent in-place generator and shall have an automatic transfer switch. 
b.  Emergency standby power will be supplied by an on-site emergency generator. The generator shall be diesel powered with an automatic transfer switch and provisions for an automatic exercise cycle. 
(5)  Site requirements. 
a.  Flooding. Lift stations shall remain fully operational and accessible during the 25-year flood. All electrical controls shall be above the 100-year flood level. All motors and mechanical equipment shall be protected against physical damage from the 100-year flood. 
b.  Access road. Access roads shall be paved with a 12-foot wide surface of either concrete (four inches thick with wire mesh) or asphalt (six-inch Graded Aggregate Base plus two-inch Type E asphalt). Maximum grade shall be 20 percent. 
c.  Ownership. Both the lift station site and the access road right-of-way shall have ownership dedicated to the city, and this shall be indicated on the subdivision plat. The dedicated space for the lift station shall include sufficient space for parking of two trucks, plus turnaround, plus slope maintenance. The dedicated width on road right-of-way shall be 30 feet minimum. 
d.  Fencing. Lift station sites shall be fenced with a minimum of six-foot-high chain link fencing topped with three strands of barbed wire. Access gates shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width. The space inside the fencing shall be large enough to facilitate service vehicle access to the pumping station wet well and other facilities. A paved turn around area shall be provided whenever the access road length exceeds 200 feet or when the road grade exceeds ten percent. 
e.  Water supply. A metered water supply line (three-fourths-inch minimum size) shall be installed to the site, and a freeze-proof yard hydrant located near the wet well. The hydrant shall be equipped with a suitable backflow preventer. 
f.  Lighting. One pole-mounted, photocell controlled, 150-watt security light shall be installed. It shall be equipped with a manual on/off switch (located in the main control panel) to override the photocell control. 
g.  Screening. Where natural screening is not present to screen the site from view of residences, special plantings shall be installed to screen the site. 
h.  Ground covers. All unpaved ground areas inside the fence and extending four feet beyond the fence shall be treated with an herbicide and covered with a geotextile fabric, followed with a four-inch thick layer of No. 57 stone. The geotextile fabric shall be a non-woven polypropylene weighing eight oz./S.Y. with a minimum burst strength of 250 psi, such as Amoco type 4553 or equal. 
(6)  Design features. 
a.  Wet well volume. The wet well volume shall be sized to limit pump cycles to no more than four cycles per hour under worst conditions. 
b.  Ventilation. For wet wells, the minimum requirement shall be a single six-inch vent with stainless steel mesh screen designed for natural ventilation. Where conditions are conducive to formation of hazardous conditions (in the design engineer's opinion) then mechanical ventilation shall be provided. For dry wells, mechanical ventilation shall be required. 
c.  Structures. Submersible lift stations shall have a wet well structure and a separate valve pit. Both structures shall be precast concrete with a monolithic base. The valve pit shall be a minimum of four feet by four feet by five feet deep with manhole steps, and provided with a floor drain pipe, and a three-foot by three-foot lockable aluminum access hatch. Wet wells may be either round or rectangular and shall have a diameter or width of at least four feet. Wet wells shall be sized to meet cycle time requirements with a drawdown (i.e., the distance between high water level and low water level) of not more than 3.0 feet. The wet well shall have a lockable aluminum hatch large enough for easy removal of pumps. Riser sections in precast units shall be sealed watertight using two strands of mastic and a coating of mortar on the inside and outside of the structure. Structures shall be adequately reinforced for all loading conditions normally encountered during shipping, construction and service. All openings (for pipes, hatch, conduits) shall be either cast in place or neatly cut. Sewer pipe connections shall utilize rubber boot connectors, and be watertight. The wet well shall be equipped with an aluminum ladder. 
d.  Accessories. All materials inside the wet well and valve pit shall be corrosion resistant. Mechanical equipment requiring ferrous metals shall have a coal tar epoxy coating. Guide rails for pumps shall be stainless steel. Miscellaneous metals including fasteners shall be aluminum or stainless steel; anchor bolts shall be stainless steel. 
e.  Pressure gauge. A pressure gauge shall be installed on the force main downstream of the gate valves, inside the valve pit and visible from ground level. A corporation stop shall be installed on the tap to allow removal of the gauge. 
f.  Valves. The discharge pipe of each pump shall have a check valve followed by a gate valve before the two pipes join into a common force main. 
g.  Surge control valves. The pumping system shall be checked to determine if a surge control valve is required. If a valve is required, it shall be located within the valve pit on the common force main and a drain line installed to drain to the wet well. 
(7)  Pump features. Pumps shall have the following features: 
a.  Non-clog impeller. 
b.  Be capable of passing a three-inch sphere. 
c.  Be capable of dry operation without overheating. 
d.  Have dual mechanical seals with seal leak indicator light in the control panel. 
e.  Pump and motor casings shall be cast iron, and all fasteners shall be stainless steel. 
f.  Motor shall be selected to be non-overloading under all operating conditions. 
g.  Motor winding shall have a heat sensor with auto reset to prevent overheating; three-phase motors shall have two sensors. 
h.  Operating speed of the pump shall not exceed 1,800 rpm without special approval. 
i.  Motor shall have upper and lower roller bearings. 
j.  The pump shall be automatically connected to the discharge connection elbow when lowered into place, and shall be easily removed for inspection or service. There shall be no need for personnel to enter pump well. Sealing of the pumping unit to the discharge connection elbow shall be accomplished by a simple linear downward motion of the pump. Each pump shall be equipped with a chain (of aluminum or other non-corrosive material) for easy removal. 
(8)  Force main. 
a.  The force main shall be sized for a minimum velocity of two feet per second with one pump operating. 
b.  Force mains shall be ductile iron pipe. 
c.  The force main profile shall slope continuously upward where practical. If high points occur where air could be trapped in the pipe, then an air release valve (of the type made for sewage applications) will be installed (in a manhole) at the high points. 
(9)  Electrical. 
a.  Lift station controls and electrical components shall be factory-wired in completely weatherproof stainless steel metal cabinets (NEMA 4X stainless steel). The cabinet shall be provided with condensate heaters. Spare fuses of each type that is used in the electrical/control system shall be furnished. 
b.  A main circuit breaker shall be installed to disconnect power to the entire station. 
c.  Three phase power will be provided for all motors. 
d.  Protection against voltage surge and loss of a phase shall be provided. 
e.  The factory-wired panel shall be equipped with a ground bus and neutral bus. The terminal shall be suitable for either aluminum or copper wire. All internal panel wiring shall be copper. 
f.  Motors shall be suitable for either 230-volt or 460-volt operation. A design engineer shall consult with the power company provider to verify specifics pertaining to electrical power availability. 
g.  Wet well level shall be controlled by four sealed mercury tube float switches. All floats shall be provided with a minimum of 25 feet of Type SJO flexible cord and shall be attached to a bracket mounted at the top of the wet well. Float functions shall be as follows: 

 
h.  The pump control system shall include the following features: 
1.  Lead pump/lag pump alternator. 
2.  Alarm light and horn to indicate high water level. 
3.  Seal failure indicating light. 
4.  Pump failure indicating light. 
5.  Condensate heater. 
6.  Lead pump selector switch. 
7.  Hand-off-auto (H-O-A) switch and run light for each pump. 
8.  Control voltage shall be 120V. 
9.  Wiring shall be neatly tied and number coded to facilitate maintenance. A schematic diagram shall be furnished with the panel. 
10.  A 120V. GFCI type electrical receptacle shall be located at the control panel. 
11.  Pump stations will be equipped with a remote transmitting unit and telemetering circuitry connecting to the city's SCADA system. The design engineer should consult the city for specific requirements at the beginning of design. 
(10)  Flow measuring. 
a.  Influent flow. An influent flow meter acceptable to the city shall be installed. 
1.  The meter shall be connected to the SCADA system for monitoring 
2.  A graph recorder shall be installed for backup purposes. 
b.  Effluent flow. An effluent flow meter acceptable to the city shall be installed. 
1.  The meter shall be connected to the SCADA system for monitoring 
2.  A graph recorder shall be installed for backup purposes. 
(11)  Warranty. Regardless of the manufacturer's warranty terms, the developer will be responsible for all repairs necessary within one year from the date the station is completed and approved by the city. The developer will be required to furnish such assurances to the city as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure prompt action. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.13, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-550. - Food establishment interceptors. 
(a)  Required. All proposed or remodeled food service facilities connected to the city sanitary sewer system shall be required to install an approved properly operated and maintained grease interceptor. All interceptors shall be installed outdoors of the building unless the user can demonstrate that an outdoor interceptor would not be feasible. Final determination shall be at the city's discretion. 
(b)  Design. Design standards are minimum requirements. It shall be the responsibility of the user/owner/generator to install properly sized interceptors to ensure compliance with the city sewer use ordinance. Interceptors shall be designed in accordance with ASTM C1613. 
(c)  Size. The minimum size for a grease interceptor shall be 750 gallons. 
(d)  Plan submittals. In addition to those items required in section 100 the following shall be provided for sites with grease interceptors: 
(1)  Site plan showing the connection to the sewer system, including test manhole. 
(2)  Interior layout plan showing square footage and all equipment, tables, plumbing fixtures, number of seats, etc. 
(3)  A manifest from the cleaning company, if there is an existing interceptor. 
(4)  An inspection report certifying the interceptor is in operational condition, if there is an existing interceptor. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.14, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-551. - Automotive repair facility interceptors; requirements. 
(a)  Automotive repair facilities, which include a floor drain in its areas of operation, shall be required to design, install and maintain an interceptor for proper removal of grit, sand, oil, and grease from the wastewater. Shops that routinely wash the interior of the building and/or store cars where fluids discharge onto the grounds may, at the city's discretion, be required to install an interceptor. 
(b)  Parking garages in which servicing, repairing, or washing is not conducted, and in which gasoline is not dispensed, shall not require an interceptor. 
(c)  An interceptor is not required for the drainage areas of commercial garages utilized only for storage of automobiles. 
(d)  Design. Design standards are minimum requirements. It shall be the responsibility of the user/owner/generator to install properly sized interceptors to ensure compliance with the city sewer use ordinance. 
(e)  Sizing. 50 gallons for the first 100 square feet of area to be drained is required, plus one cubic foot (7½ gals.) for each additional 100 square feet of area to be drained into the interceptor. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.15, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-552. - Car wash facility interceptors; requirements. 
(a)  Car wash facilities, including detail shops utilizing hand-wash practices, are required to install interceptors. 
(b)  Design. Design standards are minimum requirements. It shall be the responsibility of the user/owner/generator to install properly sized interceptors to ensure compliance with the city sewer use ordinance. 
(c)  Wash racks must be constructed to eliminate or minimize the impact of runoff from rain/storm events. Minimum requirements are roofed structures with at least two walls and appropriate grading to prevent stormwater infiltration into the sanitary sewer. 
(d)  Minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons for the first bay is required, with an additional 500 gallons of capacity for every other bay. 
(e)  An effluent sampling well shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.16, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-553. - Gas station interceptors. 
(a)  Required. All new gas stations shall be required to install interceptors in fueling areas. Fueling areas must be constructed to eliminate or minimize the impact of runoff from rain/storm events. Minimum requirements are roofed structures and appropriate grading to prevent stormwater infiltration into the sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Design. Design standards are minimum requirements. It shall be the responsibility of the user/owner/generator to install properly sized interceptors to ensure compliance with the city sewer use ordinance. 
(c)  Minimum capacity. Minimum capacity of 500 gallons for the first 1,000 square feet of area to be drained is required, plus 250 gallons for each additional 1,000 square feet of area to be drained. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.17, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-554. - Laundry interceptors; applications, design requirements. 
(a)  Typical applications include commercial/institutional laundromats and dry-cleaners. The waste discharge from these facilities usually contains high quantities of lint, silt, dissolved and suspended solids, as well as detergents. 
(b)  A lint interceptor is commonly referred to as a "lint trap," typically located outside of the building and buried below grade. The principal advantage is the cooling effect obtained by the earth. The buried interceptor is typically constructed of precast concrete, providing years of continuous service. The interceptor contains several compartments where the lint will coagulate and float to the surface and heavier solids will sink to the bottom. The discharging effluent comprises of the clearer water between these layers. 
(c)  Design standards are minimum requirements. It shall be the responsibility of the user/owner/generator to install properly sized interceptors to ensure compliance with the city sewer use ordinance. 
(d)  Inlet and outlet piping shall be a minimum of four inches or the size of the building sewer whichever is greater. In traffic areas, the trap shall be designed to have adequate reinforcement and cover (including piping), meeting HS-20 traffic loading specifications. Lint traps in traffic areas require a concrete driving surface over piping with structural backfill around piping. Effluent sample wells are required. 
(e)  The different variables include number of washing machines, wastewater flow rate, wastewater detention time, and storage factor and detention time. Commercial laundries, laundromats, and dry-cleaners shall be equipped with an interceptor in order to reduce the quantity of lint and silt that enters the collection system. The system must be of adequate size and design to allow for cool-down of wastewater so that separation can be more readily achieved. In addition, the interceptor must be "equipped with a wire basket or similar device, removable for cleaning, that prevents passage into the drainage system of solids 0.5-inch (12.7 mm) or larger in size, string, rags, buttons or other materials detrimental to the public sewerage system." (1003.6 International Plumbing Code 2003). Sizing must be in accordance with guidance found in the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), Appendix H which uses the following formula: 
(TGC) x (CPH) x (RT) x (ST) = Size of Lint Interceptor (gallons) 
Where: 
TGC = Total Gallons per Cycle; 
CPH = Cycles per hour; 
RT = Retention time; 
2.5 for Institutional Laundry; 
2.0 for Standard Commercial Laundry; 
1.5 for Light Commercial Laundry; 
ST = Storage Factor, based on hours of operation; 
1.0 for eight hours of operation; 
1.5 for 12 or more hours. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.18, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-555. - Other interceptors. 
The city may require interceptors for other establishments outside those listed herein. The city reserves the right to require the installation of an interceptor if it is determined to be in the best interest of the city and the utility. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 403.19, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-556—105-573. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION METHODS 

Sec. 105-574. - Licensing and safety. 
All contractors who work on sewer systems that will be owned by the city must be licensed in accordance with state law and local ordinance. Compliance with applicable safety regulations is the responsibility of each company engaged in the work; the city assumes no responsibility for the actions of others on the job site. It is the responsibility of those installing sanitary sewers, lift stations and related appurtenances to conform to OSHA regulations, 29 CFR part 1926, subpart P, paragraph 1926.650 through 1926.653. Publications from OSHA can be obtained by contacting OSHA Publications Distribution, Washington, D.C. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-575. - Trenching, backfilling and compaction. 
(a)  Preparation. The following steps are included in preparation: 
(1)  Strip and properly stockpile all sod and topsoil suitable for reuse in restoration. Protect until use. 
(2)  Remove pavement only as necessary for excavating the trench and installing the pipelines and appurtenances. Cut all asphalt pavement in straight, uniform lines by means of a jack hammer or suitable pavement cutter. Cut all concrete pavements to a depth of at least two inches along the cut line with a rotary saw, after which the pavement may be broken with a jack hammer or suitable pavement cutter. 
(3)  Determine location of existing utilities (underground and overhead utility lines, poles, pipes, services, structures, etc.) and mark them in advance of trenching operations. Furnish and have available at all times an electronic pipe detector in working order, and use said detector to survey the proposed path of excavation. Excavate and expose underground utilities in test pits to verify the locations, depths, and materials of construction. Notify the city of potential conflicts and presence of cathodic protected facilities. No extra compensation will be given for manual excavation required to locate, protect or restore underground utilities. 
(b)  Trench excavation. The following steps are included in excavation: 
(1)  Excavate all subsurface material within the trenching limits specified regardless of the material encountered, including rock. Excavated materials satisfying the requirements of this section for native material suitable for backfill may be used for final backfill. Remove surplus excavated material and unsuitable materials from the job site. 
(2)  Do not excavate in areas of excessive groundwater until sufficient de-watering equipment, in good working order, is available at the site. In all cases, continuously remove water accumulated in trenches prior to installing bedding or laying pipes. Provide de-watering by pumping or well-pointing, as determined by the contractor, as required to achieve dry ditches and continuously maintain a water level two feet below the trench bottom. All water pumped, bailed, or otherwise removed from the excavation shall be conveyed to a suitable discharge point and disposed of in a manner that neither violates regulatory requirements nor causes injury to public health, property, work completed, work in progress, or creates a public nuisance of any type. 
(3)  Excavate the banks of trenches vertical from bottom of trench to one foot above the top of the pipe or conduit. 
(4)  Keep the trench width within the limits specified below; however, OSHA safety requirements shall supersede the requirements stated herein whenever applicable and shall be followed: 
a.  Maximum trench width at top of pipe. Pipe outside diameter (O.D.) plus 24 inches. If the maximum trench width is exceeded, the required bedding must be upgraded to the next higher class, at the contractor's expense, for that part of the trench that exceeds the maximum allowable width. 
b.  Minimum width of trench. O.D. of bell or coupling plus 16 inches. (This minimum applies to all trenches including those in rock excavation.) 
(5)  Place excavated material (spoil) sufficiently back from the edge of trench to prevent caving of the trench wall and to permit safe access along the trench. Provide at least three feet clear from toe of spoil bank on at least one side of trench for access. Do not endanger the workers, the public, or obstruct roadways or sidewalks. Comply with OSHA trench safety standards at all times. 
(6)  Do not excavate more than 400 feet in advance of pipe laying. Unless prior approval is obtained from the city, limit the length of open trench to that which can be completed in one working day. 
(7)  Do not leave trenches open overnight unless there are extenuating circumstances approved by the city, and the excavations are fully protected by safe and effective barricades, fencing and lights. Provide precast concrete barriers equal to those specified by Georgia DOT Standard Specifications, Section 622. 
(8)  Where necessary, and as required by OSHA regulations, provide and install sufficient and suitably sized movable trench boxes, shields, sheeting, shoring and/or bracing which shall remain in place until the backfill has proceeded to a point where it can be removed safely. When damage is liable to result from withdrawing sheeting, it shall remain in place. Movable shields, sheeting, shoring, bracing, etc. are considered as an integral part of the work and no extra payment will be allowed. 
(9)  Where necessary to place excavated material or spoil on paved streets or parking lots, first provide a thick underlayment of straw matting on the pavement to receive excavated material or spoil. Sweep the pavement clean upon removal of the excavated material or spoil. 
(10)  Remove rock encountered in trench excavation for the specified minimum width of the trench (but not less than 30-inch width) and to a depth of six inches below the invert of the pipe. 
(11)  Obtain all required permits for handling explosives and performing blasting. Conduct blasting operations in strict accordance with all existing ordinances and regulations and only with the prior approval of the city. Carefully protect all exposed structures from the effects of blast and cover all blasts with heavy timbers, mats or other suitable protection. Blasting shall be done only by licensed personnel. Use very light charges to prevent damage to adjacent structures. Promptly repair any damage. Store all blasting supplies in accordance with local ordinances. In no case shall caps or other explosives be kept at the place where dynamite or other explosives are stored. 
(12)  As trenching approaches existing underground utilities, perform excavation with extreme care. Perform necessary removals, relocations, or relaying of pipes, utility lines, and appurtenances which will obstruct the work. Provide temporary support, adequate protection, and maintenance of all underground and surface utilities, drains, structures, or other obstructions encountered. 
(13)  Promptly correct damage to existing utilities or structures caused by construction activities. Promptly restore disrupted utility service and provide a condition at least equal to the original condition before the damage occurred. Should the contractor fail to promptly restore service or correct damage, the city or utility companies may correct the damage and back-charge the contractor for costs incurred for the required corrective work. 
(14)  Where existing storm drains or culverts are damaged or destroyed by removal to facilitate trenching and pipe laying, replace the damaged or destroyed drains or culverts with new reinforced concrete pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM Designation C76-04, Class II. Drain pipe shall be equal to that removed except sizes smaller than 12 inches which shall be replaced with 12-inch pipe. 
(15)  If trench subgrade is found to contain unsuitable or potentially corrosive material, such as ashes, cinders, refuse, petroleum contaminated soil or organic matter, immediately stop trenching and pipe installation until further notice and notify the city. PVC pipe will not be suitable where susceptible to permeation by certain organic contaminants and shall be replaced by ductile iron pipe. Undercut and remove all unsuitable or potentially corrosive material at least six inches below the trench bottom and replace with granular bedding material. 
(c)  Bedding and embedment. The following requirements are to be included for bedding and embedment: 
(1)  Bedding and embedment shall conform to the individual requirements for the pipe or conduit material being used. Refer to the city standard details for bedding/embedment details. Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings, bedding shall be: 
a.  PVC sanitary sewers: Class B. 
b.  DIP sanitary sewers: Class C. 
c.  PVC water pipe: Class C. 
d.  DIP water pipe: Class D. 
e.  Plastic storm sewer: Class C. 
f.  RCP or CMP storm sewer: Class D. 
(2)  Grade the trench bottom to provide a firm, uniform, and continuous bearing all along the entire length of the barrel of the pipe. Excavate bell holes no larger than necessary to allow joint assembly and to ensure that the pipe barrel will lie flat on the trench bottom. Pipe bells or couplings shall not support any load. Where trench excavation is carried below or beyond required limits, backfill the over-excavated space with specified bedding material. 
(3)  In areas of rock excavation, and where needed in other areas, provide compacted Granular Bedding Material cushion across the full width of the excavation to a minimum six-inch depth under the pipe, fittings, valves, manholes, or other structures. 
(4)  Whenever the subgrade is unstable or too soft to provide a satisfactory foundation for any pipe, de-water and undercut as necessary and stabilize with stone. Compact and bring the trench bottom to proper grade to create a firm, unyielding stabilized subgrade for bedding material and/or pipe. 
(d)  Backfill. The following steps are included in backfilling: 
(1)  General. Backfill and compact all trenches and excavations immediately after the pipe or appurtenance has been installed. 
(2)  Initial backfill and embedment. Place select backfill around haunches of the pipe and appurtenance by hand placement and compaction, from the trench bottom up to the springline of the pipe. Place embedment materials by methods that will not disturb or damage the pipe. Continue initial embedment of the pipe to at least six inches above the pipe crown or to the dimensions shown on the bedding detail. Use no stone larger than three-fourths-inch maximum dimension in the embedment. Compact the initial backfill and embedment firmly and evenly, but without use of mechanical compactors. 
(3)  Remaining or final backfill. Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings, use excavated native material suitable for backfill for the final, or general backfilling. If sufficient suitable native material suitable for general backfill is not available on site, furnish sufficient and suitable borrow material from an approved source. Place backfill from top of initial backfill up to the trench surface as described herein. Do not place rocks larger than 12 inches in maximum dimension in the upper layer of backfill unless otherwise approved by the city. 
a.  Trenches in streets, pavements, driveways (paved or unpaved), in areas to be paved, and in areas beneath proposed structures. Backfill above the initial backfill with crusher run stone. Place the stone backfill to achieve six-inch compacted layers at 95 percent standard proctor density. Use mechanical tamping to achieve the required compaction. In paved roadways also install and compact the specified pavement base material to the required thickness as shown on the pavement replacement detail. Install a temporary traffic surface at grade consisting of two inches compacted depth of crushed stone or pug mix. Leave backfilled trench open to traffic and maintain the surface at a uniform grade by refilling with stone and re-compacting as necessary to remedy any settlement. Continue such maintenance, including dust control, until surface paving is authorized by the city. 
b.  Trenches in drainage ditches or other areas subject to erosion. Unless otherwise specified, backfill trenches with native material suitable for backfill and mechanically compact in six-inch layers to achieve 95 percent standard proctor density per ASTM D698. Refill and re-compact eroded or settled trenches as often as necessary to restore and maintain the surface at the required finished grade. Immediately stabilize the surface against erosion. 
c.  Trenches in areas to be grassed or landscaped. Unless otherwise specified, backfill trenches with native material suitable for backfill and compact by methods of the contractor's choice to achieve at least 85 percent standard proctor density per ASTM D698. However, if the trench is on DOT or railroad rights-of-way, compact to the density specified in the applicable permit. Refill and re-compact settled trenches as often as necessary to restore and maintain the trench surface at the required finished grade. 
(e)  Field quality control. The following steps are included in field quality control: 
(1)  Perform routine quality control compaction testing at a frequency sufficient to ensure adequate compaction throughout the trenching and backfilling. 
(2)  In streets, paved areas, or areas to be paved, perform compaction testing of the underlying backfill prior to placing pavement base material. 
(3)  Notify the testing laboratory and the city 24 hours prior to need for testing. 
(4)  When any tests indicate the density, moisture content, or compaction does not meet requirements specified herein, as determined by the city, rework until the required density has been obtained and approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-576. - Rock excavation. 
Drilling and blasting operations shall be conducted with due regard for the safety of persons and property in the vicinity and in strict conformity with requirements of all ordinances, laws and regulations governing blasting and the use of explosives. Rock excavation near existing pipelines or other structures shall be conducted with the utmost care to avoid damage. Injury or damage to other structures and properties are the sole responsibility of the installation contractor and shall be promptly repaired by the contractor to the satisfaction of the city and property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-577. - Installation of sewer pipe. 
Construction stake-out will be required prior to construction of sewer lines. As a minimum, the horizontal alignment will be staked at 100-foot intervals and each manhole will be located with a centerline stake and two offset hubs. Cuts to invert elevations will be shown for each manhole entry and exit pipe. A copy of the stake-out notes will be provided to the city. 
(1)  Preparation. Provide 48-hour notice to the city prior to the start of any sanitary sewer installation. Provide construction stake out and verify inverts. Examine all pipe and fittings. Mark damaged pipe and fittings in such a manner that identification is permanent and easily recognizable. Immediately remove such pipe and fittings from the job site. 
(2)  Installation of pipe and fittings. 
a.  Unload, store, lay, joint and backfill all pipes and fittings in strict accordance with the manufacturer's printed instructions and recommendations. 
b.  Carefully examine all pipe and fittings for cracks or other defects before being lowered into the trench. Remove all damaged pipe, fittings or other material from the site immediately and properly discard. 
c.  Carefully grade the bottom of the trench and excavate bell holes. Lay each pipe to the line and grade shown on the drawings, or as directed by the city. Accuracy of the finished line and grade of the pipe shall be obtained in the preparation of the trench bottom. Do not lay pipe on blocking of any kind. Where finished work does not conform to the specified grades and inverts, adjust the grades as required. Lay pipe only in dry trenches. Provide de-watering as specified elsewhere in this manual. 
d.  Lay pipe upgrade with the spigots pointing downwards. (No exceptions will be allowed.) All pipes shall be straight and show a uniform grade between manholes. 
e.  Take special care that each spigot is properly centered in the bell of the preceding pipe and that each pipe is solidly bedded so that settlement does not occur. 
f.  Thoroughly clean the joint surfaces and apply jointing material as recommended by the pipe manufacturer. After each join is made, check for proper position prior to installation of next length of pipe. 
g.  Keep the interior of the pipe clear of all debris and superfluous material of every description as the work progresses. When the pipe laying is suspended, either at night or at other times, close the end of the pipe with a watertight plug. 
h.  Any pipe which has its alignment, grade, or joints disturbed after installation shall be taken up, re-laid, and re-tested. 
i.  All PVC sewers shall have minimum three feet of cover. Filling over the pipe to obtain minimum cover is not allowed. 
(3)  Connection to existing facilities. 
a.  Make connections of pipe or laterals to manholes or other structures by means of mechanical coring and installation of watertight flexible gaskets (boots) as specified elsewhere in this article . 
b.  The bypassing or spillage of raw wastewater onto the ground or into waters of the state is prohibited. 
(4)  Water main separation. Use special precautions to maintain minimum separation distances between sewer and any existing or proposed water main. 
a.  Where practical, maintain a minimum vertical separation of 18 inches between the outside of any water main and the outside of the sewer. Arrange the crossing so that the sewer joints will be equidistant and as far as possible from the water main joints. Where a sewer pipe must cross a water main, provide adequate structural support and protection for the water main to prevent damage. 
b.  To the maximum extent practical, maintain at least ten feet of horizontal separation between the sewer and any existing or proposed water main. Under no circumstances shall the sewer and a water main be laid in the same trench. 
c.  Where proposed sewer unavoidably conflicts with an existing water main, relocate the water main to maintain at least 18 inches of vertical separation under or over the sewer. Reconstruct the conflicting water main with ductile iron pipe or copper pipe, 18 feet minimum length, centered at the sewer. Coordinate all water main relocation with the water system's owner and perform all water main reconstruction in strict conformance with water system requirements. 
d.  Notify the city immediately upon encountering field conditions that do not allow at least 18-inch vertical and/or ten-foot horizontal separation between sewer and any existing or proposed water main. Where it is not possible to obtain at least 18-inch vertical separation, install an 18-foot length of DIP pressure pipe for the sewer centered on the water main, or, as an alternate, encase the sewer in concrete. 
(5)  Utility tracer system for all PVC or other non-ferrous sewers. 
a.  For all PVC or other non-ferrous sewers, provide continuous parallel tracer consisting of insulated 12-gauge copper wire. Place wire with the initial backfill one foot above the pipe and continuing uninterrupted around manholes. Provide connection to any aboveground appurtenances so that the sewer can be located with a pipe detector after backfilling. Splice with electrical tape to provide 100 percent equivalent insulation. 
b.  Also provide a continuous non-biodegradable plastic tape six inches by 0.004 inch with the words: "Caution Sewer Pipe." Place the tape in the trench directly above the pipe and between 18 inches and 24 inches below finished grade. 
(6)  Installation of service laterals (applies to laterals in the street and to laterals on private property). 
a.  Install laterals in the same manner as sewer main with the same bedding and backfill as specified for the main sewer in with the standard detail for sewer service lateral. 
b.  Install wyes and laterals in the street, or in easements, at the same time that the main sewer is installed. Install street laterals to the edge of right-of-way, to the edge of easement, or four feet from main sewer, whichever is the greater distance. 
c.  Temporarily plug and protect the upstream end of all street laterals at the edge of the right-of-way or at the tie-in point for testing. Install a temporary, watertight plug with "O" ring gaskets at each opening. 
d.  Services laterals shall not be extended and connected to any building sewer until street lateral construction has been completed to the edge of the street right-of-way, tested, and approved. 
e.  Lay all laterals to a uniform line and at grades specified or required by local plumbing codes. No service lateral shall be covered until it has been inspected and measured by the city. 
f.  Provide an approved non-biodegradable plastic tape six inches by .004 inch with the words "Caution Sewer Pipe." Place the tape in the trench directly over the service lateral between 18 inches and 24 inches below finish grade. 
g.  Install wyes at 45 degrees up from the horizontal except where the city directs otherwise. 
h.  For sewers eight feet or more in depth, connect the service with tee with a vertical riser, rather than a wye, as shown on the standard detail. Use 45 degree or less bends in all cases. No 90-degree bends will be permitted. 
i.  For service laterals on private property, provide clean-outs at each change of grade or direction, at edge of right-of-way, as detailed on the drawings, and at intervals required by the local plumbing code. 
(7)  Sewer maintenance. Protect all sewers, manholes, laterals and cleanouts from damage and maintain sewers free from debris and siltation until final acceptance. 
(8)  Site clean-up and restoration. Remove any and all material not used (including excess excavation and rock) and rubbish of every character from the job site. Restore all items disturbed by the construction to their original condition as soon as possible after disturbance and maintain the site until final acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-578. - Railroad crossings. 
All railroad crossing shall conform to the requirements of the American Railway Engineering Association Manual for Railway Engineering, Part 5. The contractor shall secure permission from the railroads to schedule the work so as not to interfere with the operation of the railroads. The contractor shall be held responsible for any delays or damages occurring to the railroads. The contractor will furnish the railroad with such additional insurance as may be required, cost of same to be borne by the contractor, together with the costs for flagmen, watchmen, temporary work of any nature, safety devices and any other items that may be imposed by the railroad. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-579. - Highway crossings. 
All construction work in the state highway right-of-way shall be approved by the state department of transportation. The developer shall be responsible for obtaining encroachment permits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-580. - Stream crossings. 
(a)  The preferred method of crossing a river, stream, creek, impoundments, or wet weather ditch is with a minimum of six inches of cover between the lowest point in the stream and the top of outside diameter of the pipe. Ductile iron pipe is required for all stream crossings and shall extend a minimum of ten feet beyond the top of bank on each side. Concrete collars or encasement must be provided at all joints for ductile iron pipe with less than three feet of cover. The stream bed and sides at the crossing site shall be protected from erosion with the use of rip rap, as defined and sized in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Appendix C, Construction Materials, 1992 or most current edition. 
(b)  Aerial crossings will require detailed plans and will be allowed only when, in the city's opinion, there is no reasonable alternative. 
(c)  Erosion control measures shall be installed prior to installing pipe across any stream. All work should be performed when stream flows are at their lowest, and all work should be performed as quickly and safely as possible. As soon as conditions permit, the streambed shall be cleared of all falsework, debris, and other obstructions placed therein or caused by the construction operations. 
(d)  Erosion control measures can include, but are not limited to, the following items: 
(1)  Silt fencing, types A, B, and/or C. 
(2)  Erosion control check dams. 
(3)  Channel diversion through temporary storm drain pipe. 
(4)  Rock filter dams. 
The construction and installation of these various structures are detailed in the Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia or the state department of transportation standards and construction details, both of which are available for purchase by the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.7, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-581. - Boring and jacking. 
(a)  Preparation. Remove pavement only as necessary for excavating bore pit and installing the casing and pipeline appurtenances. Cut all asphalt pavements in straight, uniform lines by means of a jackhammer or suitable pavement cutter. Cut concrete pavements to a depth of at least two inches along the cut line with a rotary saw, after which the pavement may be broken with a jack hammer or suitable pavement cutter. 
(b)  Techniques of construction. Unless otherwise specified, the construction techniques (for whichever method of installation is used) shall be the contractor's choice. However, the work must be performed using generally accepted, and safe, construction procedures using adequate equipment, by experienced workmen, and in conformance with applicable permit requirements and all federal, state, and local laws. 
(c)  Installation by open cut method. Use the open-cut method for crossing a roadway or stream only when specifically shown on the drawings or directed by the city when permission has been obtained from the governing authority for a specific highway or roadway crossing. 
(1)  Cut pavement and excavate trenches in accordance with this article. Provide suitable sheeting and bracing where necessary. Keep the work de-watered at all times. 
(2)  The bottom of the trench shall be evenly graded to a depth of approximately six inches below the bottom of the casing in order to accommodate bedding materials. Bedding material shall be compacted crushed stone. 
(3)  Accurately lay the casing pipe on the prepared bed to the alignment and grade indicated and securely block in place to prevent movement during the succeeding phase of the backfilling operation. 
(4)  Backfill over the casing shall conform to requirements for casings and pipelines under pavement, or shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of DOT permits, whichever are more stringent. 
(5)  Pavement replacement shall conform to the requirements herein, but shall not be less than applicable DOT requirements unless specific written approval is received. 
(6)  Make all arrangements for diversion of traffic and control of traffic during the making of the crossing, all in accordance with the requirements described herein. 
(7)  In the event that open-cut road crossings cannot be completed in one day, cover the open section of trench with steel plates of such size and thickness as to safely withstand heavy traffic over the trench and remain in place under such heavy traffic. 
(d)  Installation by boring and jacking method. Use the boring and jacking method where a crossing is designated on the drawings, unless open-cut is specified or directed by the city. The boring-and-jacking method of installation of casing for the carrier pipe shall be a dry operation without use of hydraulic jetting to soften, loosen or sluice away the material to be excavated. 
(1)  Excavate suitable bore pits or trenches suitable sheeting and bracing where necessary. Keep the work de-watered at all times. Provide suitable traffic signs, barricades, and lights for protection of all open excavations and to conform to all permit conditions. 
(2)  Excavate and remove whatever material is encountered in the bore pit and boring excavation, including rock, and extend excavation no farther than two feet ahead of the casing pipe. 
(3)  Limit minimum diameter of the boring excavation to the outside diameter of the casing pipe as closely as practical. 
(4)  Remove excavated material from the boring as the excavation progresses. Accumulation of excavated material within the casing pipe will not be permitted. 
(5)  Should appreciable loss of ground occur as a result of boring and jacking operations, immediately fill the voids with soil cement using a one part cement to five parts granular soil ratio. Mix and place the soil cement as rapidly as possible after loss of ground. 
(6)  If blasting operations are required, apply for and obtain all required permits for handling explosives and performing blasting operations. The use of explosives on a state or interstate highway right-of-way is prohibited unless approved in writing by the city and authorized by a separate DOT blasting permit obtained by the contractor. 
(e)  Alignment and grade. 
(1)  Install casing pipe at the location and grade shown on the drawings. Variations in the installed position of the casing from the line and grade shown on the drawings will be permitted only if approved by the city. However, the contractor shall be responsible for any costs of related realignment of pipelines that may result from misaligned casings. 
(2)  If site conditions are suitable, leave casing pipe exposed at both ends until inspected and approved by the city and DOT or railroad inspector. Otherwise, provide temporary backfill, then re-excavate and expose both ends for inspection when requested to do so. 
(3)  Assist the city in obtaining a dimensioned as-built drawing showing horizontal and vertical location of both ends of the casing. 
(4)  Fill all abandoned casings with sand and plug ends with masonry or concrete at least 12 inches in depth or by welded steel plate. 
(f)  Welding. Steel casing pipe shall be field-butt welded by experienced welders generally according to AWWA C206, section 5, Welding-Procedure Details. Field joints shall be continuous, circumferential welded to result in a joint meeting the minimum strength requirements of the base metals and which is completely watertight. 
(g)  Installation of carrier pipe. 
(1)  Notify the city at least two days prior to installation of the carrier pipe and obtain the city's approval prior to proceeding with sealing and backfilling. Install carrier pipe only in the presence of the city. 
(2)  Provide a minimum of two stainless steel spacers per section of pipe. Mount spacers and install pipe in strict accordance with the manufacturer's written instructions. 
(3)  After inspection by the city, seal casing ends against entrance of foreign material by means of flexible rubber end seal. 
(4)  Installation, testing, and disinfection of carrier pipe shall be as specified in other sections of these specifications, as applicable. 
(h)  Backfilling. Permanently backfill the bore pits and trenches immediately after approval of the casing and carrier pipe installation by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.8, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-582. - Manholes and appurtenances. 
Outside of roads, streets, or shoulders, set the top level and 24 inches above the existing or proposed grade of the surrounding landscape. Cast-in-place frames and covers shall be used for all manholes outside of paved areas. In roads, streets, road shoulders, sidewalks, and lawns, adjust the tops flush with the proposed finished surface. Maximum vertical adjustment shall be nine inches. On sloped surfaces, adjust the top of manhole as an angle as necessary to conform to slope or gradient of the proposed or existing finished surface or pavement. 
(1)  Preparation. Do not install manholes in excavations containing water or on fluid soil. Prior to installation, de-water each excavation as necessary. Maintain a dry excavation until the manhole has been completely installed, tested, and backfilled. Prepare an unyielding foundation of crushed stone, six-inch minimum compacted thickness, as shown on the drawings, prior to installation of base section. 
(2)  Installation. 
a.  Align eccentric manhole openings longitudinally over the main sewer, unless otherwise directed by the city. 
b.  Set the bottom as near as practical to the required grade to ensure that a properly grouted channel can be provided. Manholes must be vertical; no exceptions. 
c.  Whenever the difference in elevation between the inlet and outlet sewer inverts exceed two feet, an outside drop connection must be provided. Inside drops are not allowed. 
d.  Carefully assemble manhole sections and sewer entrance using gusseted joints installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations to ensure a tight and permanent fit. Seal joints between sections with Ram-Nek, ConSeal CS-30R, or Kent-Seal No. 2 joint sealer. Do not use grout in horizontal manhole joints. 
e.  Using approved non-shrink epoxy grout, fill all lift holes, inside and out, whether or not the lift holes penetrate through manhole walls. Fill lift holes prior to manhole coating and backfilling. 
f.  Do not use grouting or caulking of any kind in the interior horizontal joints of manhole sections prior to vacuum testing and approval. Wipe grout in the interior horizontal joint only upon final manhole testing and approval. 
g.  If manhole step installation is required in the field, use approved epoxy grout. 
h.  After manhole testing, approval and acceptance, construct invert channels as shown on the standard detail drawings for manhole inverts. Use 1:2 (cement:sand) mortar to provide smooth channel through pipe inlets to true line and grade as shown on the drawings. Concrete blocks or bricks may be used for fill in deep base sections under mortar. Provide three-inch minimum thickness of mortar over filler block or brick. Precast manhole inverts are not acceptable. 
i.  Provide precast concrete rings as required at top section to adjust to finished grade. Install with non-shrink grout. Adjustment using brick courses is not allowed unless specifically approved. Maximum height of adjustment shall be nine inches. 
(3)  Exterior coating. Coat exterior of manhole (including leveling rings and base of frame) with approved coal tar bitumastic coating in accordance with the coating manufacturer's directions, 16-mil minimum thickness. If coating is brushed (rather than sprayed) take care to thoroughly coat all surface irregularities and joints. Fill lift holes prior to coating. Allow ample time for exterior coating to dry completely before leakage testing and backfilling. Do not apply coating to green, uncured concrete. No other coating or wrapping materials or systems shall be used to seal the exterior of any manhole. 
(4)  Backfilling. 
a.  Do not place permanent backfill until manhole leakage testing has been completed and approved. 
b.  Backfill with clean native material and compact as specified for pipe trenching at manhole excavations except those located in existing pavement or areas to be paved. 
c.  For manholes located in existing or proposed streets or in other paved areas or areas to be paved, backfill with crusher run stone and compact as specified for pipe trenching. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.9, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-583. - Replacement of pavement. 
The contractor shall fully restore and replace all pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other surface structures removed or disturbed, to a condition that is equal to or better than the original condition in a manner satisfactory to the city. (See standard details.) 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.10, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-584. - Location/protection of existing underground utilities. 
It is the responsibility of the contractor to locate all underground utilities and to protect same. Utility lines or services damaged by the contractor shall be repaired by the contractor at the contractor's own expense. The contractor has sole responsibility of complying with all provisions of the utilities protection code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.11, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-585. - Protection of water supply and other utilities. 
(a)  The city has an established cross-connection program to prevent the entry of contaminants or pollutants into any area of the potable water supply through the control of cross-connections. It is illegal to introduce any substance into or to have any cross-connections with the potable water supply. There shall be no physical connection between a public or private potable water supply system and a sanitary sewer which would permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable water supply. 
(b)  Whenever possible, sewers should be laid at least ten feet horizontally from any existing or proposed water main. Should conditions prevent a separation of ten feet, the lines shall be laid in separate trenches. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.12, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-586. - Sewer services. 
(a)  A sewer service shall be provided for every existing or proposed lot or building. All sewer services shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter unless otherwise specified. All service lines shall be designed to maintain a minimum of two feet per second sewer velocity. All services shall be shown on the construction and as-built drawings. A common service shall not be allowed for two or more buildings. The service shall extend to five feet inside the property line of the lot being served and normally be within ten feet of the lower corner of the lot. All service laterals shall be a minimum of five feet deep at the property line. Where five feet of cover cannot be achieved, sewer services shall be constructed of ductile iron. A 90-degree bend, constructed from two 45-degree fittings shall be installed at the end of all sewer services with a vertical section of pipe to extend a minimum of four feet above existing ground level. (See standard details.) Connections to the main exceeding eight feet in depth may have the saddle or tee rotated to a bend inserted in the service to provide five feet lateral depth at the property line. 
(b)  The developer shall be responsible for serving all lots developed. On any lot where the service cannot be found, the developer shall be responsible for payment of the cost of installation of the service. Also, unless noted on the final plat, the service shall be low enough to serve the first floor elevation at the building line. Install 14-gauge detector wire on all laterals. 
(c)  The builder shall be responsible for the location of the service prior to the pouring of the foundation, driveway or other appurtenance. The city will not be responsible for any house built too low to be served nor for any service covered by construction. 
(d)  No plumber or contractor will be allowed to connect to the sewerage system except to the end of the service provided for his connection. Also, any service provided will be utilized without the installation of additional services. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.13, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-587. - Clean-up. 
(a)  Prior to requesting the completion of sewer construction inspection, the contractor shall remove and dispose of in an acceptable manner all shipping timbers, shipping bands, spacers, excess materials, broken material, crates, boxes and any other material brought to the job site. 
(b)  Any work areas within public right-of-way or property outside of the development that were damaged by the sewer construction shall be repaired or replaced with the same kind of material as existed prior to the damage occurring. All easement areas shall be cleared of trees, stumps and other debris and left in a condition such that the easement can be maintained by bush-hog equipment. 
(c)  All shoulders, ditches, culverts, and other areas impacted by the sewer construction shall be at the proper grades and smooth in appearance. 
(d)  All manhole covers shall be brought to grade. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 404.14, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-588—105-607. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - INSPECTION OF SEWERS 

Sec. 105-608. - City inspection. 
(a)  The developer's contractor will be responsible for the quality, accuracy and workmanship of his completed work. 
(b)  City personnel will visit the job site on a periodic basis and will make spot checks as they deem appropriate. The city shall have the right to review and inspect all construction and may reject any work that does not meet quality control standards. Cost for all testing shall be paid for by the developer. 
(1)  Manholes and appurtenances. Manholes will be visually inspected to check for plugging of lift holes, use of connecting boots, use of joint material, leakage, proper invert construction, and proper setting of frame and cover. 
a.  Provide 48-hours' notice prior to testing and conduct all tests in the presence of the city. 
b.  Prior to backfilling, conduct a vacuum leakage test on each completed sanitary sewer manhole in accordance with ASTM C1244. Place a vacuum of ten-inch Hg on the manhole as measured by an approved vacuum gauge. Maximum allowable vacuum loss shall be one-inch Hg in 60 seconds for four-foot diameter manhole, 75 seconds for a five-foot diameter manhole, or 90 seconds for a six-foot diameter manhole. 
c.  Hydrostatic test. Testing must be conducted by plugging all inlet and outlet sewers after completion of manhole construction. Fill sewer manhole with water to top rim of the frame and cover. After concrete has been thoroughly moistened, monitor water loss over a two-hour period. Maximum allowable loss shall be two inches of water at the rim. 
d.  Manhole construction. Manholes will be visually inspected to check for plugging of lift holes, use of connecting boots, use of joint material, leakage, proper invert construction, proper setting of frame and cover. 
e.  Manholes which fail any of the tests specified herein shall be repaired by a method approved in advance by the city, or replaced, and re-tested until acceptable results are obtained. Correct all visible leaks regardless of test results. Grouting repairs may, at the city's discretion, be allowed on the exterior walls of the manhole only. 
(2)  Gravity sanitary sewers and laterals. All material and work shall be subject to inspection at any time. All inadequate, defective, or improper work or materials will be rejected and the contractor will be required to replace or reconstruct the work. Provide 48-hours' notice to tests and conduct all testing in presence of the city. Gravity flow pipelines which fail any of the tests specified herein shall be repaired by a method approved by the city, or replaced, and re-tested until acceptable. 
a.  Lamping test. Before calling for inspection of the installed sewers, flush all sewers clean of all water, sand, dirt, debris, or other obstructions. After the sewers have been fully backfilled for at least 30 days, provide labor, supplies, and equipment for lamping the completed sewers. Lamp the sewers in presence of the city. Any section of sewer which does not exhibit a smooth, straight, full-moon bore will be rejected. 
b.  Deflection test for PVC pipe. Conduct deflection tests on all PVC sewers after the sewers have been fully backfilled for at least 30 days (or longer if, in the opinion of the city, soil moisture conditions have not allowed full backfill settlement). The deflection test shall consist of free passage of a properly sized solid mandrel or solid sewer ball sized to allow deflection no greater than five percent of the pipe actual interior diameter. Push or pull the mandrel or sewer ball by an approved method in the presence of the city. Any section of sewer which exhibits deflection exceeding five percent of the interior diameter will be rejected. 
c.  Test for watertightness of gravity flow pipelines. Conduct test for watertightness of gravity flow pipelines in the presence of the city by one of the following methods at the city's discretion: 
1.  Infiltration testing. Perform infiltration tests on all sewers in accordance with procedures set forth in ASTM C969. Measure infiltration flow with a calibrated V-notch weir for a minimum of four hours. The length of sewer tested shall not exceed 700 feet. For infiltration testing, the pipeline shall not leak in excess of a rate of 25 gallons per inch of diameter per mile of pipe line per day. 
2.  Exfiltration testing. If, in the opinion of the city, groundwater levels will not provide sufficient hydrostatic water pressure to warrant infiltration testing, perform exfiltration testing in accordance with procedures set forth in ASTM C969. Fill the pipeline and manholes with water so that a head of at least two feet is provided above the top of the pipe at the uppermost end. Allow line to stand until the pipe has reached its maximum absorption, but not less than four hours. Refill line as required to re-establish minimum hydrostatic head and measure exfiltration rate over a four-hour period. For exfiltration testing, the pipeline shall not leak in excess of a rate of 25 gallons per inch of diameter per mile of pipeline per day. 
3.  Air testing. Perform low pressure air testing for PVC sewers in accordance with ASTM F1417 for each section of sewer line. Temporarily plug and adequately brace all pipes prior to testing. Temporary restraints are also required for cleanouts and plugs for testing. Provide backfill sufficiently completed to prevent movement of the pipeline under air testing pressure. Allowable leakage will be based on an allowable loss as provided in Table 1 of ASTM F1417, using an initial pressure of 4.0 psi and maintaining a minimum of 3.5 psi. Observe all reasonable safety precautions during air testing, at a minimum, those precautions specified by ASTM F1417. 
d.  Video inspection. Inspect each section of sewer by videoing from manhole to manhole. Any section of sewer which does not exhibit a smooth, straight, full-moon bore will be rejected. Videoing equipment must also possess a swivel head that has the capability of looking at each lateral connection. A copy of the video inspection must be provided to the city on an acceptable media format. 
(3)  Other; compaction of backfill. Compaction testing may be required for sewers constructed in paved areas or where pavement is planned. A minimum of two tests per 500 feet of trench line located in roadways will be required. If any of these tests show failing results, then the failing backfill will be removed, re-compacted and re-tested, and one additional area will be tested as well. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 405.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-609. - Minimum inspection by developer. 
The following minimum information shall be determined and certified by the developer's engineer: 
(1)  Horizontal location. Horizontal location of the line will be checked by measuring as-built distances between manholes and bearings from manhole to manhole. 
(2)  Elevation and slope. Elevation of each invert and top of manhole will be measured and recorded. Actual pipe slope will be computed and any segment having less than minimum allowable slope will be rejected and re-done. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 405.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-610. - Other testing requirements. 
The city reserves the right to require further testing for any reason to ensure quality workmanship and materials. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 405.3, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-611—105-638. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 105-639—105-664. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-665. - Water flow test. 
(a)  A water flow test must be performed on the existing water line to determine the adequacy of the water supply line for the project. 
(b)  The test shall consist of a fire hydrant flow test, conducted at the nearest hydrant to the proposed development and a 24-hour pressure test. 
(c)  Test information shall consist of: 
(1)  Static pressure and residual pressure. 
(2)  Flow in GPM at residual pressure. 
(3)  24-hour pressure chart. 
(d)  An adequate supply of water for the proposed project must be available prior to the approval of any plans. Flow tests are valid for one year. 
(e)  The city will perform the test at the developer's expense. All fees for water flow tests shall be paid in full before the test is performed. 
(f)  The developer will be responsible for retaining the services of an outside consultant/contractor to accomplish and submit a design study based on the flow test results and indicating the projected available flow at the highest point in the development in GPM with residual pressure of 20 psi for the total project. This report should provide results indicating adequacy of flow quantities and pressure for the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 502.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-666. - Plans for proposed water system; preliminary review. 
Preliminary plans will be prepared and submitted for review as described elsewhere in the development regulations. Questions relating to adequate fire protection, multiple feeds, water supply and proposed locations of connections should be resolved at this step before proceeding with detailed planning. A submittal for preliminary review must include all land to be developed although the land may be developed in several phases or units. Adequacy determinations of the existing water system will be made for the total project. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 502.2, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-667—105-690. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN CRITERIA 

Sec. 105-691. - General. 
The criteria listed herein is not intended to cover all aspects of design, but rather to mention the basic guidelines and those particulars that are required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 503.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-692. - Water supply. 
(a)  Residential water supply for domestic use shall be in accordance with the following table and at a minimum residual pressure of 20 psi at the highest point in the development: 
INSTANTANEOUS WATER DEMANDS FOR RESIDENTIAL AREAS 

 
(b)  The city may require the following minimum flow/duration quantities prior to development of the property at the highest point in the development: 
(1)  Multifamily: 750 GPM for 30 minutes; 
(2)  Shopping centers: 750 GPM for 30 minutes; 
(3)  Motels, light industry and schools: 750 GPM for 30 minutes; 
(4)  Heavy industry, warehouses, office buildings, greater than 200,000 square feet: minimum 1,000 GPM for 45 minutes; 
(5)  Residential: 500 GPM for 30 minutes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 503.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-693. - Fire protection. 
(a)  Fire hydrants shall be spaced not more than 500 feet apart with additional fire hydrants located as necessary to permit all portions of buildings to be reached by hose lays of not more than 300 feet in length (spacing as traffic travels). In subdivisions, hydrants will generally be aligned with the property line separating two adjacent lots. 
(b)  Fire lines shall be metered per these specifications. 
(c)  Hose lay distance for fire truck hoses is defined as being measured along the route a piece of fire apparatus must travel in laying a fire hose from the fire to the fire hydrant. 
(d)  All plans for development must meet all applicable fire protection codes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 503.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-694. - Water mains and appurtenances. 
(a)  Water mains. 
(1)  Ductile iron pipe. Ductile iron pipe shall be used in all locations. 
(2)  On existing streets. On existing roads, water lines shall be located on the south and west side of the road, nine feet from the back of curb, with a minimum cover of 42 inches below the level of the road shoulder. Fire hydrants on existing roads shall be located between the waterline and the back of curbing. 
(3)  On new streets. All curbing must be installed before any water lines are installed. Water lines on new streets shall be located on the south and west side of the street, as shown in the standard detail drawings. Water lines shall be installed with 42 inches of cover at finish grade. 
(b)  Service laterals. 
(1)  Short side service laterals shall be installed with a uniform slope from the main shallowing to a bury of 12 inches at the water meter setting. Water meter settings are to be located adjacent to the right-of-way limit. Long side services shall have a minimum cover of 36 inches under areas of pavement and curbing then shallowing to 12 inches at the water meter. 
(2)  Service laterals crossing any roads shall be placed inside a minimum of a two-inch diameter PVC casing. 
(3)  A "W" shall be etched into the curb where each service tap is made for permanent location. 
(4)  Tubing shall be as specified by the city. 
(5)  Services for subdivisions shall be sized and located as shown on the standard detail drawings. 
(c)  Residential water meters. Residential water meters shall be located at the limits of the street right-of-way. In general, meters will be located near the property line; where possible a double yoke assembly will be utilized at the property line separating two adjacent lots. The project designer is responsible for verifying electric transformer locations and avoiding conflicts. The developer shall be responsible for installing the meter box and yoke assembly. See standard detail for listing of required components. The city shall install the water meter in the yoke assembly after tap fees have been paid and service applied for. 
(d)  Vaults and all valve and piping assemblies. Vaults and all valve and piping assemblies for commercial and industrial meter settings shall be installed by the developer. Installations for three-fourths-inch and one-inch meter settings shall utilize a standard yoke assembly and the required additional backflow device located in a separate box. The city shall provide the meter after tap fees are paid and service applied for. No water service shall be provided until all required backflow devices are in place. 
(e)  Backflow preventer. All water meters shall be provided with a backflow preventer. Residential services shall be provided with a dual check backflow preventer installed by the developer as part of the standard yoke assembly. Additional backflow prevention measures are required for residential services with lawn irrigation sprinkler systems connected. Commercial water services, as a minimum, shall be provided with a double check valve backflow prevention device installed by the developer and located immediately downstream of the meter setting in a separate vault or utility box. Additional and/or more extensive backflow prevention measures may be required depending on the type of business, materials handled and plumbing configuration. All customers applying for commercial water service are to contact the city water department backflow prevention coordinator for a determination of specific requirements concerning backflow prevention devices. 
(f)  Fire line meters. Fire line meters shall be designed to meet site-specific conditions. See standard details for conceptual layout of meter. 
(g)  Detector meter. Detector meter shall be designed to meet site-specific conditions. See standard details for conceptual layout. 
(h)  Water valves. 
(1)  At intersections. Valves on water mains at intersections shall be located behind the curb. Valves are not allowed in paved roadways. As a general rule, the number of valves shall equal the number of streets in the intersection minus one. The city may require valves in excess of this requirement if the water system layout warrants additional valves. 
(2)  At end of line. A water valve and a minimum of 36 feet of pipe shall be provided at the end of all lines for phased developments, and at locations where the water main may be extended in the future for water system improvements. The end of the line shall be provided with a temporary plug and thrust collar designed to function in a manner that will allow for the end of the line to be excavated and exposed for tie-on of an extension without taking the main out of service. 
(3)  Along mains. Maximum spacing of water valves along mains shall be 1,000 feet. These line valves, unless at intersections, shall be located near fire hydrants. 
(i)  Valve markers. One concrete valve marker shall be furnished and set at each line valve as required by the city. 
(j)  Air and vacuum release valves. Air and vacuum (A&V) release valves shall be located where appropriate as determined by a registered engineer in responsible charge of the project design. All A&V release valve locations are subject to approval of the city. In general, within subdivisions A&V release valves are not necessary as long as services are located at the water main high points. 
(k)  Polyethylene encasement. Ductile iron pipe water main shall be provided with polyethylene encasement where the water main either crosses or is in close proximity to a steel gas main. 
(l)  Easements. Water mains that are located off the public right-of-way shall have a minimum 20-foot permanent easement. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 503.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-695. - Line extension requirements. 
(a)  Developers are required to extend all mains along their entire property frontage. The size of the extension will be at least the size of the existing main and may be larger if required by the city. 
(b)  If an existing main must be extended to serve a particular development, the developer will be required to pay all costs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 503.5, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-696—105-718. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FIRE LINE 

Sec. 105-719. - General requirements. 
(a)  All fire service lines must be equipped with an appropriate backflow device. At a minimum this device shall be a double check valve installed in a vault at a point on the fire service line as near to the main as practical. Certain fire system configurations may require more extensive backflow prevention measures. Contact the city for a specific determination of backflow prevention requirements of a particular fire service system design. 
(b)  All fire service systems require the installation of an underwriter approved detector meter installed as a component of the double check assembly or a factory mutual fire line meter immediately upstream of the double check valve assembly at the discretion of the city. 
(1)  All detector check assemblies shall utilize a meter equipped with a remote reading device as specified by the city. 
(2)  Factory mutual fire line meter systems shall utilize meters specifically designed for fire lines equipped with remote reading devices as specified by the city. 
(c)  Fire service charges shall be as specified in the current city fee schedule. 
(d)  When unauthorized water is used through a detector meter in three or more billing periods in one calendar year, it shall be replaced with a factory mutual fire line meter at the expense of the developer/owner. Unauthorized use of water is defined as non-firefighting water and/or water use without prior notification and approval of the city. 
(e)  All work to be performed by the developer. Installation of detector meters or factory mutual fire line meters as required by this article will be handled by the developer under supervision of the city's inspectors. The cost of installation will be the responsibility of the developer. 
(f)  The city shall have the authority to cut off water service to buildings whose owners refuse to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(g)  The customer shall have ownership and be responsible for maintenance and repairs of the fire service line beginning at the boundary with the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 504, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-720—105-736. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 105-737. - Generally. 
(a)  All materials used in the work including equipment shall be new and unused materials of a reputable U.S. manufacturer conforming to the applicable requirements of the specifications, and no materials shall be used in the work until they have been approved by the city. 
(b)  All products shall be new and unused. All materials and components that come into contact with drinking water shall conform to ANSI/NSF standard 61 and shall be lead free in compliance with federal, state and local requirements. The term "lead free" is defined as eight percent or less lead for pipes and fittings and 0.2 percent lead for solders and flux. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-738. - Ductile iron pipe. 
Ductile iron pipe is to be manufactured in the U.S.A. in conformance with AWWA C151 and cement mortar lined in accordance with AWWA C104, standard thickness, with seal coat. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specified, the pipe shall be pressure class 350 for four-inch to 12-inch diameter pipe, pressure class 300 for 14-inch to 20-inch pipe and pressure class 250 for all larger diameters. 
(2)  Unless otherwise specified, the pipe shall have push-on (P-O) compression type joints conforming to AWWA C111. 
(3)  Restrained joint (RJ) pipe, where specified or indicated on drawings, shall consist of a push-on compression type joint with a locking gasket with stainless steel locking segments vulcanized into the gasket to grip the pipe to prevent joint separation. Restrained joints shall be Fast Grip Gasket by American Cast Iron Pipe Co. or Field-Lok Gasket by U.S. Pipe Co., or equal approved by the city. Retainer glands with set screws are not acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-739. - PVC pipe. 
All PVC pressure pipe used for temporary water mains shall be class 200, DR 14 pipe rated at 200 psi working pressure or standard dimension ratio 21 (SDR 21). 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-740. - Water service lines. 
Water service lines shall be one of the following as directed by the city: 
(1)  Seamless copper tubing shall be supplied in conformance with ASTM B-88, Type K, soft; or 
(2)  PE pipe for three-fourths-inch and one-inch service lines shall be copper tube size (CTS). PE pipe size two-inch shall be iron pipe size (IPS). Pipe shall be rated at 200 psi; have SDR of nine; conform to ASTM D2239 (pipe) or D2737 (tubing) and AWWA C901; and be made from ultra-high molecular weight high-density polyethylene (PE 3608/4710). All pipe and service tubing supplied under this specification shall come with a minimum 50-year manufacturer's warranty. Insert stiffeners shall be installed in all PE connections by compression joint to fittings. Inserts appropriately sized for insertion into three-fourths-inch and one-inch PE pipe shall be manufactured from thermoplastic and be specifically designed to prevent the collapse of PE water service line pipe. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-741. - Boring and jacking pipe. 
(a)  Casing pipe. Welded steel, smooth wall, uncoated pipe conforming to ATSM A139, grade B shall be used, except that the hydrostatic test is not required. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specified on the drawings, casing wall thickness shall be 0.25-inch for 12-inch NPS and smaller; 0.375-inch for 14-inch NPS through 24-inch NPS; and 0.50-inch for 26-inch NPS and larger. 
(2)  Casings for railroad crossings shall be standard weight (STD) for sizes up to 24-inch NPS and extra strong (XH) weight for 24-inch NPS and larger. 
(3)  Diameter shall be NPS size as indicated on the drawings. 
(4)  Pipe shall be furnished with beveled ends for field butt welding. 
(b)  Carrier pipe. Ductile iron pipe with push-on joints, conforming to other sections of these specifications, as applicable, except that carrier pipe shall have Field-Lok Gaskets by U.S. Pipe or Fast Grip Gaskets by American Cast Iron Pipe Co. 
(c)  Casing spacers. Type 304 stainless steel spacers with PVC liners and abrasion resistant, low friction polymer runners shall be used. Center restrained type, as manufactured by Cascade Waterworks Mfg. Co., PowerSeal Type 304, the BWM Co. Model SS, or Advance Products and Systems, Inc. (two spacers per pipe joint) shall be used. 
(d)  End seals. Flexible rubber end seal by Maloney, or an equal approved by the city, and all stainless steel hardware shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-742. - Ductile iron fittings and accessories. 
Ductile iron fittings and accessories are to be manufactured in the U.S.A. in conformance with AWWA C153 for diameters through 24 inches and AWWA C110 for diameters larger than 24 inches. Fittings shall be pressure rated 350 psi for diameters through 24 inches and 250 psi for diameters larger than 24 inches. Other specifications include: 
(1)  Cement mortar lined in accordance with AWWA C104, standard thickness, with seal coat. Interior walls shall be smooth and free of defects. 
(2)  Mechanical joint (MJ) unless otherwise specified on the drawings. 
(3)  Fittings used on restrained joint (RJ) fittings shall be restrained joint, push-on compression type joints equal to those specified for restrained joint DI pipe. 
(4)  Rubber gasket joints in accordance with AWWA C111. 
(5)  Gaskets for PVC pipe shall be plain rubber transition type compatible with the type of pipe and fittings used. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-743. - Butterfly valves. 
All valves larger than 16-inch shall be butterfly valves conforming to AWWA C504. 
(1)  All butterfly valves shall be bubble-tight closing at the rated pressure with flow in either direction, and shall be satisfactory for applications involving throttling service and frequent operations or operations after long periods of inactivity. Valves shall meet the full requirements of AWWA Standard C504, latest revision for 150 psi working pressure and shall be suitable for aboveground or buried service. All interior ferrous surfaces of valves larger than 16 inches shall have a special epoxy coating meeting the requirements of AWWA C550. 
(2)  Valve bodies shall be equipped with integrally cast mechanical joint ends meeting ANSI A21.11 (AWWA C111). Mechanical joints shall be fitted with retainer glands with set screws on ductile iron pipe. Retainer glands shall be Mega-Lug as manufactured by EBAA Iron. Butterfly valves installed underground shall come equipped with the manual operator specified in the following subsection (3) of this section. 
(3)  Manual operators shall be of the traveling nut, self-locking type and shall be designed to hold the valve in any intermediate position between fully open and fully closed without creeping or fluttering. Operators shall be equipped with mechanical stop-limiting devices to prevent over travel of the disc in the open and closed positions. Valves shall close with a clockwise rotation. Operators shall be fully enclosed and designed for buried operation. Extensions shall be provided as necessary to bring the operating nut within 18 inches of the ground surface. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.7, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-744. - Gate valves, metal-seated. 
Gate valves, metal-seated (acceptable only for eight-inch and smaller mains) shall conform to AWWA C500 for double-disc type, iron body, bronze mounted valves for buried, vertical installation, except that valves shall be rated for 200 psi working pressure. Gate valves shall be as manufactured by American Darling, Mueller, or M&H. 
(1)  Valve ends: Mechanical joint unless shown otherwise on the drawings. 
(2)  Valve discs: Double-disc type, parallel seat. 
(3)  Stem and seal: Bronze, non-rising stem (NRS), unless shown otherwise on the drawings; O-ring seals. 
(4)  Epoxy coating: Interior and exterior, in accordance with AWWA C550. 
(5)  Operator: Manual operating nut, two inches square, unless shown otherwise on the drawings; valve to open when turned to the left (counter-clockwise). 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.8, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-745. - Gate valves, resilient seat. 
Gate valves, resilient seat, shall conform to AWWA C515 for reduced-wall, resilient-seated, iron body, bronze mounted gate valves, except that all cast ferrous valve components shall be ductile iron. Gate valves shall be as manufactured by American Darling, Mueller, or M&H. 
(1)  Valve ends: Mechanical joint unless shown otherwise on the drawings. 
(2)  Valve discs: Resilient rubber seat ring. 
(3)  Stem and seal: Bronze, non-rising stem (NRS), unless shown otherwise on the drawings; O-ring seals. 
(4)  Epoxy coating: Interior and exterior, in accordance with AWWA C550. 
(5)  Operator: Manual operating nut, two inches square, unless shown otherwise on the drawings; valve to open when turned to the left (counter-clockwise). 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.9, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-746. - Small gate valves. 
(a)  Gate valves smaller than three inches shall conform to the level of quality and manufacturing standards established for valves three inches and larger by the respective AWWA Standards. All small gate valves shall be rated for 200 psi working pressure. 
(b)  Valves for non-buried service shall be bronze body, rising stem, solid wedge disc, with hand wheel, Crane 428, Jenkins 47, or equal specifically approved by the city. 
(c)  Valves for buried service shall be 200 psi iron body, non-rising stem, bronze mounted, metal seated, Mueller A-2360, Kennedy 1571X, 1579X, or an equivalent resilient seat type specifically approved by the city. Provide standard two-inch square operating nut on all valves for buried service. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.10, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-747. - Ball valves four inches and smaller. 
Two-way, lever-operated bronze body Ball Valve, Standard Port size, Pittsburgh Brass Manufacturing Co., Watts, Milwaukee Valve, or equal specifically approved by the city shall be used. All ball valves shall be rated for 200-psi working pressure. PVC ball valves, if specified, shall be Full-Flo True Union Ball Valve as manufactured by Hayward Manufacturing Co., Inc., or equal specifically approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.11, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-748. - Check valves. 
In-line swing check style conforming to AWWA C508, ductile iron body, mechanical joint ends, resilient material-to-metal type seat. Check valves shall be rated for 200 psi working pressure. Provide outside spring and lever unless shown otherwise on the drawings. Epoxy coating, interior and exterior, shall conform to AWWA C550. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.12, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-749. - Backflow preventer for fill valve assembly. 
Double check valve assembly conforming to AWWA C510, bronze body, ball type test cock, ball valve shut offs with tee handles shall be used. Watts Series 007, Hersey Model No. FDC, Conbraco Series 40-100, or equal specifically approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.13, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-750. - Air release valves. 
Air valves for release of air under pressure shall conform to AWWA C512 for air release valves rated to withstand 300 psi working pressure. Provide ductile iron body, threaded connections, stainless steel float and compound lever system, Buna N seat; with all internal trim stainless steel or bronze. Valve size shall be one-inch inlet one-half-inch outlet unless otherwise specified; orifice size to be determined by working pressure. Provide Crispin Model PL10-H, APCO Model 200A, or Val-Matic Model 38. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.14, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-751. - Combination air valves. 
Combination air valves shall conform to AWWA C512 for combination air valves rated to withstand 300 psi working pressure. Provide ductile iron body, threaded connections, stainless steel floats and compound lever system, Buna-N seal; with all internal trim stainless steel or bronze. Valve shall have one-inch inlet and outlet, unless larger size is indicated on the drawings. Provide Crispin Model UL10-H, APCO Model 143C, or Val-Matic Model 201C. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.15, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-752. - Fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants shall conform to AWWA C502 for dry-barrel fire hydrants, traffic type, with safety flange which allows the valve to remain closed when the hydrant is broken or damaged above or near the grade level. Hydrants shall be Mueller Super Centurion A-423, with tamper-proof option 114. One tamper-proof fire hydrant wrench per two installed hydrants shall be provided to the city. Other specifications include the following: 
(1)  Size. Hydrant main valve opening 5¼ inches. Inlet shall be six inches, mechanical joint, with strapping lugs. 
(2)  Bury. Unless otherwise specified, with bury required by water main diameter, and to provide 18 inches from centerline of nozzles to the bury line of installed hydrant. However, vertical extensions shall be provided as required to bring the hydrant to its proper finished grade. 
(3)  Outlet nozzles. Two 2½-inch diameter; one 4½-inch diameter nozzle threads shall conform to those in service where the hydrant is to be installed unless otherwise specified. Provide field replaceable nozzle threads. 
(4)  Stem seals. O-ring. 
(5)  Valve. Compression type closing with pressure. Facings shall be rubber. 
(6)  Color. 
a.  Top bonnet: NFPA colored per tested fire flows; 
b.  Barrel: Yellow. 
(7)  Barrel drain. Provide integral drain outlet. 
(8)  Anchoring. Provide harnessing lugs. Use mechanical joint anchoring coupling (up to 36 inches in length) or three-fourths-inch galvanized, threaded rods, with galvanized bolts and washers. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.16, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-753. - Piping accessories. 
(a)  Any accessories required shall be compatible with pipe and fittings used. Small valves, pipe, and fittings shall conform to AWWA Standard C800. 
(b)  Tapping saddle for pipe six inches and smaller: dresser Style 91, double strap, JCM Model 402, Smith-Blair No. 313, or equal specifically approved by the city. (For tapping pipe larger than six inches in diameter, use a DI tapping saddle or tee.) 
(c)  Couplings for three-inch and smaller pipe: dresser Style 38. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.17, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-754. - Air and vacuum relief valve assemblies. 
(a)  Air and vacuum relief valves shall be cast iron body and covers with bronze trim, stainless steel float, Buna-N seal and shall be designed for a minimum working pressure of 150 psi. 
(b)  The valve shall be designed to exhaust large quantities of air during the filling period, and small quantities of air which collect in the line while operating under pressure. Acceptable manufactures of air/vacuum valves are Golden-Anderson, APCO or Val-Matic. 
(c)  Valves between the water main and air relief valve shall be two-inch stainless steel ball valves. All air and vacuum relief valves are to be installed in standard meter boxes with gravel bottoms. Provide a minimum gravel layer thickness of 12 inches. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.18, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-755. - Manhole for air valve or check valve. 
Pre-cast concrete conforming to ASTM C478-03a, with cast iron cover, NEENAH R-6041-A for cast-in-slab, or R-1776 if not cast-in-slab type. Cover shall read, "CITY OF EMERSON WATER." 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.19, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-756. - Vault for air valves. 
For air valves installed in vault in non-vehicular traffic areas only, use Carson Industries L Series 24 light duty HDPE vault, with extension for 24 inches of minimum depth, with 24-inch square by three-inch thick polymer concrete lid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.20, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-757. - Valve boxes. 
Cast iron, 5¼-inch diameter, suitable for the valve installed; two-piece screw type adjustable to suit the depth of bury. Provide extension stem as required for deep valves so that no operating nut is deeper than 1.5 feet below the cover. The casting shall be coated with two coats of coal tar pitch varnish. The lids of all boxes shall be cast iron and bear the word "water." Boxes shall be equal to Russco Model 562-S with a 5¼-inch cast iron drop cover. All off-pavement valve boxes shall have concrete collars and valve markers. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.21, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-758. - Valve collars. 
Reinforced concrete. Provide pre-cast 24-inch diameter by six-inch thick pad for non-traffic areas. For valve boxes located in traffic and/or paved areas, provide poured-in-place, 24-inch square or round by six-inch thick pad. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.22, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-759. - Valve markers. 
Valve markers shall be made of 3,000 psi concrete, and shall be four feet long and four inches on each side, with four No. 4 reinforcing bars. The markers shall be set with an even number of feet between the centerline of the valve and the centerline of the aluminum disc in the top of the marker, and the distance in feet between the valve and marker shall be stamped in the marker at the time of setting. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.23, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-760. - Service tubing. 
ASTM B-88 copper tubing type K, three-fourths-inch minimum size, unless otherwise shown on the approved drawings shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.24, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-761. - Casing for service tubing. 
Two-inch diameter SDR 21 PVC conforming to all requirements of ASTM D 2241, for three-fourths-inch and one-inch tubing shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.25, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-762. - Water meters. 
Water meters shall be as specified by the city. Currently the city utilizes for residential service the Sensus PPM, five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch AWWA C708, registration in gallons, with Sensus ICE Radio Read Unit. Deliver to city in original containers for installation by the city when needed and after all tap fees and deposits are fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.26, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-763. - Meter boxes. 
A new plastic body meter box for each service connection shall be provided. Boxes shall be reinforced at top and bottom, with cast iron meter reading lid compatible with Sensus Radio Read units, DFW D-1200 or Brooks 1914. Large meter boxes: DFW D-1500 or Brooks 1220-12. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.27, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-764. - Accessories. 
(a)  Accessories shall conform to AWWA Standard C800 and the city's standard practice. 
(b)  Use city-approved service saddle for tapping all PVC pipe and DIP pipe which is 12-inch and larger. Ductile Iron pipe, six-inch and eight-inch only, may be direct tapped. Service saddles for eight-inch diameter piping or smaller shall be Dresser #194 or Ford 202 while service saddles larger than eight-inch diameter piping shall be #291 Double Strap. 
(c)  Corporation stop. Three-fourths-inch ball stop for three-fourths-inch service; one-inch ball stop for one-inch service or branch connector; AWWA taper thread x compression connection for CTS O.D. tubing. Mueller B-25008, Ford FB 1000-3, or approved equal. 
(d)  Branch connector. One inch by three-fourths-inch by three-fourths-inch for CTS O.D. tubing. Mueller h-15343, Ford Y44-243G, or approved equal. 
(e)  Coupling. Three-fourths-inch one eight bend coupling, F.I.P. thread x compression, CTS O.D. tubing. Mueller H 15534, Ford LA 14-33-G, or approved equal. Adapters on the inlet end of meter setters shall be Mueller&reg; or Ford&reg; 45 degrees. 
(f)  Meter yoke. Copper meter yoke with lock wing angle meter ball valve, ASSE dual cartridge check, and MIP thread ends. 
(1)  For three-fourths-inch service: five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch by nine-inch riser, Mueller B2434R-6A, Ford VBHC72-9W MM33, or McDonald 28-209WDPP 33 with a seven-inch riser and installed ten inches below the top of meter boxes with a 12-inch long PVC pipe brace. 
(2)  For one-inch service: One by 12-inch riser Mueller B2434F-2A, Ford BHC74-18W MM44, or McDonald 28-412WDpp44. 
(g)  Customer cut-off valve. (Provide only as replacement for existing valve when re-connecting services.) Three-fourths-inch bronze gate valve, F.I.P. threads, 200 psi minimum working pressure, with hand wheel, NIBCO T-113, Hammond 606, or approved equal. Provide PVC irrigation valve box and lid for standard service; at PRV services, install in meter box, DFW D-1200 or Brooks 1914. 
(h)  Pressure reducing valve (PRV). Three-fourths-inch Conbraco Series 36. 
(i)  Nipple connection. Eighteen-inch long, sch. 80 PVC pipe with schedule 80 PVC coupling, FIP x FIP or as specified by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.28, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-765. - Bedding and backfill. 
(a)  Bedding and backfill material shall be subject to approval of the city. For approval of imported backfill or bedding material, give at least five working days' advance notice of intent to import material and designate the proposed borrow area. Allow the city's testing laboratory to sample as necessary from the borrow area for the purpose of making acceptance tests to prove the quality of the material. 
(b)  Native material suitable for backfill. Soils excavated on site which do not contain unsuitable material as defined herein may be approved for general backfill. Excessively wet or dry soils may not be used until moisture is adjusted to optimum level to permit proper compaction. 
(c)  Granular material for bedding and embedding or initial backfill. An approved manufactured aggregate or coarse-grained, clean soil which are classified as Class IA, IB, or II soils per ASTM D2321. Acceptable materials which may be approved include sand, chert, crushed stone, gravel, or mixture of these, all of which meets the requirements of ASTM C33 for coarse aggregate, or Graded Size No. 57 stone, all free of unsuitable material, may be acceptable for bedding, embedment or initial backfill. 
(d)  Stone (crushed stone or GAB) for trench bottom stabilization or backfill under pavement areas. Sound, durable crusher run rock, all of which passes a 1½-inch sieve, free of unsuitable material, graded 1½ inches down per GA DOT Specifications. Graded Size No. 57 stone is not an acceptable alternative to crusher run rock. 
(e)  Unsuitable material. Any fine-grained soil, Group PT, OH, OL, CH, ML or MH, classified per ASTM D 2487, silt, highly organic soil, topsoil, roots, vegetable matter, trash, debris, asphalt, frozen or excessively wet soil, and stone or gravel larger than three inches in maximum dimension. Unsuitable material shall include any material with greater than five percent passing No. 200 sieve. 
(f)  Rock definition for trenching. For trenching, the term "rock" means any material which cannot be excavated with a backhoe having a bucket curling force rated at not less than 33,000 pounds (Caterpillar 225B or equivalent). 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.29, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-766. - Water meter vault. 
(a)  Meter vaults shall be constructed with pre-cast reinforced concrete consisting of a minimum six-inch wall thickness. 
(b)  Bedding shall consist of a minimum 12-inch layer of #57 compacted stone. 
(c)  The meter vault top shall have a minimum eight-inch reinforced concrete thickness. 
(d)  An aluminum access ladder doweled to the meter vault wall or manhole steps centered at the access opening shall be installed. 
(e)  The hatch cover must be a 36 inches by 36 inches Bilco-Aluminum Single Model J-4AL or equivalent. 
(f)  Meter vault inlet/outlet pipe openings shall be sealed with grout or mortar. Piping must not support the meter vault. 
(g)  Backflow prevention (BFP) assembly devices must be supported at two points with either pipe stands or solid masonry supports. 
(h)  Thrust blocking shall be installed to prevent potential blow-offs. 
(i)  Installations of four-inch to eight-inch double check detector assembly (Watts Regulator Series 709DCDA) shall be required. Backflow prevention (BFP) device testing: All double check detector assemblies (DCDA) shall be tested upon initial installation and at least annually thereafter by a certified and approved testing service. A copy of these testing results shall be submitted to the city immediately upon completion of testing procedures. 
(j)  Restrained flange adapters must be a Series 2100 Megaflange by EBAA Iron, Inc. or an approved equal. 
(k)  Thrust tie rods shall be galvanized while all pipe and their associated fittings shall be constructed of ductile iron. 
(l)  Meter vaults shall be installed on an owner's private property with provisions for a 15-foot by 30-foot utility easement and/or right-of-entry clause. 
(m)  All materials shall be furnished and installed by the customer or owner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.30, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-767. - Backflow assembly. 
Backflow preventers for residential services shall consist of a dual check valve and shall be installed by the developer as part of the yoke assembly. Backflow prevention devices for commercial services, as a minimum, shall consist of an ASSE approved double check backflow preventer installed by the developer immediately downstream of the meter assembly. Fire line double check detector assembly shall be a Watts Regulator Series 709DCDA. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.31, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-768. - Insulators for DIP in steel casing. 
Insulators shall be as manufactured by Cascade Waterworks Manufacturing Company or approved equal. Insulators for 24-inch DIP carrier pipe shall be CCS-2580 and eight inches in width. Insulators for 12-inch DIP carrier pipe shall be CCS-1320 and eight inches in width. Insulators for eight-inch DIP carrier pipe shall be CCS-905 and eight inches in width. All insulators shall have a stainless steel shell. Insulators shall be located within two feet of each end of the casing and spaced no more than ten feet apart within the casing. The positioning of the casing insulators shall be centered for water mains. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 505.32, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-769—105-789. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WATER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 105-790. - Specifications, generally. 
(a)  It shall be expressly understood that these specifications are for installation of all underground water mains and appurtenances. 
(b)  All work shall conform to the applicable provisions of the AWWA specifications of latest revision except as otherwise specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-791. - Trenching, backfilling and compaction. 
(a)  Preparation. 
(1)  Strip and properly stockpile all sod and topsoil suitable for reuse in restoration. Protect until use. 
(2)  Remove pavement only as necessary for excavating the trench and installing the pipelines and appurtenances. Cut all asphalt pavement in straight, uniform lines by means of a jack hammer or suitable pavement cutter. Cut all concrete pavements to a depth of at least two inches along the cut line with a rotary saw, after which the pavement may be broken with a jack hammer or suitable pavement cutter. 
(3)  Determine location of existing utilities (underground and overhead utility lines, poles, pipes, services, structures, etc.) and mark them in advance of trenching operations. Furnish and have available at all times an electronic pipe detector in working order, and use said detector to survey the proposed path of excavation. Excavate and expose underground utilities in test pits to verify the locations, depths, materials of construction. Notify the city of potential conflicts and presence of cathodic protected facilities. No extra compensation will be given for manual excavation required to locate, protect or restore underground utilities. 
(b)  Trench excavation. 
(1)  Excavate all subsurface material within the trenching limits specified regardless of the material encountered, including rock. Excavated materials satisfying the requirements of this section for native material suitable for backfill may be used for final backfill. Remove surplus excavated material and unsuitable materials from the job site. 
(2)  Do not excavate in areas of excessive groundwater until sufficient dewatering equipment, in good working order, is available at the site. In all cases, continuously remove water accumulated in trenches prior to installing bedding or laying pipes. Provide de-watering by pumping or well pointing, as determined by the contractor, as required to achieve dry ditches and continuously maintain a water level two feet below the trench bottom. All water pumped, bailed, or otherwise removed from the excavation shall be conveyed to a suitable discharge point and disposed in a manner that neither violates regulatory requirements nor causes injury to public health, property, work completed, work in progress, or creates a public nuisance of any type. 
(3)  Excavate the banks of trenches vertical from bottom of trench to one foot above the top of the pipe or conduit. 
(4)  Keep the trench width within the limits specified below; however, OSHA safety requirements shall supersede the requirements stated herein whenever applicable and shall be followed: 
a.  Maximum trench width at top of pipe: Pipe outside diameter (O.D.) plus 24 inches. If the maximum trench width is exceeded, the required bedding must be upgraded to the next higher class, at the contractor's expense, for that part of trench that exceeds the maximum allowable width. 
b.  Minimum width of trench: O.D. of bell or coupling plus 16 inches. (This minimum applies to all trenches including those in rock excavation.) 
(5)  Place excavated material (spoil) sufficiently back from the edge of trench to prevent caving of the trench wall and to permit safe access along the trench. Provide at least three feet clear from toe of spoil bank on at least one side of trench for access. Do not endanger the workers, the public, or obstruct roadways or sidewalks. Comply with OSHA trench safety standards at all times. 
(6)  Do not excavate more than 400 feet in advance of pipe laying. Unless prior approval is obtained from the city, limit the length of open trench to that which can be completed in one working day. 
(7)  Do not leave trenches open overnight unless there are extenuating circumstances approved by the city, and the excavations are fully protected by safe and effective barricades, fencing and lights. Provide precast concrete barriers equal to those specified by Georgia DOT Standard Specifications, section 622. 
(8)  Where necessary, and as required by OSHA regulations, provide and install sufficient and suitably sized movable trench boxes, shields, sheeting, shoring and/or bracing which shall remain in place until the backfill has proceeded to a point where it can be removed safely. When damage is liable to result from withdrawing sheeting, it shall remain in place. Movable shields, sheeting, shoring, bracing, etc. are considered as an integral part of the work and no extra payment will be allowed. 
(9)  Where necessary to place excavated material or spoil on paved streets or parking lots, first provide a thick underlayment of straw matting on the pavement to receive excavated material or spoil. Sweep the pavement clean upon removal of the excavated material or spoil. 
(10)  Remove rock encountered in trench excavation for the specified minimum width of the trench (but not less than 30 inches in width) and to a depth of six inches below the invert of the pipe. 
(11)  Obtain all required permits for handling explosives and performing blasting. Conduct blasting operations in strict accordance with all existing ordinances and regulations and only with the prior approval of the city. Carefully protect all exposed structures from the effects of blasts and cover all blasts with heavy timbers, mats or other suitable protection. Blasting shall be done only by licensed personnel. Use very light charges to prevent damage to adjacent structures. Promptly repair any damage. Store all blasting supplies in accordance with local ordinances. In no case shall caps or other explosives be kept at the place where dynamite or other explosives are stored. 
(12)  As trenching approaches existing underground utilities, perform excavation with extreme care. Perform necessary removals, relocations, or relaying of pipes, utility lines, and appurtenances which will obstruct the work. Provide temporary support, adequate protection, and maintenance of all underground and surface utilities, drains, structures, or other obstructions encountered. 
(13)  Promptly correct damage to existing utilities or structures caused by construction activities. Promptly restore disrupted utility service and provide a condition at least equal to the original condition before the damage occurred. Should the contractor fail to promptly restore service or correct damage, the city or utility companies may correct the damage and back-charge the contractor for costs incurred for the required corrective work. 
(14)  Where existing storm drains or culverts are damaged or destroyed by removal to facilitate trenching and pipe laying, replace the damaged or destroyed drains or culverts with new reinforced concrete pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM Designation C76-04, Class II. Drainpipe shall be equal to that removed except sizes smaller than 12 inches which shall be replaced with 12-inch pipe. 
(15)  If trench subgrade is found to contain unsuitable or potentially corrosive material, such as ashes, cinders, refuse, petroleum contaminated soil or organic matter, immediately stop trenching and pipe installation until further notice and notify the city. PVC pipe will not be suitable where susceptible to permeation by certain organic contaminants and shall be replaced by ductile iron pipe. Undercut and remove all unsuitable or potentially corrosive material at least six inches below the trench bottom and replace with granular bedding material. 
(c)  Bedding and embedment. 
(1)  Bedding and embedment shall conform to the individual requirements for the pipe or conduit material being used. Refer to the drawings for bedding/embedment details. Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings, bedding shall be: 
a.  PVC sanitary sewers: Class B. 
b.  DIP sanitary sewers: Class C. 
c.  PVC water pipe: Class C. 
d.  DIP water pipe: Class D. 
e.  Plastic storm sewer: Class C. 
f.  RCP or CMP storm sewer: Class D. 
(2)  Grade the trench bottom to provide a firm, uniform, and continuous bearing all along the entire length of the barrel of the pipe. Excavate bell holes no larger than necessary to allow joint assembly and to ensure that the pipe barrel will lie flat on the trench bottom. Pipe bells or couplings shall not support any load. Where trench excavation is carried below or beyond required limits, backfill the over-excavated space with specified bedding material. 
(3)  In areas of rock excavation, and where needed in other areas, provide compacted granular bedding material cushion across the full width of the excavation to a minimum six-inch depth under the pipe, fittings, valves, manholes, or other structures. 
(4)  Whenever the subgrade is unstable or too soft to provide a satisfactory foundation for any pipe, de-water and undercut as necessary and stabilize with stone. Compact and bring the trench bottom to proper grade to create a firm, unyielding stabilized subgrade for bedding material and/or pipe. 
(d)  Backfill. 
(1)  General. Backfill and compact all trenches and excavations immediately after the pipe or appurtenance has been installed. 
(2)  Initial backfill and embedment. Place select backfill around haunches of the pipe and appurtenance by hand placement and compaction, from the trench bottom up to the springline of the pipe. Place embedment materials by methods that will not disturb or damage the pipe. Continue initial embedment of the pipe to at least six inches above the pipe crown or to the dimensions shown on the bedding detail. Use no stone larger than three-fourths-inch maximum dimension in the embedment. Compact the initial backfill and embedment firmly and evenly, but without use of mechanical compactors. 
(3)  Remaining or final backfill. Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings, use excavated native material suitable for backfill for the final, or general backfilling. If sufficient and suitable native material suitable for general backfill is not available on site, furnish sufficient and suitable borrow material from an approved source. Place backfill from top of initial backfill up to the trench surface as described herein. Do not place rocks larger than 12 inches in maximum dimension in the upper layer of backfill unless otherwise approved by the city. 
a.  Trenches in streets, pavements, driveways (paved or unpaved), in areas to be paved, and in areas beneath proposed structures. Backfill above the initial backfill with crusher run stone. Place the stone backfill to achieve six-inch compacted layers at 95 percent standard proctor density. Use mechanical tamping to achieve the required compaction. In paved roadways also install and compact the specified pavement base material to the required thickness as shown on the pavement replacement detail. Install a temporary traffic surface at grade consisting of two inches compacted depth of crushed stone or pug mix. Leave backfilled trench open to traffic and maintain the surface at a uniform grade by refilling with stone and re-compacting as necessary to remedy any settlement. Continue such maintenance, including dust control, until surface paving is authorized by the city. 
b.  Trenches in drainage ditches or other areas subject to erosion. Unless otherwise specified, backfill trenches with native material suitable for backfill and mechanically compact in six-inch layers to achieve 95 percent standard proctor density per ASTM D698. Refill and re-compact eroded or settled trenches as often as necessary to restore and maintain the surface at the required finished grade. Immediately stabilize the surface against erosion. 
c.  Trenches in areas to be grassed or landscaped. Unless otherwise specified, backfill trenches with native material suitable for backfill and compact by methods of the contractor's choice to achieve at least 85 percent standard proctor density per ASTM D698. However, if the trench is on DOT or railroad rights-of-way, compact to the density specified in the applicable permit. Refill and re-compact settled trenches as often as necessary to restore and maintain the trench surface at the required finished grade. 
(e)  Field quality control. 
(1)  Perform routine quality control compaction testing at a frequency sufficient to ensure adequate compaction throughout the trenching and backfilling. 
(2)  In streets, paved areas, or areas to be paved, perform compaction testing of the underlying backfill prior to placing pavement base material. 
(3)  Notify the testing laboratory and the city 24 hours prior to need for testing. 
(4)  When any tests indicate the density, moisture content, or compaction does not meet requirements specified herein, as determined by the city, rework until the required density has been obtained and approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-792. - Bedding. 
Bedding shall conform to the individual requirements for the pipe or conduit being used. Bedding shall be Class D for ductile iron pipe. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-793. - Alignment grade and cover. 
(a)  Install pipe and appurtenances at the locations, positions, alignments, and grades shown on the drawings. In the event of conflict, install as directed by the city. 
(b)  Provide 42-inch depth of cover measured from finished grade to top of pipe barrel unless otherwise shown on the drawings. Where obstruction is encountered, the depth of cover may be more or less than 42 inches, provided that the greater or lesser depths are approved by the city. 
(c)  For pipelines parallel to existing public roads and highways, provide minimum 48-inch depth of cover below the finished grade or 48-inch depth measured below the centerline elevation of the road or highway, whichever depth is at lowest elevation. 
(d)  Limit pipe curvature to the horizontal or vertical joint deflection specified by the pipe manufacturer or AWWA Standard C600. Use fittings if required curvature cannot be maintained by allowable joint deflection. Do not bend PVC pipe. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-794. - Installing pipe. 
(a)  Install pipe and appurtenances only when trench conditions are suitable. Trenches must not contain water that can enter open end of pipe. Provide proper implements, tools, and facilities for the safe and convenient performance of the work. 
(b)  Lower all pipe, fittings, valves, and hydrants carefully into the trench piece by piece by means of a derrick, ropes, or other suitable tools or equipment. Prevent damage to water main materials and protective coatings and linings. Do not drop or dump water line materials into the trench. 
(c)  Carefully examine all pipe and fittings for cracks and other defects while suspended above the trench immediately before installation in final position. Defective pipe or fittings shall be clearly marked and shall be removed from the site. 
(d)  Clean the interior and bell and spigot ends of each piece of pipe thoroughly before the pipe is laid. 
(e)  Prevent foreign material from entering the pipe while it is being placed in the line. If necessary, provide protective covering for the ends of the pipe until the connection is to be made to the adjacent pipe. During laying operations, no debris, tools, clothing, or other materials shall be placed in the pipe. 
(f)  As each length of pipe is placed in the trench, center the spigot end in the bell, force the pipe home and bring to correct line and grade. Secure the pipe in place with approved backfill material tamped around it. Take precautions to prevent dirt from entering the joint space. 
(g)  At times when pipe laying is not in progress, close the open ends of pipe with a watertight plug. Maintain plug in place until the trench is pumped completely dry. 
(h)  Lay pipe with bell ends facing in the direction of laying, unless directed otherwise by the city. Where pipe is laid on a grade of ten percent or greater, start the laying at the bottom and proceed upward with the bell ends of the pipe upgrade. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-795. - Cutting pipe. 
Use pipe-cutter for inserting valves, fittings, or closure pieces in a neat and workmanlike manner without damage to the pipe or lining. Cut at right angles to the axis of the pipe. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-796. - Detection of non-ferrous pipe. 
Install one continuous strand of approved detection tape directly over all non-ferrous pipe, approximately 18 inches above the pipe and one continuous strand of No. 12 solid copper wire in blue insulation directly under the pipe. Pull wire up into valve boxes to within two inches of top of valve box. Installed detection device shall be such that owner can locate installed pipe using a standard electronic detector. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.7, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-797. - Jointing. 
(a)  Provide jointing of all pipe, fittings, valves, and hydrants in strict compliance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(b)  Mechanical joints (MJ). Tighten all nuts with torque limiting wrench. Nuts spaced 180 degrees apart shall be tightened alternately in order to produce equal pressure. 
(c)  Push-on joints (P-O). Furnish and install adaptor as required to join bells and spigots of different sizes. Complete joint by forcing the plain end to the bottom of the socket with a forked tool or jack-type tool. 
(d)  Restrained joints (RJ). Follow the same procedure as for push-on joints and the manufacturer's procedure for type of restrained joint installed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.8, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-798. - Setting of valves and fittings. 
(a)  Set valves plumb. (No exceptions will be allowed.) Tamp backfill around valves and boxes carefully in six-inch layers for the full depth of trench. 
(b)  Provide a valve box, cast iron lid, and concrete collar for every valve. For valves in areas that will not be paved, six-inch PVC pipe riser may be used in lieu of C.I. box. The valve box or riser shall not transmit shock or stress to the valve, with the box cover flush with the surface of the finished pavement or such other level as may be directed. 
(c)  Provide an extension stem on any operating nut that is greater than five feet below the valve box lid. If used, an extension shall terminate 18 inches below grade. 
(d)  Upon final completion of valve and valve box, including surface restoration, operate each valve in the presence of the city to demonstrate proper valve operation. 
(e)  Provide and install concrete valve marker only for valves specifically designated by the city. Install markers after final grading of the site. 
(f)  Provide an accurate and complete sketch for each valve showing measured distances to at least three permanent points. Measure for valve sketches upon job completion and submit to the city when application is made for final payment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.9, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-799. - Setting of hydrants. 
(a)  Set all hydrants plumb with nozzles parallel with, or at right angles to, the street with the pumper nozzle facing the street unless otherwise specified. 
(b)  Provide and install vertical extensions if required to match the bury line with finished grade after backfill. Do not bury the break-away flanges under any conditions. 
(c)  Immediately upon installation, install black polyethylene bag (or other approved cover) over all inoperable fire hydrants, new or existing. 
(d)  Upon final completion of fire hydrants ready for service, demonstrate proper installation and operation by: 
(1)  Operating each hydrant under flowing conditions; and 
(2)  Closing and opening the hydrant isolation valve in the presence of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.10, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-800. - Thrust (reaction) blocking. 
(a)  Provide blocking for all plugs, caps, tees, bends, valves, hydrants, etc. unless otherwise specified. Generally, concrete thrust blocking is required whether or not restrained joints are used. 
(b)  Blocking shall be purchased ready-mix concrete having a compressive strength of not less than 3,000 psi at 28 days. Place blocking between solid, unexcavated earth and the fitting to be anchored. The area of bearing on the pipe and on the ground in each instance shall withstand thrust forces created by the specified test pressure. In no instance shall the bearing area be smaller than shown on the drawings for firm, dry clay (3,000 pounds per square foot). Where soils are encountered with less than 3,000 pounds per square foot bearing capacity, increase bearing area dimensions as necessary. All blocking shall be placed such that the joints will be accessible for repair, unless otherwise shown or directed. 
(c)  Metal harnesses, tie rods, or clamps may not be used except in special situations specifically approved by the city. Steel rods or clamps, if their use is approved, shall be galvanized. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.11, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-801. - Utility crossings. 
(a)  Use extreme caution to avoid damage or disruption where crossings are necessary over or under other utility pipes or structures, such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, gas mains, telephone ducts, buried cables, other water mains, or other structures. 
(b)  Do not pass water pipe through any drainage pipe, culvert, sanitary or storm sewer, or manhole, or any other structure. 
(c)  Provide minimum of six-inch cushion of earth or sand between water pipe and any other utility or structure. 
(d)  If practical, provide at least ten feet horizontal and 18 inches of clear vertical separation at all structures and other pipelines or utilities. 
(e)  See additional requirements herein for separating water main from storm or sanitary sewers and natural gas mains. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.12, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-802. - Stream and river crossings. 
(a)  For open-cut stream crossings, install water pipe as indicated on the stream crossing detail drawing. Provide minimum cover of 24 inches under bottom of streambeds or ditches. 
(b)  Where indicated on the drawings and for streams greater than 15 feet wide, place ball joint river crossing pipe beneath the river bed to maintain minimum 24 inches of cover. Install river crossing pipe by means and methods of the contractor's choice while ensuring that all conditions of applicable permits are complied with. Handle, install, and join ball joint pipe strictly in accordance with the manufacturer's written instructions. Use extreme care to avoid flotation of pipe under all conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.13, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-803. - Sewer separation. 
(a)  Use special precautions to maintain minimum separation distances between water main and any existing or proposed sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or manhole. 
(b)  To the maximum extent practical, maintain at least ten feet of horizontal separation between the water main and any existing or proposed sewer. Under no circumstances shall a sewer and a water main be laid in the same trench. 
(c)  Maintain a minimum vertical separation of 18 inches between the outside of the water main and the outside of any sewer or force main. Arrange the crossing so that the water main joints will be equidistant and as far as possible from the sewer joints. Install water pipe above (over) sanitary sewers. Where local conditions prohibit laying water pipe above (over) a sewer, maintain 18 inches of minimum vertical separation and provide adequate structural support and protection for the sewer to prevent damage during pipe laying and backfilling operations. Ensure that any sewer or force main crossing over a water main is constructed of materials and with joints that are equivalent to water main standards and tested to ensure watertightness. 
(d)  Notify the city immediately upon encountering field conditions that do not allow the specified minimum distances. If at least an 18-inch vertical separation between the water pipe and existing or proposed sewer is not possible, notify the city and use an 18-foot length of ductile iron pipe for the water main, centered on the sewer at the point of crossing. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.14, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-804. - Gas main separation. 
(a)  Use special precautions to maintain minimum separation distances between water main and any existing or proposed natural gas mains. 
(b)  Where practical, maintain a minimum five-foot clear vertical separation and minimum horizontal separation of ten feet between the water main and any steel gas main. Notify the city immediately upon encountering field conditions that do not allow the specified minimum distances. 
(c)  Pipe wrapping or encasement of DI water pipe, where specified or directed, shall be performed in accordance with requirements of AWWA Standard C105. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.15, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-805. - Connecting to existing mains. 
(a)  Coordinate connections to existing water facilities with the city and do not make connections to existing mains without specific approval of time of day and allowable duration of service disruption. 
(b)  Ascertain the exact locations and depths of existing mains prior to connection. Locations of required connections to existing mains shown on drawings may be approximate only. 
(c)  Make connections to existing mains in a complete and workmanlike manner using only approved fittings and specials to suit conditions encountered. 
(d)  Repair, reconnect, and return to service in equal or better condition all existing pipes which are cut or damaged. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.16, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-806. - Water service connections. 
(a)  Install service connections and reconnections in the same manner as water distribution mains except that the depth of cover shall be 36 inches minimum. 
(b)  Install service connections where directed by the city and after the new main is fully installed, tested, disinfected and approved. It is intended that all service connections will be reconnected to the new water main using copper tubing unless polyethylene service tubing is specifically permitted. 
(c)  Use standard service connections unless PRV (high pressure) service connections are directed by the city. 
(d)  Install water meter boxes on public right-of-way at the property line, unless otherwise directed by the city. Install customer cut-off valves and PRVs on the customer's property, at the property line, unless otherwise directed by the city. 
(e)  Provide and install all necessary fittings and couplings for re-connecting existing meters. 
(f)  If approved by the city, use a single one-inch copper tube lateral under roadway pavement to serve two standard residential meters where two long-side residential meters are less than 15 feet apart. 
(g)  Make service reconnections in accordance with Emerson's Standard Detail drawing for water service connections. 
(h)  Install two-inch PVC casing pipe for all service tubing to be under existing or proposed pavements. Extend casing five feet beyond edge of pavement on each side, unless otherwise directed. (Extend ten feet each side for state DOT roads.) Install casing pipe with 36 inches cover under road or shoulder surface, or ditch line. 
(i)  Normally, pavement cutting will not be permitted for installing service tubing or casing. Install casings for service tubing under pavements by jacking or boring where practical. However, the city may approve installation of two-inch PVC casing by open cut methods if rock or other obstructions are encountered by attempts to install by jacking or boring. 
(j)  Set meter boxes level, on well compacted earth, and in a manner such that stormwater will not accumulate on, into, or over, the meter box. 
(k)  Install the meters with extra fiber or rubber washers so that washers create at least 0.1-inch separation between the meter and coupler on each side of meter. 
(l)  Securely cap valves and meter setters that are installed temporarily without meters. Provide caps to prevent damage to ends or entry of contamination. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.17, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-807. - Boring and jacking. 
(a)  Preparation. Remove pavement only as necessary for excavating bore pit and installing the casing and pipeline appurtenances. Cut all asphalt pavements in straight, uniform lines by means of a jack hammer or suitable pavement cutter. Cut concrete pavements to a depth of at least two inches along the cut line with a rotary saw, after which the pavement may be broken with a jack hammer or suitable pavement cutter. 
(b)  Techniques of construction. Unless otherwise specified, the construction techniques (for whichever method of installation is used) shall be the contractor's choice. However, the work must be performed using generally accepted, and safe, construction procedures using adequate equipment, by experienced workmen, and in conformance with applicable permit requirements and all federal, state, and local laws. 
(c)  Installation by open cut method. Use the open-cut method for crossing a roadway or stream only when specifically shown on the drawings or directed by the city when permission has been obtained from the governing authority for a specific highway or roadway crossing. 
(1)  Cut pavement and excavate trenches in accordance with this manual. Provide suitable sheeting and bracing where necessary. Keep the work de-watered at all times. 
(2)  The bottom of the trench shall be evenly graded to a depth of approximately six inches below the bottom of the casing in order to accommodate bedding materials. Bedding material shall be compacted crushed stone. 
(3)  Accurately lay the casing pipe on the prepared bed to the alignment and grade indicated and securely block in place to prevent movement during the succeeding phase of the backfilling operation. 
(4)  Backfill over the casing shall conform to requirements for casings and pipelines under pavement, or shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of DOT permits, whichever are more stringent. 
(5)  Pavement replacement shall conform to the requirements herein, but shall not be less than applicable DOT requirements unless specific written approval is received. 
(6)  Make all arrangements for diversion of traffic and control of traffic during the making of the crossing, all in accordance with the requirements described herein. 
(7)  In the event that open-cut road crossings cannot be completed in one day, cover the open section of trench with steel plates of such size and thickness as to safely withstand heavy traffic over the trench and remain in place under such heavy traffic. 
(d)  Installation by boring and jacking method. Use the boring and jacking method where a crossing is designated on the drawings, unless open-cut is specified or directed by the city. The boring and jacking method of installation of casing for the carrier pipe shall be a dry operation without use of hydraulic jetting to soften, loosen or sluice away the material to be excavated. 
(1)  Excavate suitable bore pits or trenches suitable sheeting and bracing where necessary. Keep the work de-watered at all times. Provide suitable traffic signs, barricades, and lights for protection of all open excavations and to conform to all permit conditions. 
(2)  Excavate and remove whatever material is encountered in the bore pit and boring excavation, including rock, and extend excavation no farther than two feet ahead of the casing pipe. 
(3)  Limit minimum diameter of the boring excavation to the outside diameter of the casing pipe as closely as practical. 
(4)  Remove excavated material from the boring as the excavation progresses. Accumulation of excavated material within the casing pipe will not be permitted. 
(5)  Should appreciable loss of ground occur as a result of boring and jacking operations, immediately fill the voids with soil cement using a one part cement to five parts granular soil ratio. Mix and place the soil cement as rapidly as possible after loss of ground. 
(6)  If blasting operations are required, apply for and obtain all required permits for handling explosives and performing blasting operations. The use of explosives on a state or interstate highway right-of-way is prohibited unless approved in writing by the city and authorized by a separate DOT blasting permit obtained by the contractor. 
(e)  Alignment and grade. 
(1)  Install casing pipe at the location and grade shown on the drawings. Variations in the installed position of the casing from the line and grade shown on the drawings will be permitted only if approved by the city. However, the contractor shall be responsible for any costs of related realignment of pipelines, which may result from misaligned casings. 
(2)  If site conditions are suitable, leave casing pipe exposed at both ends until inspected and approved by the city and DOT or railroad inspector. Otherwise, provide temporary backfill, then re-excavate and expose both ends for inspection when requested to do so. 
(3)  Assist the city in obtaining a dimensioned as-built drawing showing horizontal and vertical location of both ends of the casing. 
(4)  Fill all abandoned casings with sand and plug ends with masonry or concrete at least 12 inches deep or by welded steel plate. 
(f)  Welding. Steel casing pipe shall be field-butt welded by experienced welders generally according to AWWA C206, section 5, Welding-Procedure Details. Field joints shall be continuous, circumferential welded to result in a joint meeting the minimum strength requirements of the base metals and which is completely watertight. 
(g)  Installation of carrier pipe. 
(1)  Notify the city at least two days prior to installation of the carrier pipe and obtain the city's approval prior to proceeding with sealing and backfilling. Install carrier pipe only in the presence of the city. 
(2)  Provide a minimum of two stainless steel spacers per section of pipe. Mount spacers and install pipe in strict accordance with the manufacturer's written instructions. 
(3)  After inspection by the city, seal casing ends against entrance of foreign material by means of flexible rubber end seal. 
(4)  Installation, testing, and disinfection of carrier pipe shall be as specified in other sections of these specifications, as applicable. 
(h)  Backfilling. Permanently backfill the bore pits and trenches immediately after approval of the casing and carrier pipe installation by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 506.18, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-808—105-837. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - INSPECTIONS AND TESTS 

Sec. 105-838. - Scope. 
(a)  This section pertains to the inspection and testing of installed water lines requiring testing for assuring proper operation and service and/or specifically specified to be tested. In general, all lines designed to operate under pressure shall be successfully tested. Tests of installed piping shall consist of a pressure and leakage test. 
(b)  All piping to be tested must satisfactorily comply with the pressure tests before being eligible for acceptance. In general, tests shall be conducted in accordance with AWWA Standard C-600 except as otherwise herein specified. All costs for testing required by the city shall be paid for by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 507.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-839. - Filling for testing. 
Connect temporary fill valve assembly to existing water main or hydrant as shown on the drawings. Coordinate with the city for filling and testing. Provide adequate backflow protection on fill line between potable water supply source and new water main. Fill slowly, as directed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 507.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-840. - Hydrostatic testing. 
(a)  Perform pressure and leakage tests on each section of the pipe between valves in accordance with AWWA C600, except as otherwise specified herein. All thrust blocking shall be in place and properly cured prior to start of hydrostatic testing. If directed by the city, pipelines may be tested before the trench is completely backfilled. 
(b)  Furnish and install corporation stops at high points on the pipe to release air as pipe is slowly filled with test water. When a segment of pipe between two valves is filled and ready for testing, the segment of pipe shall be thoroughly blown free of air and prepared for testing. Air must be removed prior to testing. 
(c)  Furnish suitable test pump, meters, connections, pressure gauges approved by the city, and all necessary apparatus including means for accurately measuring water introduced into the pipe during testing. 
(d)  Maintain full test pressure for a minimum of two hours. Test pressure shall be 200 pounds per square inch (psi). Pressure shall not vary by more than five psi during the test. 
(e)  The length of pipe included in each pressure test shall be limited to the segment between two valves, unless otherwise directed by the city because of topography or other conditions which might prevent a valid test. 
(f)  Concurrently with the pressure tests, conduct leakage tests on all pipe. Maximum allowable leakage shall be six gallons per mile of pipe per inch of nominal diameter per day. 
(g)  Locate, remove, and replace all defective pipe, valves, fittings, or hydrants. Clamps or other repair devices shall not be used for repair. 
(h)  Repeat pressure and leakage tests until results are satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 507.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-841. - Initial flushing. 
(a)  After completion of hydrostatic testing, and prior to disinfection, thoroughly flush the pipelines, in presence of the city. Provide adequate backflow protection for the flushing water source, to be approved by the city prior to flushing. 
(b)  Produce a minimum velocity of three feet per second in pipe for as long as necessary to clean out silt and debris, unless the city determines otherwise. 
(c)  Provide adequate outlet piping and/or diffuser nozzle for proper disposal of flush water without causing erosion or other damage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 507.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-842. - Disinfection. 
(a)  After initial flushing, disinfect all installed pipe, fittings, valves, and appurtenances or other facilities exposed to contamination by the construction. Disinfect strictly in accordance with AWWA Standard C651, using the continuous-feed method, except as otherwise specified. Use of the slug method may be directed by the city for larger pipelines to reduce volume of heavily chlorinated water to be flushed to waste. Use of the tablet method is not acceptable. 
(b)  Provide disinfection of all pipe and appurtenances using calcium or sodium hypochlorite solution. Do not use calcium hypochlorite intended for swimming pool disinfection. 
(c)  Provide constant feed of chlorine such that the main will have not less than 25 mg/l free chlorine. After 24-hour retention period, all portions of the main shall have a residual of not less than ten mg/l of free chlorine. 
(d)  Final flushing. After 24 hours, flush chlorinated water from the line until chlorine concentration of water leaving the main is no higher than that generally prevailing in the existing system, or less than one mg/l. Provide proper treatment and disposal of chlorinated water in accordance with federal, state, and local law. 
(e)  Repeat disinfection procedure until bacteriological analysis results are acceptable to the city and the local regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 507.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-843. - Backfill testing. 
Compaction testing will be required for mains constructed in paved areas or where pavement is planned. A minimum of two tests at each road crossing will be conducted at varying depths as fill is being placed. If any of these tests show failing results, then the failing backfill will be removed, re-compacted and re-tested, and one additional area will be tested as well. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 507.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-844. - Other testing requirements. 
The city reserves the right to require further testing for any reason to ensure quality workmanship and materials. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 507.7, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-845—105-866. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT/FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-867. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 601.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-868. - Basis for area of special flood hazard; flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of this article, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 28, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto including, but not limited to, the October 8, 1982, maps on file are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the city. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA-approved methodology approved by the city. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 601.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-869. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 601.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-870. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 601.4, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-871—105-888. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-889. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
(c)  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 602.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-890. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot contour intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
1.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
2.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
A local benchmark must be provided within the limits of the site. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 105-951(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 105-950(5). 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structures. 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this article. The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 602.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-891. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
(a)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the city a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. 
(b)  When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(c)  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 602.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-892. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to ensure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including, but not limited to, section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the city shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of divisions 3 and 4 of this article; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the city shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 602.4, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-893—105-917. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 105-918. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the city. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 603.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-919. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS- or FEMA-approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the city. If floodway data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 603.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-920. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection (a) of this section shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two' percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 105-921; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 603.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-921. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 105-953 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the city. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 603.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-922. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) of this section. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 603.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-923. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The city may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 603.6, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-924—105-949. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 105-950. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 105-920, 105-921 and 105-922 have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this section, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located four feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 604.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-951. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
The following provisions, in addition to those in section 105-950, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 105-920, 105-921, and 105-922 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 105-920, 105-921, and 105-922 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than four feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 105-950(5). 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than four feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 105-950. 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 105-920, 105-921, and 105-922 have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 105-920, 105-921, and 105-922 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the city to be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with section 105-950 and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on-site must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings, substantial improvements (subsection (1)a of this section), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 105-920, 105-921, and 105-922 have been met. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than four feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 105-950. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 604.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-952. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least four feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 604.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-953. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
(a)  For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the city shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
(b)  If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than four feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with section 105-950. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 604.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-954. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to four feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 105-950. 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 604.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-955. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data. 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required. 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 105-890. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(f)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 604.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-956. - Waivers; additional considerations; requirements. 
Waivers from certain specifications are allowed and addressed previously in this chapter. For the purpose of a waiver involving floodplain/flood hazard the following shall apply in addition to those requirements previously addressed. In the event the requirements specific to this section are in conflict with the general requirements, the requirements contained in this section shall rule. 
(1)  Waivers may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the waiver issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(2)  Waivers may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(3)  Waivers shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(4)  In reviewing such requests, the city shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(5)  Conditions for waivers: 
a.  A waiver shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the waiver would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a waiver will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Waivers shall only be issued upon determination that the waiver is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the waiver is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a waiver is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The city shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any waivers to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(6)  Waivers shall not be issued after the fact. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 605, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-957—105-985. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-986. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this section; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this section, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the city; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, Definitions, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 105-1018(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA); 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this section, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located, and provided further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1) through (8), (10) and (11) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the city, the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a land-disturbance permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a land disturbance permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 701, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-987—105-1015. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL USING BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

Sec. 105-1016. - General provisions. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES state general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of sections 105-1017 and 105-1018. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES state general permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 702.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1017. - Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(a)  BMP requirement. Best management practices as set forth in sections 105-1017 and 105-1018 shall be required for all land disturbing activities occurring in the city, not otherwise exempted. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the city or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b), which is incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  Discharge violation. A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and/or maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by the city or of any state general permit issued by the EPD pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(c)  BMP design/install/maintain violation. Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by the city or of any state general permit issued by the EPD pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(d)  Requirements according to state statutes. The city may set more stringent buffer requirements in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 702.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1018. - Additional requirements. 
The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable and no later than 14 days after disturbance; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable and in all cases prior to any certificates of occupancy being issued; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 1005-1017(b). 
(15)  Stream buffer. 
a.  Except as provided in subsections (15) and (16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. 
b.  As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: 
1.  That under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; 
2.  That has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; 
3.  For which groundwater is not a source of water; and 
4.  For which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. 
Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. 
c.  The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
1.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
2.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
(i)  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(ii)  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  Trout stream buffer. There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280 et seq.) and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this section, maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015, if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a minor buffer impact as defined in EPD Rule 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
e.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements herein. 
f.  The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of, a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
g.  Construction site operators must control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 702.3, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1019—105-1049. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPLICATION AND PERMITTING PROCESS 

Sec. 105-1050. - General. 
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 703.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1051. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD, if applicable 
(b)  Application. The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city on forms furnished by the city and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 105-1052. The plan, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that proposed land disturbing activity will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of sections 105-1017 and 105-1018 will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's plan and supporting data. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(c)  Local fees. Local permitting fees shall be as set by resolution of the city council and shall be reasonably related to the cost of engineering review of the plans and the cost of administering permits. Additional fees may be charged for re-reviews, inspections, and re-inspections. 
(d)  State fees. In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), in the amount of $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. Half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the EPD; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the EPD, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction 
(e)  Payment of fees. All applicable permitting fees shall be paid in full to the city and the state prior to issuance of the permit. 
(f)  District review and city review. Plan approval by both the district and the city shall be required for a permit to be issued. Immediately upon receipt and review of a completed permit application and an approvable plan with all supportive data, the city shall refer the application, the plan, and supportive data to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan by the district, but not by the city. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the city. The city shall also independently review the plan, and no permit shall be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district and the city also approves the plan as complying with this chapter. 
(g)  Multiple prior violations. If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the city may deny the permit application. Criteria to be applied in making this decision include whether the applicant poses a substantial risk of further violations, the number of past violations, the severity of past violations, the applicant's response to correcting problems, and the time elapsed since the last violation. Corporations owned or controlled by the same entity shall count as the same applicant for these purposes. 
(h)  Fraudulent submissions. Fraudulent submissions are prohibited, and any falsehoods or misinformation on a permit application shall subject the application to rejection, and subject any permit to revocation. If a permit is granted to a person who is later determined by the city to be a straw man, (i.e., not the actual operator, but rather a front for the actual operator), the permit shall be revoked. 
(i)  Surety requirement. The city may require any permit applicant to post a surety in the form of a performance bond, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof, (the form of which shall be approved by the city) in the amount of $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. Any proposed surety is subject to the approval of the city attorney before acceptance, and must be issued by a company approved to do business in Georgia under Treasury Circular 570. Any bank issuing an irrevocable letter of credit must have a physical branch in the state. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the city may draw on the surety or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(j)  Inspection certification. Prior to issuance of the permit by the city, the operator or owner shall certify that the design professional responsible for the design of the plan has also been engaged and is authorized to provide periodic inspections, plan revisions, stream sampling, and related certifications as required by this article and the state general permit, if applicable. At any time, for any reason, the operator or owner may submit a revised inspection certification designating a different, or additional, design professional. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 703.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1052. - Plan requirements. 
(a)  Design requirements. Each erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan ("plan") shall be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in sections 105-1017 and 105-1018, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, latest edition, is hereby incorporated by reference into this article and shall be followed for design and review of submitted plans. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. All maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the seal and dated signature of the responsible design professional. 
(b)  Plan requirements. Each erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan (the "plan") shall conform to the following: 
(1)  All sheets shall be 24-inch by 36-inch or 36-inch by 42-inch size. All sheets shall be of equal size. 
(2)  The site plan scale shall be one inch equals 40 feet, or larger scale if necessary for clarity. 
(3)  A property plat showing the entire property required for the project shall be included. 
(4)  A topographic (two-foot contour interval) and physical features map of the entire property required for the project shall be included, with the seal and dated signature of the preparer responsible for the topography and mapping. Topography shall be on USGS datum and a permanent benchmark on the project site must be identified. 
(5)  Name, address and 24-hour telephone number of the operator and property owner. 
(6)  Delineation of the 100-year flood boundary for the project site. 
(7)  Delineation of all state waters within and adjacent to the project site with required buffers shown. 
(8)  Delineation of protective fencing for areas within the project not subject to land disturbing activities. 
(9)  Delineation and size of drainage areas for all off-site stormwater entering the project site and for sub-basins within the site. 
(10)  Proposed retaining walls showing dimensions and heights. All retaining walls greater than four feet in height shall be designed by, and bear the seal and dated signature of a professional engineer registered by the state. 
(c)  Certified personnel. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(d)  Required supporting data. Data required for the plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 703.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1053. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 105-1018(15), (16), and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 105-1051(i) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority (LIA) are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(c)  Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(d)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(e)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(f)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 703.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1054. - Inspection, administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The city will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 704, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1055. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the EPD and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 705, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1056—105-1078. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-1079. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the ordinance administrator to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the ordinance administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 801.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1080. - Stormwater design manual. 
The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 801.2, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1081—105-1098. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-1099. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
(c)  Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 105-1100; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 105-1101; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 105-1102, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with section 105-1103, if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 105-1104. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 802.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1100. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(a)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is required that the land owner or developer shall meet with the city for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(b)  To accomplish this goal, the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate, at a minimum, existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings, local watershed plans, the county greenspace projection plan (if applicable) and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 802.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1101. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in division 3 of this article. 
(b)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist found in the stormwater design manual. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 804; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in division 3 of this article VIII must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include a map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 3 of this article VIII ; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Emerson Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance, Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city as provided in section 105-1102, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section 105-1102. 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 802.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1102. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
(b)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(c)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate, for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(d)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(e)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in division 5 of this article. 
(f)  The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 802.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1103. - Performance bonds, irrevocable letter of credit and maintenance bonds. 
(a)  Performance bonds or irrevocable letter of credit. The city shall require the submittal of a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit prior to issuance of a permit in order to insure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to function and perform as intended and for failure to complete such work as specified in the stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be for 125 percent of the total construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, including: 
(1)  Total installed cost for storm drain pipe, culvert, manhole, and box inlet installation; and 
(2)  Total cost for site filling and grading, including construction of open drainage swales and detention/retention facilities 
The performance bond requirements of this section shall be waived if a bond is provided as described in section 105-64. 
(b)  Maintenance bonds. Prior to the release of the stormwater facility performance surety, a maintenance surety will be required. The maintenance surety will be in the amount of 20 percent of the total construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit. The maintenance surety shall cover a period of five years from the date of release of the performance bond or letter of credit by the city. 
(c)  Release of sureties. Notice of scheduled date for completion of construction shall be provided to the city at least 72 hours prior to its planned completion. The owner will schedule the final inspection with the city. The performance bond or letter of credit will be released by the city council at its next regular meeting following final approval. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 802.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1104. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city. 
(b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 105-1099. (Two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included.) 
(c)  The city shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(d)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (c) of this section and this subsection shall apply to such re-submittal. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreements, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The city shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city; and 
(5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 105-1162. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 802.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1105. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 802.7, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1106—105-1132. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 

Sec. 105-1133. - Compliance. 
Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this division shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans. 
Sec. 105-1134. - Water quality. 
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 803.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1135. - Stream channel protection. 
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 803.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1136. - Overbank flooding protection. 
Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under section 105-1135(2) is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 803.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1137. - Extreme flooding protection. 
Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 803.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1138. - Structural stormwater controls. 
(a)  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
(b)  Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 803.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1139. - Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. 
The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 105-1134. The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 803.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1140. - Drainage system guidelines. 
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include, but are not limited to, culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 803.7, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1141. - Dam design guidelines. 
Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 803.8, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1142—105-1160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS OF POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 105-1161. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction by applicant. 
(a)  The applicant shall maintain a copy of the approved stormwater management plan on site. When required, the applicant shall designate a responsible person for self-monitoring and provide all contact information for such individual to the city. Self-monitoring shall be conducted within 24 hours of a measurable rain event, or at minimum once per week. 
(b)  All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Any remedial action needed to maintain compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(4)  Schedule and designated party for proposed remedial actions. 
(c)  Written reports shall be kept on-site and be made available to the city within 24 hours of request for review. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 804.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1162. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction by city. 
(a)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(b)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(c)  If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 804.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1163. - Final inspection and as-built plans. 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans as outlined in the city development regulations. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 804.3, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1164—105-1189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES AND PRACTICES 

Sec. 105-1190. - Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which is subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
(b)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, may correct the violation as provided in section 105-1193. 
(c)  Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 805.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1191. - Right-of-entry for inspection. 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 805.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1192. - Records of maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 805.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1193. - Failure to maintain. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. Other remedies as deemed appropriate may be utilized. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 805.4, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1194—105-1219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-1220. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in this chapter. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 901.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1221. - Provisions relating to pre-existing activities, permits or developments. 
This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 902.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1222. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited above. 
(3)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
(4)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(b)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 902.2, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1223—105-1247. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-1248. - Buffer and setback requirements. 
All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 903.1, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1249—105-1269. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER BUFFER REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-1270. - Other restrictions may apply. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 904, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1271—105-1298. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT ON BUFFER ZONE PROPERTIES 

Sec. 105-1299. - Application information. 
(a)  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the city may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
(b)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 905, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1300—105-1326. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-1327. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. 
(b)  This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1001.1, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1328—105-1352. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 105-1353. - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
(a)  No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(b)  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater de-watering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1002.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1354. - Prohibition of illegal connections. 
The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city sewer department. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1002.2, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1355—105-1376. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES 

Sec. 105-1377. - Proof of compliance with permit required. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1003, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1378—105-1407. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ACCESS AND INSPECTION OF PROPERTIES AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 105-1408. - Inspection. 
The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1004, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1409—105-1439. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES AND SPILLS 

Sec. 105-1440. - Procedure for reporting discharge of prohibited materials; response; violation. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by telephone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the telephone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided in this section is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1005, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1441—105-1458. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - STORM SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-1459. - Drainageways and easement. 
(a)  Drainageways for manmade drainage ditches shall be cleared and opened at the time of development to control surface water runoff. Runoff slopes, and side slopes to be specified by the developer's engineer, according to good engineering practices. 
(b)  Drainageways shall be provided where a development is traversed by a watercourse, natural stream, channel or any other circumstances where required by the city. It shall conform substantially to the limits of such watercourse plus any additional width as is necessary to accommodate future development. 
(c)  Drainageways off the street right-of-way that are to be dedicated to the city shall be clearly defined on the plat of the individual property owner and said property owner shall be required to keep easements free of obstructions and shall maintain same in such a way as to ensure free and maximum flow at all times. 
(d)  All drainageways, including existing drainage ditches, shall be clear of debris, excess dirt and other materials. The ground shall be smoothed down and grassed by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1101, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1460—105-1481. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STORM DRAINAGE DESIGN CRITERIA 

Sec. 105-1482. - Storm sewers. 
(a)  All storm sewer design calculations shall be certified by a professional engineer, land surveyor or landscape architect currently licensed in the state. 
(b)  Storm drainage pipes shall be sloped so as to maintain a minimum velocity of three feet per second (fps) during the two-year design storm event in order that sediment will not collect. 
(c)  Drainage formulas used in determining size of storm sewer components shall meet all criteria of the 
(1)  Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Latest Revision, facilitated by the Atlanta Regional Commission, the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division and 35 cities and counties across Georgia; and 
(2)  Drainage Manual for Highways, latest edition; or other methodology as approved by the city. 
(d)  The 25-year storm event shall be used in designing the storm drains. In cases where the property is traversed by a spring, creek, or other watercourse, the 100-year storm event will be used for design. 
(e)  Storm sewers shall not be less than 15 inches in diameter. No storm drain pipe running parallel to the existing primary road shall be located beneath the proposed entrance widening. Relocation of existing storm drainage structures shall be done by the developer. 
(f)  Storm drainage structures or drainageways shall not be located within 20 feet of any existing or proposed building. 
(g)  Storm sewers shall extend at least from edge of right-of-way to edge of right-of-way. Residential subdivision storm sewers shall extend at least to the rear of the building on all piping. 
(h)  Catch basins, junction boxes, drop inlets and outlet structures shall have a minimum elevation drop from the inlet invert elevation to the outlet invert elevation of at least 0.20 feet. 
(i)  Maximum continuous length of pipe without a junction box, drop inlet, or catch basin, shall be 300 feet for pipes less than 42 inches in diameter, and 500 feet maximum for pipe greater than 42 inches in diameter. 
(j)  Storm sewers shall be reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) within the pavement of an existing or proposed street unless otherwise approved by the city. 
(k)  Aluminum storm drain piping shall be encased in a polyethylene wrap when it is located within 20 feet of a steel gas line. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1102.1, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1483. - Drainage structures (excluding pipe or culverts). 
(a)  The design engineer shall check the hydraulic capacity of each drainage structure designed as an inlet point in the drainage system. The actual stormwater flows shall be compared with the structures' flow capacity to ensure their capacity is not exceeded. 
(b)  Catch basins shall be constructed in accordance with the Georgia DOT Standard Details 1033D and/or 1034D. 
(c)  Catch basins shall be located outside of intersection radii. 
(d)  Catch basin spacing from each other shall be limited to a maximum distance as follows: 
(1)  250 feet on grades up to seven percent. 
(2)  400 feet on grades from seven percent to ten percent. 
(3)  500 feet on grades over ten percent. 
No curb cuts in lieu of drainage structures will be allowed. 
(e)  The outlet end of all storm drain pipes shall have either flared-end sections or concrete headwalls which meet Georgia DOT Standards 1120 or 1125. This same standard applies to the inlet end of storm sewers where an open pipe is designed to collect the runoff. Flared ends shall be of the same material as the storm drain pipe. 
(f)  Drop inlets shall be designed to Georgia DOT Standard Detail 1019A. Weir drop inlets shall be provided in landscaped areas. Grated drop inlets shall be provided in paved areas. 
(g)  Junction boxes or manholes having access to the pipe shall be constructed to meet the requirements of Georgia DOT Standard Detail 9031U or 1011A. Manholes shall be provided with eccentric cone sections. 
(h)  All drainage structures shall have a minimum elevation drop from the inlet invert elevation to the outlet invert elevation of at least 0.20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1102.2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1484. - Hydrology study. 
(a)  All development plans requiring a land disturbance permit will require a hydrology study provided by the developer to the city. The hydrology study and all stormwater detention facility design calculations shall be certified by a professional engineer, land surveyor or landscape architect currently licensed in the state. The city has the right to require proof of qualifications and registration, and to require that a copy of all calculations performed by the design professional be submitted to the city. The hydrology study shall also additionally meet the requirements of article VIII of this chapter. 
(1)  Hydrology study must address the following issues: 
a.  Existing land uses downstream. 
b.  Anticipated future land uses downstream. 
c.  Magnitude of increased peak flows due to development. 
d.  Presence of existing drainage problems. 
e.  Capacity of existing and anticipated drainage systems. 
f.  Creation of concentrated flows where none had occurred previously. 
g.  Availability of feasible locations for detention facilities. 
h.  Existing flows generated off-site which pass through the proposed development site. 
i.  Anticipated future flows generated off-site which pass through the proposed development site. 
j.  The nature of the receiving drainageway. 
k.  For any development that impacts a stream, creek, lake, pond, or wet area, developer must provide confirmation from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers that the development complies with section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(2)  The hydrology study shall identify the locations and quantities of stormwater runoff entering and exiting the site for both pre- and post-developed conditions. Analysis of the off-site properties shall address future development in addition to addressing existing conditions. It shall contain drainage area delineation maps and other exhibits at a satisfactory scale and sufficient in quantity and scope to define the boundaries of the site relative to watercourses, drainage divides, drainage structures and other pertinent features. 
(3)  The analysis of downstream conditions in the hydrology study shall address each and every point or area along the project's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the area immediately downstream of the project property. This area shall generally extend a flow distance of about one-half mile from the project property line. However, the most critical downstream area investigation shall be conducted relative to existing and anticipated land uses on tracts which adjoin the project property. As part of the hydrological study, consideration should be given to the flow capacity of downstream drainage structures. If the downstream system is inadequate, the developer is required to either improve the downstream drainage structure or provide additional storage in the detention facility. 
(b)  The method of estimating stormwater runoff shall be of the hydrologic methods described in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All storm data and input parameters for calculations shall be taken from this reference manual. The method used shall be determined as follows: 

 
(c)  All developments, except single-family residential, that are not required to obtain a land disturbance permit shall submit a letter certified by a professional engineer, land surveyor or landscape architect currently licensed in the state stating that all drainage and detention facilities have been designed in accordance with this chapter. The city has the right to require proof of qualifications and registration, and to require that a copy of all calculations, work product, reports and studies regarding the proposed development and performed by the design professional be submitted to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1102.3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1485. - Stormwater detention facilities. 
(a)  Stormwater detention facilities shall be required for any portion of any site for which development activities will result in increased peak stormwater runoff. 
(b)  Permanent detention facilities will not be required if the design professional can provide calculations and proof there are no roads, culverts, buildings, or other property that will be adversely impacted by the increased runoff leaving the site, and that the discharge does not directly flow into a major flood plain or creek system with known or suspected flooding problems. Future phases of development of the drainage basin must be considered in determining adverse effects. 
(c)  When stormwater detention facilities are deemed not required, the 100-year elevation of the receiving stream shall be determined. Excavation of earth below said elevation in the shoulder of the stream or floodplain shall be required in a volume equal to or greater than that of the detention pond that would have been required. 
(d)  Stage-storage-discharge relationship calculations for detention facilities and their outlet structures shall constrain the detention facility's outflow to the pre-developed flow or less for the two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50- and 100-year storm events. 
(e)  The detention facility shall incorporate overflow features and basin bank elevations which will accommodate the routing of the 100-year storm event through the detention facility with no damage to the facility. 
(f)  Detention basin discharge locations shall be in defined drainage ditches or storm sewers. If there is an existing storm drainage system within 150 feet of the discharge point of the outlet pipe for the basin, then the developer shall extend the outlet pipe and tie-in to the existing system. Obtaining any required easements for said tie-in are the responsibility of the developer. Some method of reestablishing sheet flow may be approved at the discretion of the city. 
(g)  Earthen detention basin fill slopes and cut slopes shall be no greater than 3:1. 
(h)  All ponds which are normally dry having a depth, including freeboard, greater than four feet and a side slope steeper than 2:1 shall be fenced and have a ten-foot wide lockable gate for entrance. The fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height and shall be of the chain link or privacy type. 
(i)  For improvements or expansion of existing developments, pre-development conditions shall reflect original land use before any structural development, such as buildings, roads, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1102.4, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1486. - Stormwater quality/quantity control facilities. 
The city requires each new project to create adequate stormwater controls using best management practices (BMPs). Use of BMPs to enhance water quality and to comply with the Clean Water Act (CWA) is federally mandated. The city will utilize the Atlanta Regional Commission's Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volumes I and II, as standards for compliance with the required BMPs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1102.5, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1487. - Stormwater ditches. 
(a)  All ditches between storm drain pipes and downstream of storm drain pipe shall be designed by a professional engineer or landscape architect currently licensed in the state. 
(b)  The ditch profile and cross-sections shall be shown on the plans. The plans shall show the velocity and flow for the ditch design. Drainage ditches shall be designed to limit the runoff velocity to less than five fps or the ditch shall have the bottom and sides lined with sod. Ditches shall be designed to limit the runoff velocity to less than eight fps or the ditch shall have a paved invert as shown in the city standard details or a permanent channel stabilization lining appropriate for the design velocity and approved by the city. 
(c)  In residential subdivisions, all ditches are to be installed and apparent prior to approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1102.6, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1488. - Sub-drainage. 
When subgrade compaction requirements of these specifications cannot be met, sub-drainage will be installed to control the surplus groundwater by intercepting side hill seepage or by lowering or regulating the groundwater level. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1102.7, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1489. - Bridges. 
Bridges shall not be allowed unless otherwise approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1102.8, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1490. - Existing dams. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the developer to provide any required information or studies, to include the dam breach analysis, for any dam located on the property proposed to be developed or located on adjacent property upstream of the proposed development, to the city. The design engineer shall search the entire watershed upstream of the property for other dams regulated by the state. The city shall maintain a record of dams reported to the city and their attendant breach zones. The design engineer shall include a statement in the dam breach analysis report whether or not any dams were found upstream and whether or not they affect the property to be developed. 
(b)  The city shall submit the required information to the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources for review. 
(c)  The city shall notify the dam owner in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Georgia Safe Dams Act. 
(d)  If development is proposed in the breach zone below the dam, then the dam owner shall be required to upgrade the dam to category I standards, as defined in the Georgia Safe Dams Act, or breach the dam in a safe manner as authorized by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. If the dam owner elects to breach the dam, measures must be taken to ensure that stormwater flows are not increased on downstream property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1102.9, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 105-1491. - Proposed dams. 
The developer of any proposed new dams which are regulated by the Georgia Safe Dams Act shall obtain necessary permits and approvals from the state prior to obtaining a development permit from the city. A development permit shall be required before the construction of said dam. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1102.10, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1492—105-1515. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STORM SEWER MATERIALS 

Sec. 105-1516. - Specifications for materials. 
(a)  Georgia DOT Standard Detail 1030D shall be used in determining class concrete or gauge of pipe under fill. 
(b)  A certification by the supplier of the pipe specifications for each pipe shall be required before installation. 
(c)  Concrete pipe shall be steel reinforced in accordance with AASHTO: M170. 
(d)  All corrugated metal pipe shall be type II aluminized steel. 
(e)  High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) pipe materials may be acceptable at locations approved by the city. HDPE Corrugated and Smooth Lined Pipe and Fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with requirements of AASHTO M 294 and AASHTO MP7, latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1103, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1517—105-1535. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STORM SEWER CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 105-1536. - Pipe installation standards. 
Pipe installation shall conform to Georgia DOT Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges. 
(1)  Before any traffic over a storm drain is allowed, the developer shall provide an adequate depth and width of compacted backfill to protect the structure from damage or displacement. Any debris or silt that constricts the flow through a pipe shall be removed by the developer as often as necessary to maintain drainage. All pipe structures shall be cleaned before the work is accepted. Any damage or displacement that may occur due to traffic or erosion shall be repaired or corrected at the developer's expense. 
(2)  Minimum clearances are: 
a.  One foot between the bottom of the base or sub-base, if used, and the exterior crown of the culvert. 
b.  A minimum of 0.5 foot between underground utilities and exterior crown of culverts. 
(3)  Trench construction for storm drainage pipe shall be in accordance with State Highway Standard 1030D. 
(4)  Storm drainage pipe shall be bedded in Size No. 57 (one inch to No. 4) per ASTM D-448 Table 1, Standard Sizes of Processed Aggregates When Structural Fill Material Is Not Available. 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1104, 4-24-2017) 
Secs. 105-1537—105-1560. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESIDENTIAL DRAINAGE PLANS (RDP). 

Sec. 105-1561. - RDP required for certain lots; minimal lot clearing; contents of plan. 
(a)  A residential drainage plan accepted by the city shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit on those lots subject to periodic flooding or as labeled RDP on a final plat. The residential drainage plan shall address all items listed below. RDPs shall be prepared by a qualified designed professional and drawn to scale on a certified boundary survey of the lot as prepared by a registered land surveyor. The plan shall be submitted by the owner or builder and reviewed by the city prior to the request for issuance of a building permit. Please allow ten business days for each submittal. 
(b)  Minimal lot clearing shall be permitted prior to issuance of a building permit for RDP lots. Clearing is defined as the removal of vegetation and trees without changing the topography of the lot. Clearing shall only be permitted under the following conditions: 
(1)  Prior to any clearing, owner/builder must notify and coordinate with the qualified professional preparing the RDP and request an erosion control inspection from the city. 
(2)  All best management practices, including silt fencing, construction exit, etc., must be properly installed and maintained. 
(3)  The builder must call the city for an erosion control inspection once all BMPs have been properly installed and all disturbed areas stabilized. 
(4)  No grading shall be conducted prior to the issuance of the building permit. The term "grading" is defined as altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition. The term "grading" includes cutting, filling, stockpiling and the shaping of land. The builder will be subject to citations and fines for grading and/or failure to install BMPs prior to obtaining a building permit. 
(5)  Once the RDP has been reviewed and approved by the city and has successfully passed an erosion control inspection, the builder may then obtain a building permit. No land disturbance shall be conducted prior to the issuance of the building permit. The builder will be subject to citations and fines for land disturbances prior to obtaining a building permit. 
(6)  The owner's engineer or qualified professional shall, upon completion of the construction prepare an as-built certification for the proposed improvements for design compliance. A standard form of certification will be provided by the city and is required prior to the request and issuance of a certificate of occupancy and/or final inspection from the city. 
(7)  Three copies of the RDP on paper no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches shall be submitted to the city for review. 
(c)  Residential drainage plans shall show the following as applicable: 
(1)  Boundary lines of the lot, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and bearing to the nearest minute. 
(2)  Location and names of all abutting streets or other rights-of-way. 
(3)  The outline of all buildings, driveways, parking areas, swimming pools, recreational courts, patios, accessory structures and other improvements existing or proposed on the property. 
(4)  Dimensions of buildings and distances between all structures and to the nearest property lines as required to locate the major improvements on the lot. 
(5)  All easements, public water or sewer lines traversing or located on the property, health department approved location for septic tank and septic system drain field. 
(6)  Subdivision name, lot designation, land lot, district and section. 
(7)  North arrow and scale. 
(8)  Pre-development (current conditions) contour lines based on mean sea level. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more than two feet and shall be based on a field survey related to project and/or FEMA flood study datum. 
(9)  Proposed contours shall be shown along with the finished floor elevation of the lowest floor of the house including basement. A certification of elevation is required to be submitted to the city prior to requesting a rough inspection. 
(10)  Stormwater features, including swales, pipes, diversion berms, stormwater detention and other structures, drainage easements and directions of flow, including off-site runoff from any source that may impact the site. 
(11)  Floodplain features, including the limits of any flood hazard area, local or otherwise, 100-year high water elevation, origin of the floodplain data and any proposed modifications to the floodplain limits. 
(12)  Sedimentation and erosion control measures (BMPs) to be installed on the lot. 
(13)  Name, address, telephone number and fax number of the owner of the lot. 
(14)  Level 1A certification number for builder/developer. 
(15)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, seal, registration number, and signature of the qualified professional who prepared the drainage improvements or modifications shown on the RDP. 
(16)  Level 2 certification number for design professional. 
(17)  The residential drainage plan shall contain the following signature block. If the RDP was required because of floodplain or a local flood hazard on the lot, the language contained within the brackets must be included; otherwise, it should be deleted from the signature block: 
This residential drainage plan has been reviewed for general compliance with the development regulations of the City of Emerson, Georgia and is approved for issuance of a building permit for residential structure and other improvements shown hereon. [No framing inspection will be approved until a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, as-built, prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer, has been received and accepted by the engineering department.] This approval is granted with the provision that a final inspection and/or certification of occupancy shall not be issued for completion of construction until conformance to this residential drainage plan has been field verified and as-built certified by the design professional. 
____________ 
City of Emerson 
____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Date 
(Ord. No. 2017-005, § 1105, 4-24-2017) 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix is the city zoning ordinance as originally adopted on October 8, 1985 and amended through April 28, 2014. Subsequent amendments are shown in history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history indicates that the provisions are derived from the original as amended through April 28, 2014. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE, APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE 

Sec. 8.1. - Title. 
The title is the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Emerson." 
Sec. 8.2. - Applicability. 
These regulations shall apply to all present and future land development located within the incorporated area of Emerson, Georgia. The requirements contained herein are declared to be minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of this ordinance. This ordinance shall regulate the height, number of stories, and the size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of [a] lot that may be occupied; the size of yards and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; the location and use of buildings and other structures; and the use, condition of use or occupancy of land and trade, industry, housing, recreation, transportation, agriculture or for any other purpose; creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof; defining certain terms used herein; providing for the method of administration, enforcement and amendment; providing penalties and resolutions and for other purposes. 
Sec. 8.3. - Planning goals and purpose. 
A.  Promote orderly growth and development based on physical, social, and economic needs, environmental considerations, and public facilities and services. 
B.  Provide for the development of adequate commercial facilities on both city-wide and neighborhood levels while retaining existing facilities. 
C.  To achieve such timing, density, and distribution of land development and use as will prevent overloading public infrastructure systems for providing water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, sanitation, police and fire protection, and other public services. 
D.  Promote a diversified housing market, encourage, promote and facilitate high quality design, construction and landscape measures for new developments in a variety of ways, including flexible zoning and development regulations, coherent development standards, and innovative planning ideas. 
E.  Establish appropriate planning procedures and innovative planning tools to guide growth and development. 
F.  To encourage such distribution of population, land development and use as will facilitate the efficient and adequate provision of public services and facilities. 
G.  Provide a diverse mix of residential types to serve the varying housing needs of Emerson's existing and future population. To achieve such density, design, and distribution of housing as will protect and enhance residential property values and facilitate the provision of adequate housing for every citizen. 
H.  Increase the viability of businesses in downtown Emerson. 
I.  Promote innovative, environmentally sensitive design and development. 
J.  To prevent flooding of improved property. 
K.  Promote balanced growth and diversity in residential development, business, and industry. 
L.  Continue to address the issues of pollution and its effect on natural resources (i.e., water, air, noise, visual, ground). 
M.  Retain existing offices and professional businesses and provide for the development of suitable areas for business and professional offices. 
N.  Retain existing compatible industry and preserve adequate land, services, and facilities for expansion and growth of light, clean industrial activities. 
Sec. 8.4. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this ordinance are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid, it shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and section of this ordinance. 
Sec. 8.5. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its adoption by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 8.6. - Repeal of conflicting ordinance and validity of prior approvals and actions. 
A.  This is the zoning ordinance of the City of Emerson, and all other conflicting ordinances or resolutions are hereby repealed, provided that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of operation or conditions of site development accompanying those zoning approvals or use permits issued under previous zoning ordinances or resolutions; however, modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished as provided by this ordinance. 
B.  All variances and exceptions heretofore granted shall remain in full force and effect and all terms, conditions and obligations imposed shall remain in full force and effect and be binding. Prior ordinances shall remain in effect insofar as required for the initiation of any proceedings against violations thereof and for the prosecution of any violations heretofore commenced. 
C.  Notwithstanding anything contained herein and notwithstanding any zoning classification change, all previous special stipulations, conditions, restrictions, agreements and terms contained in prior zoning ordinances shall remain in full force and effect and shall not be amended by this document and shall carry forward to any new zoning classification and shall be binding upon said property. Prior ordinances shall remain in effect and shall remain as such special stipulations, conditions, restrictions, agreements and terms, even though the zoning category itself may be changed hereunder. 
D.  In the event all of this ordinance is struck down as void, unconstitutional or invalid, including therefore this provision, that prior ordinance shall be considered to not have been repealed, and shall therefore still be in effect. 
Sec. 8.7. - Development projects under construction. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall require any change in the development or proposed use of properties which are legally under construction or for which a development plan or preliminary plat has been approved within two years of the effective date of this ordinance and the development of which shall be commenced within one year after the effective date of this ordinance. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently. 
Secs. 8.8—8.17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 8.18. - Official zoning map. 
A.  The city is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as though fully set forth herein. A copy of the official zoning map shall be maintained on file with the city clerk for inspection and review by the public. 
B.  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map of the City of Emerson, Georgia" together with the date of the adoption of this ordinance. 
C.  If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and state law, changes are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council, with an entry on the official zoning map signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. 
D.  No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and punishable as provided under this ordinance. 
E.  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map which shall be located in the office of the city clerk shall be the final authority. 
Sec. 8.19. - Replacement of official zoning map. 
In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may by resolution adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede all previous such maps. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors of omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
Sec. 8.20. - District designations. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, [the] City of Emerson is hereby divided into ten conventional zoning districts and four site-plan specific zoning districts 
Secs. 8.21—8.30. - Reserved. 
TABLE A - CITY OF EMERSON ZONING DISTRICTS 

 
ARTICLE III. - APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8.31. - Rules governing interpretation. 
Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any district shown on said map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center line right-of-way of streets and alleys, land lot lines, militia district lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
B.  Where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundaries, unless same are indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on such maps. Split zoned properties shall no longer be permitted; however, those existing on the date of adoption of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue as a nonconforming use. Property owners may request the city rezone the entire property to one of the existing zonings or subdivide the property along the district boundary provided all lot standards are achieved for each newly created lot. 
C.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this ordinance, the city council may permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
Sec. 8.32. - Uniformity and compliance. 
The regulations set by this ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and specifically, except as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 8.33. - Compliance with district regulations. 
No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 8.34. - Lots reduced below requirements. 
No lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein unless such lot is under threat of condemnation by an entity possessing legal authority to condemn then said lot shall be allowed to be reduced in dimension or area. Lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance. 
Sec. 8.35. - Annexed territory. 
All territory, which may hereafter be annexed into the city, shall be classified as per the procedures outlined in this Code. 
Sec. 8.36. - Conditional use permit necessary. 
Any person requesting a special exception from those permitted uses listed under any zoning district must comply with those regulations set forth in [this] Code. 
Secs. 8.37—8.46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 8.47. - Intent. 
Within the districts established by this ordinance or amendments that may later be adopted, there may exist, lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or such amendment. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these non-conformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this ordinance that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
Sec. 8.48. - Continuance of nonconforming use. 
The lawful use of any building or structure or land existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance or amendment thereto may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance, except that the nonconforming use shall not be: 
A.  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
B.  Reestablished after discontinuance for a continuous period of six months or discontinuance of 18 months during any three-year period (except when government action impedes access to the premises); 
C.  Expanded, extended or enlarged in any manner which increase its non-conformity, but such structure may be altered to decrease its non-conformity. 
Should under the threat of condemnation, by an entity possessing legal authority to condemn, a lot become non-conforming, then any structure upon that lot which is destroyed by natural causes shall be allowed to reconstruct within 18 months but no component of the noncompliance could be enlarged. 
Sec. 8.49. - Continuance of building occupied by nonconforming use. 
A building occupied by a nonconforming use at the time of enactment of this ordinance or amendment thereto may be retained, except that it shall not be: 
A.  Expanded, extended or enlarged in any manner which increases its non-conformity. 
B.  Rebuilt, altered or repaired if such construction costs would exceed 50 percent of its replacement cost. 
Sec. 8.50. - Exceptions. 
A.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, provided such construction costs do not exceed 50 percent of its replacement cost. 
B.  If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance, nor shall any ordinance of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this ordinance. 
Sec. 8.51. - Definitions. 
Interpretation of words. 
A.  Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; and words in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
B.  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
C.  The word "may" is permissive. 
D.  The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
E.  The word "structure" includes the word "building." 
F.  Words not defined herein shall be construed as having the meaning given by common and ordinary use. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply: 
Abut: To physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property line. 
Accessory building or use: A use or a structure subordinate to the principal use or building on a lot and serving the purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building. Where an accessory building is attached to the main building in a substantial manner, as by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be considered part of the principal building. 
Administrator: A.k.a. zoning administrator, shall mean city manager or designee. 
Agriculture: The production, rearing or storage of crops and/or livestock for sale, lease or personal use, or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program. 
Airport: A place designed for the landing and taking off of aircraft, usually equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair and various accommodations for passengers. 
Alley: A service way providing a secondary means of public access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration: Any change or re-arrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows, or any enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another. 
Animal hospitals: A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use. 
Apartment house: A structure containing three or more dwelling units. 
Apartment unit: One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit in a building containing more than two dwelling units. 
Artisan: A person or group of individuals manually skilled in making a particular product such as glass, pottery and ceramics, wood cabinets, and other small-scale woodworks. 
Assisted living facility: A facility licensed by the State of Georgia for the transitional residency of elderly and/or disabled persons, progressing from independent living to congregate housing, within which are provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry services, transportation services and routine social and medical appointments and counseling. 
Automobile maintenance: The routine replacement and maintenance of non-engine related parts including brake repair, tire replacement, tune-ups, and oil changing. This term shall not include engine or body dismantling. 
Automobile repair: General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles, or trailers such as collision service, body repair and frame straightening; painting and upholstering; vehicle steam cleaning; and undercoating. 
Automobile sales: The use of any building, land area or other premises for the display and sale of new or used motor vehicles, and including any warranty repair work or other repair service; provided, however, that such definition shall not include the sale by an individual of motor vehicles acquired for such individual's own use and actually so used. 
Automobile service station (gas, filling station): A building or structure used for the retail sale and dispensing of fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories, and supplies, including installation or minor services, customarily incidental thereto; facilities for washing and for chassis and gear lubrication of vehicles are permitted if enclosed in a building. 
Basement: That portion of a building built partly underground having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of the lot grade but not less than six and one-half feet. 
Beverage shop: Retail establishment selling alcoholic goods and other materials that are packaged to go and not for consumption upon the premises. 
Bedroom: A private room planned and intended for sleeping, separable from other rooms by a door, and accessible to a bathroom without crossing another bedroom or living room. 
Block: A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad right-of-way, waterways or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
Boarding home for sheltered care: A profit or non-profit boarding home, rest home, or other home for the sheltered care of adult persons licensed by the State of Georgia which, in addition to providing food and shelter for up to five persons unrelated to the proprietor, also provides any personal care or service beyond food, shelter and laundry. 
Boarding house: A building, or portion thereof, where meals and lodging are provided for compensation for at least three persons and not more than ten persons exclusive of the proprietor, members of the proprietor's family and servants of the establishment. 
Buffer area: A strip of land established to protect one type of land use from another with which it is incompatible containing a continuous visual screening of vegetation and fencing. 
Building: Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building coverage: The horizontal area measured from the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot. 
Building facade: The portion of any exterior elevation of a building extended from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation fronting a public street, excluding alleys and lanes, and which may also be referred to as the building face. 
Building permit: Written permission issued by the proper municipal authority for the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure. 
Building setback line: A line, usually fixed parallel to the lot line, beyond which a building, or any projection thereof, cannot extend, excluding uncovered steps terraces, stoops or similar fixtures. 
Car wash: A building, or portion thereof, where automobiles are washed by mechanical or high pressure water devices. 
Cemetery: Property used for the interring of the dead. 
Certificate of occupancy (CO): A document issued by the proper authority allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all the applicable municipal codes and ordinances. 
Childcare center: A private establishment enrolling five or more children and where tuition, fees, or other forms of compensation for the care of the children is charged. The term includes day nurseries and kindergartens. 
Church: A building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
City: The City of Emerson. 
Clerk of superior court: Shall mean the clerk of the superior court of Bartow County, Georgia. 
Clinic: A building or part of a building used for medical, dental, chiropractic, surgical or therapeutic treatment of human beings, excluding hospitals or professional offices of a doctor located in their residence. 
Club or lodge, private: Buildings or facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for social, educational or recreational purposes, but primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Comprehensive plan: A policy guideline including the future land use map adopted by the mayor and council representing issues, goals, policies, and actions for the growth and development of the city. While adopted by the mayor and council it does not serve as a development ordinance nor does it carry the force of law but rather serves as a guide to continued growth and development city-wide. 
Conditional use: A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that such use would not be detrimental to public health, safety or general welfare. Such uses may be required to meet additional standards and may be controlled as to the number, area and spacing from other uses and each other. 
Condominium: A building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure. Common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
Condominium, commercial: A building or buildings used for offices, businesses, professional services and other commercial enterprise organized, owned and maintained as a condominium. 
Construction vehicle: Any vehicle (other than passenger vehicle, pick-up or panel truck) whose primary purpose is use in land development and construction including, but not limited to, earth moving equipment and dump trucks. 
Covenant: A private legal restriction on the use of land, contained in the deed to the property or otherwise formally recorded. 
Convenience stores: Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of less than 5,000 square feet. 
Cul-de-sac: A minor street with only one outlet, sometimes called a "dead end" street. 
Curb cut: The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the roadway. 
Dedication: Under subdivision regulations, the transfer of property from private to public ownership. 
Density: The number of families, individuals, dwelling units, or housing structures per unit of land. The standard for density shall be the gross density, which includes all the land within the boundaries of the area. The net density calculation shall exclude floodplains, wetlands and standing bodies of water. 
Detention facility: A municipal, county, or state jail used for the detention of prisoners; including penal institutions, penitentiaries, prisons and prison institutions; detention and correctional institutions; rehabilitation institutions and work camps. 
Development: The ordinance of an existing parcel of land; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance, and any use or extension of the use of land. 
District: A part, zone or geographic area within the municipality within which certain zoning or development regulations apply. 
Domesticated animals: Small animals including fish or fowl permitted in the house or yard and kept for company or pleasure, such as dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds, and fish, but excluding horses, swine, livestock and exotic animals. 
Drive-in establishment: An establishment which is designated to provide, either wholly or in part, service to customers while in their automobile parked on the premises. 
Drive-in restaurant: A building or portion thereof where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption and where all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines of the building. 
Driveway: A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling or other structure. 
Drug store: A store where the primary business is the filling of medical prescriptions and the sale of drugs, medical devices and supplies, and nonprescription medicines, but where non-medical products are sold as well. 
Dwelling, detached: A dwelling which is designed for and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space or yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means. 
Dwelling, duplex: A building that is divided horizontally into two dwelling units each of which has an independent entrance either directly or through a common vestibule and used by not more than two families. 
Dwelling, multiple or multifamily: A building designed for and containing three or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling, quadraplex: Four attached dwellings in one structure in which each unit has two open space exposures and shares one or two walls with adjoining unit or units. 
Dwelling, single-family: A building designed for and containing one dwelling unit occupied by one family unit. 
Dwelling, single-family attached: A one-family dwelling attached to two or more one-family dwellings by common vertical walls. This term includes duplexes and triplexes. 
Dwelling, triplex: A building divided into only three dwelling units each of which has an independent entrance either directly or through a common vestibule and used by not more than three families. 
Dwelling unit: Consists of one or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, shall always be included in each "dwelling unit." 
Easement: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity. 
Exotic or wild animals: Means any living member of the animal kingdom including those born or raised in captivity except the following: domestic dogs, domestic cats, common farm animals, rodents, fish, non-poisonous reptiles, common caged birds and invertebrates. 
Family: One or more related persons or three or less unrelated persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit provided that all related persons are related by blood, marriage or adoption. All related persons are limited to the spouse, parents, grandparents, grandchildren, stepchildren, sons, daughters, brothers or sisters of the owner or the tenant or of the owner's or the tenant's spouse. Domestic servants employed on premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a family. The term "family" shall not be construed to mean fraternity, sorority, club, student center, group care homes, foster homes and is to be distinguished from persons occupying a boarding house, rooming house, hotel, or apartment unit as herein defined. 
Family day care center: A private residence in which a business, registered by the State of Georgia and licensed by the City of Emerson, operated by any person who receives compensation for supervising and caring for no fewer than three and no more than eight children under 18 years of age, who are not residents in the same private residence for fewer than 24 hours per day. 
Fence: An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. 
Flag lot: A lot or parcels approved by the city with less frontage on a public street than is normally required. The panhandle is an access corridor to lots or parcels located behind lots or parcels with normally required street frontages. 
Floor area: The total area of all floors of a building as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls and including halls, stairways, elevator shafts, excluding attached garages, porches, balconies and unfinished basements. 
Floor area ratio (FAR): A mathematical expression determined by dividing the total floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located as: floor area/lot area = floor area ratio. 
Frontage: The length of any property line of a premises which abuts public right-of-way. 
Fraternity or sorority house: A dwelling maintained exclusively for members affiliated with an academic college or university or other professional recognized institutions of higher learning. 
Funeral home: A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation. 
Garage, commercial: A commercial structure or any portion thereof in which one or more automobiles are housed, or kept or repaired; not including exhibition or showrooms or storage of cars for sale. 
Garage, private residential: A structure which is accessory to a residential building and which is used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof, and which is not a separate commercial enterprise available to the general public. 
Grade: An average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure. 
Group home: A dwelling shared by non-related individuals who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential. This use shall also apply to homes for the handicapped; however, the term "handicapped" shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance or alcohol, nor shall it include any person whose residency in the home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals. The term "group home for the handicapped" shall not include alcohol or drug treatment centers, work release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts, or other housing serving as an alternative to incarceration. 
Halfway house: A temporary residential living arrangement for persons leaving an institutional setting and in need of a supportive living arrangement in order to readjust to living outside the institution. These are persons who are receiving therapy and counseling from support staff who are present when residents are present, for the following purposes: 1) to help them recuperate from the effects of drug or alcohol addiction; 2) to help them reenter society while housed under supervision while under the constraints of alternatives to imprisonment including, but not limited to, prerelease, work release, or probationary programs; or 3) to help persons with family or school adjustment problems that require specialized attention and care in order to achieve personal independence. 
Health department: Shall mean the Bartow County Health Department. 
Health practitioner: A doctor, dentist, chiropractor but not including a veterinarian. 
Height: The vertical distance between the highest part of a structure, sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and the ground. The vertical distance from the grade, or its equivalent, to the highest point of the underside of the ceiling beams, in the case of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof, and to the mean level of the underside of the rafters between the eaves and the ridge of the gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
Historic district: A district consisting of various zones which have substantial historic, architectural and/or cultural significance. These areas shall be shown on the official zoning map. 
Home for the aged: Any multifamily residential use limited to occupation by persons age 62 or older, with exception of managerial personnel. HUD elderly housing and handicapped housing; provided no health care services are furnished other than communication systems. 
Hospital: A building or portion thereof designed or used for therapeutic treatment of bed patients who are physically or mentally ill. 
Hotel: A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for transient guests, and offered to the public for compensation and which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. 
Improvement: Any man-made item which becomes part of, placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate. 
Impervious surface: A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water including streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar structures. 
Industrial park: A large tract of land that has been planned, developed and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses, including warehousing and distribution, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility. 
Junk: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition. 
Junk vehicles: Any wrecked or non-operable automobile, truck or other vehicle. 
Junk yard: Any land or building or other structure used for the storage, collection, processing or conversion of any worn out, cast off, or discarded metal, paper, glass or other materials which is ready for destruction, or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use. 
Kennel: Any location where boarding, caring for and keeping of more than a total of four dogs or cats or other animals or combination thereof (except litter of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on, and also raising of show, working, hunting animals. 
Livestock: Poultry, cattle, swine, horses, mink, rabbits, sheep, goats or any other domestic animal used for consumption. 
Lot: The basic development unit, also called parcel, with fixed boundaries, used or intended to be used by one building and its accessory building and not divided by any public road or alley. 
Lot, corner: A lot fronting on two streets at their intersection. 
Lot, substandard: A lot not meeting the required minimum lot dimensions of the zoning district it is in. 
Lot coverage: That amount of land covered or permitted to be covered by a building(s) excluding parking areas, driveways and walkways but including accessory structures measured in terms of a percentage of the total lot area. 
Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line, or the distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and midpoint of the rear lot line. 
Lot line: A line of record bounding a lot, which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space. 
Lot width: The distance between the side lot line measured along the front building line of the lot as determined by the prescribed minimum front setback requirement. 
Lot of record: A lot which is part of an approved subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Bartow County; or a parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Bartow County. 
Marina: A facility which is operated and equipped primarily for the purposes of in-water or dry storage of boats, or if in a residential setting and equipped primarily for the purpose of the launch of trailered boats and having in-water or dry storage of boats subject to specific site development and operations standards in order to protect the surrounding residential character, or which is also operated and equipped for sales, service and repair of boats both in and out of the water. 
Major side setback: The required minimum horizontal distance between the building line and the property line which abuts any street frontage not considered as the front setback. 
Manufactured home: A structure transportable in one or more sections and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. This unit must bear a HUD certificate. Note: Manufactured housing is regulated by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401-5426, pursuant to which the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) promulgated regulations related to construction and safety. 24 CFR §§ 3280.1—3280.904. 
Materials recovery facility: A solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recoverable materials, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. 
Mini-warehouse: A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis. 
Minor side setback: The required minimum horizontal distance between the building line and the side property line, provided such property line does not abut any street, public or private. 
Mobile home: Housing unit that is similar to a manufactured home, but does not bear the HUD certificate. Due to health, safety and general welfare reasons these units are no longer allowed. 
Modular home: A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes having been built to state construction codes. 
Motel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public at a daily rate or weekly rate for a period of continuous guest occupancy not to exceed 30 days, and providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, and recreational facilities. Guest quarters are accessible through a main entrance and by internal hallways. The purpose of such shall not be for extended stay occupancy. 
Nonconforming use, building, lot, parcel of land: A legally existing use or building which fails to comply with any provision of this ordinance either at the effective date of this ordinance or as the result of subsequent amendments. 
Nursing home: A home for aged or ill persons licensed by the State of Georgia as such in which persons are provided with food, shelter and medical care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to diagnosis and treatment. 
Occupant: The individual or individuals in actual possession of a premises. 
Office, general: Any building or part of a building in which one or more persons are employed in the management or direction of an agency, business, organization, but excludes such uses as retail sales, manufacture, assembly or storage of goods, or places of assembly and amusement. 
Office, professional: Any building or part of a building in which one or more persons are employed in the management or direction of an agency, business, organization staffed by professionally qualified persons and their staff. Examples of qualified professions typically are licensed by the State of Georgia and include, but are not limited to, architects, real estate brokers, health service practitioners, accountants, engineers and attorneys. 
Official zoning map: A legally adopted map that conclusively shows the location and boundaries of zoned districts. 
Off-street parking space: A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to an access aisle, and which is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way. 
Open space: Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment. 
Outdoor storage: The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. 
Outlet mall: A type of shopping mall which manufactures sell their products directly to the public through their own branded stores. Other stores in outlet malls are operated by retailers selling returned goods and discontinued products, often at heavily reduced prices. 
Parcel: The basic development unit, also called lot, with fixed boundaries, used or intended to be used by one building and its accessory building and not divided by any public road or alley. 
Parking area: Any public or private land area used for parking vehicles including parking lots, garages, private driveways and legally designated areas of public streets. 
Parking lot: Any designated area designed for temporary accommodation of motor vehicles in normal operating condition. 
Parking space: Any area for the exclusive parking of a single vehicle. 
Permit: Written governmental permission issued by an authorized official, empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law, but not allowed without such authorization. 
Permitted use: Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
Personal care home: A facility licensed by the State of Georgia for the transitional residency of persons incapable of independent living, within which are provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry services, transportation services and routine social and medical appointments and counseling. 
Pharmacy: A place where medicines are compounded or dispensed. 
Planned development: A tract of land developed based on a plan which allows for flexibility of design not available under normal zoning district requirements. 
Planned shopping center: Commercial development which is approved site-plan specific and allows for minor reductions of bulk area requirements typically in exchange for greenspace/open space and other amenities. Also allows for uniqueness of site and architectural design. 
Planning commission: shall mean the planning commission for the City of Emerson, Georgia. Also referred to as the planning and zoning board. 
Plat: A map representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries and location of individual properties and streets. 
Plat, final: The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision or site plan which is presented to the planning commission for final approval. 
Plat, preliminary: A map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision or site plan which is submitted to the proper review authority for consideration and approval. 
Public works director: The person vested by the city manager with the responsibility of directing the operations of building inspections, fleet transportation, sanitation, street and traffic administration, street department, and traffic services. 
Recovered materials: Those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused, or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recovered materials processing facility: A facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such term shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste. 
Recreational vehicles: A camper, camp trailer, travel trailer, house car, motor home, trailer bus, trailer coach, fifth wheel or similar vehicle, with or without motive power, designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel use or emergency occupancy, constructed with integral wheels to make it mobile and/or towable by motor vehicle. 
Recycling collection point: A primary or accessory use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources with no processing of such items taking place. 
Residence: A home or dwelling utilized as living quarters. 
Residential district: Any zone consisting primarily of residential dwelling units. 
Rest home: See Home for the aged. 
Retail professional services: Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to products, to the general public, including eating and drinking places, hotels and motels, finance, real estate and insurance, personal services, motion pictures, amusement and recreation services, health, educational and social services, museums and galleries. 
Retail trade: Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public and for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
Right-of-access: The legal authority to enter or leave a property. 
Right-of-way: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer and other similar uses. 
Rooming house: See boarding house. 
RV park: A parcel of land which has been planned and developed to accommodate two or more travel trailers, self-propelled motor homes, truck campers and camping trailers for temporary occupancy of not over 60 days' duration. 
School: State, county, city church or other schools, public or private, as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges, post-high school learning centers. 
Setbacks: The required space between a property line and a building or specified structure. 
Shopping center: A group of commercial establishments constructed as a singular entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site. 
Sidewalk: A paved, surfaced or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway. 
Site plan: The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot including: topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plains, marshes and waterways; open spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, and screening devices; any other information that reasonably may be required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving authority. 
Solid waste handling facility: Any facility the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. 
Sports complex: An area of a minimum of 75 acres containing multiple permanent fields for a variety of sports, for sports such as baseball, softball, lacrosse, soccer/football fields, and other competitive sports facilities and associated structures and uses and related commercial and office uses. Permanent fields include associated features (depending on the sport) such as fencing/backstops, dug-outs, benches, goals, bleachers and scoreboards. 
Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it and including those finished basements used for the principal use with a floor area greater than 50 percent of the story above. 
Street: A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley, or other way. 
Street, alley: A service way, at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting property; not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Street, arterial: A street shown as an arterial street. 
Street, collector: A street shown as a collector street. 
Street, local: A street shown as a local street. 
Street, private: Any right-of-way or area set aside to provide vehicular access within a development which has not been dedicated to, nor accepted by the city, and which is not maintained by the city. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground. 
Subdivider: A person, firm or corporation having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance or proceedings to subdivide such land under this ordinance, or the authorized agent of such person, firm or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under these regulations. 
Subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of sale, lease, legacy or building development; it includes all divisions of land involving a new street to which the public has access (whether private or public) or change in an existing street, and includes re-subdivision, and where appropriate to the context, related to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. 
Swale: A depression in the ground, which channels runoff. 
Swimming pool: As defined in the City of Emerson Building Code Ordinance. 
Tract: An area, parcel, piece of land, or property, which is the subject of a development application. 
Trailer: Any vehicle or structure constructed so as to permit occupancy thereof as sleeping or living quarters, or the conduct of any business, trade or occupation, or use as selling or advertising device, or use of storage or conveyance for chattel, tools, equipment or machinery, and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways and streets propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power. This term shall include, but not be limited to: automobiles, motorcycles, boat utility trailers, trailer coaches and manufactured homes. 
Trailer, camping: Shall mean any portable structure or vehicle designed for highway travel at legal speed limits without special permit which is intended for temporary living. 
Townhouses: Attached houses in a row or group, each house separated from adjoining houses in the same row or group by fire walls and having fee simple title. 
Variance: A device which grants a property owner relief from certain provisions of a zoning ordinance when, because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make more money. 
Waste transfer station: A facility used for the temporary storage and collection of waste materials. 
Yard: An open space on the same lot with a building or building group lying to the front, rear, or side of a building extending to the nearest lot line. 
Zero lot line: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line. 
Zone: A specifically delineated area or district in a municipality within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings. 
Secs. 8.52—8.61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8.62. - R, Single-Family Residential. 
Permitted uses. 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings, but not including manufactured homes. 
2.  Neighborhood recreation centers or swimming pools, provided: 
a)  Lighting shall be established in such a way that no direct light shall cast over any property line nor adversely affect neighboring properties. 
b)  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than 75 feet from any property line. 
c)  All pools must adhere to the standards of the standard swimming pool code, as amended. 
3.  Private parks and playgrounds. 
4.  Public buildings and utilities. 
5.  Sign(s), (as permitted in the City of Emerson sign ordinance). 
6.  Home occupations - See standards in section 8.92. 
Conditional uses permitted by mayor and city council. 
1.  Bed and breakfast, provided: 
a)  The facility is operated by the resident-owner with a maximum of five guestrooms rented for a daily or weekly fee, which use is subordinate and incidental to the primary residence. 
b)  The structure shall contain 2,000 square feet or more of gross heated floor area. 
c)  No freestanding signs are permitted. All signage must be attached to the structure used for the bed and breakfast house and not exceed six square feet and be indirectly illuminated. 
d)  The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family character, and, if changes are made, the changes must be approved by mayor and city council. 
e)  All bed and breakfast houses must meet all applicable health and safety codes. 
f)  Maximum length of stay shall not exceed 14 days. 
g)  A minimum of one parking space per rental room is provided in addition to those required for the resident. 
2.  Religious institutions, including all accessory uses, including, but not limited to, child care centers, provided: 
a)  Minimum lot size is five acres. 
b)  Accessory schools and cemeteries are permissible provided an additional three acres is provided in addition to the five-acre church requirement. 
c)  All parking areas shall include a 30 foot landscaped buffer when abutting any property used for single-family residential purposes. 
d)  Minimum parking space of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
3.  Special event home, provided: 
a)  Establishment must be on a minimum of a two-acre site. 
b)  A maximum of 3,000 square feet may be dedicated to the reception floor area. 
c)  Trash receptacles must be located in a rear or side yard and shall be screened on all sides. Garbage shall be collected only during the daytime hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
d)  All applicants shall comply with the City of Emerson noise ordinance. 
e)  Capacity of the special events home will be limited to 300 persons. 
f)  The commercial operations of the facility shall not operate between 12:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
g)  Facility should only be located in appropriate areas of the city and not have a negative impact on surrounding properties. 
h)  If the facility ceases to operate as a special events home for a period of six consecutive months, the property shall lose its approval as a special events home. 
i)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
4.  Telecommunication towers and antennas - See standards in article 7, division 1. 
5.  Golf courses and driving ranges, provided: 
a)  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than 100 feet from any property line, 
b)  Lighting shall be established in such a way that it shall not adversely affect neighboring properties. 
c)  Minimum parking of 2½ spaces per hole for golf courses and 0.75 spaces per tee for driving ranges. 
d)  Central loudspeakers are prohibited. 
6.  Group homes - See standards in section 8.89. 
7.  Horses or noncommercial riding stables, provided they are kept on a lot not less than three acres, all buildings are set back 150 feet from all property lines, all horses are kept 50 feet from property lines and have 5,000 feet of fenced area. 
8.  Noncommercial clubs or lodges. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
9.  Noncommercial horticulture and agriculture. 
10.  Personal care homes consisting of six or fewer individuals, inclusive of resident staff provided: 
a)  The principal structure contains a residential facade architecturally similar to adjacent buildings. 
b)  Such facilities obtain all necessary local and state licenses. 
c)  The use is limited to the principal structure only. 
d)  The maximum number of beds permitted shall be limited to one person per 250 gross square feet of heated floor space within the principal structure. 
e)  A minimum of one parking space per bedroom. 
11.  Garage sales, provided: 
a)  Limited to three consecutive days and one event every three months. 
b)  No consignment goods may be offered for sale. 
c)  Sales are conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
12.  Guest homes, garage apartments and servant quarters, provided: 
a)  Such structure is located to the rear of the principal structure and no less than 20 feet from any property line and ten feet from the principal building. 
b)  Such structure has 5,000 square feet of lot area dedicated to its use in addition to the district requirements for the principal use. 
c)  No paying guests or tenants are housed. 
d)  No other similar use or structure is located on the lot. 
e)  The building's height and/or area do not exceed that of the principal building. 
13.  Tutoring. 
a)  The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family character. 
14.  Accessory structures 
1.  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
3.  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
4.  No accessory structure may exceed the mean height of the principal building. 
5.  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed 50 percent that of the principal structure. 
6.  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than five feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable laws and safety and health ordinances. 
7.  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach five feet into the required rear or side setback. 
15.  Use limitations. 
1.  All outside storage must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by an opaque fence or wall at least six feet in height. The mayor and city council may approve the substitution of plantings for the required fence. 
2.  All front yards must be planted with sod grass. 
3.  No off-street parking space shall be utilized to park buses, tractor-trailers (attached or otherwise) or semi-trailer. 
Bulk and area regulations: 
Minimum lot size: 7,500 square feet. 
Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
Minimum lot width on a cul-de-sac: 35 feet. 
Maximum building height 1 : 50 feet. 
Minimum heated floor space: 900 square feet. 
Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent. 
Front setback: 20 feet. 
Minimum side setback: ten feet. 
Minimum back setback: 20 feet. 
Minimum parking required: two spaces per unit. 
1 Specific height requirements apply to signs. The height limitations do not apply to structures such as unoccupied and inaccessible architectural features on commercial or institutional buildings (e.g., church spires, church belfries, cupolas and domes on commercial buildings), government-owned observation towers, water towers, chimneys, smokestacks (in industrial districts), conveyors (in industrial districts), flag poles, masts, aerials, and similar structures, except that none of the above shall, within a three mile radius of the Cartersville-Bartow County Airport, exceed a height above the "clear zone" required for a safe approach to said airport as set forth by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
Furthermore, any said structure containing a sign shall be subject to the height requirements of the City of Emerson sign ordinance. 
Landscape and buffer requirements. 
Not applicable in this district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-001, 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 8.63. - RM-6, Multifamily Residential (six units/acre). 
Purpose and intent. 
The RM-6 district is intended to provide suitable areas for multifamily housing designed in a compatible and complementary manner so as to function as a singular and integrated land use. This zoning district may serve as a transitional zone between commercial/office uses and residential districts of a lesser intensity. 
Permitted uses. 
1.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use. 
2.  Assisted living, personal care and retirement home facilities, provided: 
a)  Such facilities must obtain all necessary state licenses and/or certifications. 
b)  The maximum number of beds permitted shall be determined by multiplying the site's acreage by the district's density limitation and a factor of 1.5. 
Ex. A two-acre site could include 18 beds [(two acres) x (six DUA) x (1½) = 18]. 
c)  Minimum parking of one space per bedroom and one space per each employee on largest shift. 
3.  Condominiums and townhouses, provided: 
a)  Maximum density: Six units per acre. 
b)  Minimum floor area: 900 square feet per unit. 
c)  Homeowners association required for maintenance of common areas and amenities. 
4.  Leasing office, clubhouse, gazebo or other structures related to apartment development. 
5.  Neighborhood recreation centers or swimming pools, provided: 
a)  Lighting shall be established in such a way that it shall not adversely affect neighboring properties. 
b)  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than 75 feet from any property line. 
c)  All pools must adhere to the standards of the standard swimming pool code, as amended. 
6.  Private parks and playgrounds. 
7.  Public buildings and utilities. 
8.  Rooming and boardinghouses. 
a)  Maximum seven beds per acre. 
b)  Minimum parking of one space per bedroom. 
9.  Sign(s), (as permitted in the City of Emerson sign ordinance). 
10.  Home occupations - See standards in section 8.92. 
Conditional uses permitted by mayor and city council. 
1.  Halfway houses See standards in section 8.90. 
2.  Religious institutions, including all accessory uses, including, but not limited to, child care centers, provided: 
a)  Minimum lot size is five acres. 
b)  Accessory schools and cemeteries are permissible provided an additional three acres is provided in addition to the five-acre church requirement. 
c)  All parking areas shall include a 30 foot landscaped buffer when abutting any property used for single-family residential purposes. 
d)  Minimum parking space of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
3.  Telecommunication towers and antennas - See standards in article 7, division 1. 
Accessory structures. 
1.  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
3.  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
4.  No accessory structure may exceed the mean height of the principal building. 
5.  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than five feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable laws and safety and health ordinances. 
6.  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach five feet into the required rear or side setback. 
Use limitations. 
1.  All outside storage associated with non-residential uses must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by an opaque fence no less than six feet in height. The zoning administrator may approve the substitution of plantings for the required fence. Unenclosed carports and front porches may not be used for storing any materials other than firewood or recyclable materials within a city approved container. 
2.  Buildings must be separated by at least 60 feet unless a side face is involved in which case the buildings shall be separated by no less than 40 feet. 
3.  No building may exceed 250 feet in length. 
4.  A recreation area must be provided at a ratio of one acre per 50 units (or a proportional percentage thereof) with a minimum of 10,000 square feet provided. Such area may serve as green space and/or developed for recreational purposes such as pools or basketball and tennis courts. Non-passive recreational areas must be located in such a manner that at least 75 percent of the units are within 300 feet, as measured from building footprints. 
5.  When over 50 percent of the required parking is provided underground, a density bonus of two dwelling units per acre shall be allowed. 
6.  Apartment complexes which convert to condominium use must file a new final plat and meet all requirements of the City of Emerson. 
7.  No off-street parking space shall be utilized to park buses, tractor-trailers (attached or otherwise) or semi-trailer. 
Bulk and area regulations. 
Minimum tract size: two acres. 
Maximum density: six dwelling units per acre. 
Minimum tract width: 100 feet. 
Maximum building height: 50 feet. 
Minimum floor area: 
400 square feet for an efficiency. 
500 square feet for one-bedroom unit. 
700 square feet for two-bedroom unit. 
900 square feet for three-bedroom unit. 
Maximum building coverage: 35 percent. 
Maximum impervious surface: 67 percent. 
Front setback (arterial): 50 feet. 
Front setback (other): 40 feet. 
Side setback (major): 35 feet. 
Side setback (minor): 25 feet. 
Rear setback: 50 feet. 
Minimum parking required: 
Two spaces per unit. 
One visitor space per five units. 
Landscape and buffer requirements. 
When a RM-6 district abuts a single-family residential district or use, a 40-foot greenbelt buffer shall be established. Such buffer shall be undisturbed where practical or enhanced. 
Where devoid of significant vegetation and must include a solid fence or wall (finished side to the exterior) no less than six feet in height or trees or shrubbery. 
Green space requirement. 
1.  For every RM-6 development, 25 percent of the gross tract area green space shall be required. 
2.  Where applicable, the green space shall remain primarily undisturbed. 
3.  For housing density calculation purposes, the maximum number of lots shall be determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size, as described in the bulk and area requirements section of this ordinance. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a)  100-year floodplain, 
b)  Floodway, 
c)  Wetlands, as defined by the US Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act, 
d)  Retention/detention areas, utility areas, 
e)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area, 
f)  Road rights-of-way and areas reserved for utilities. 
4.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within green space, unless the applicant demonstrates that with this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this ordinance: 
a)  100-year floodplain, 
b)  All required stream bank buffer zones, 
c)  Floodway, 
d)  Wetlands, as defined by the US Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act, 
e)  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species, 
f)  Archaeological sites, cemeteries, and burial grounds, 
g)  Retention/detention areas, utility areas, 
h)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area, 
i)  Roadways. 
5.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and are required to be included within green space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a)  Important historic sites, 
b)  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one-acre contiguous area, 
c)  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches in caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line, 
d)  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads, 
e)  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres' contiguous area, 
f)  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
6.  All green space must be organized and designed so that at least 75 percent of the green space shall be in a contiguous tract. The green space shall adjoin any neighboring areas of green space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected green space. 
7.  Above ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected green space, but cannot be counted towards the 25 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the green space. 
8.  The green space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the green space. 
9.  Green space management plan required. A green space management plan ("plan") shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. This plan shall, at a minimum that consists of the following: 
a)  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the green space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements, 
b)  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the green space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided, 
c)  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the board of commissioners, 
d)  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
10.  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant shall be placed on the green space property concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
Permitted/prohibited uses of green space. 
1.  Permitted uses of green space: 
a)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total green space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected green space, 
b)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture, or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas, 
c)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources, 
d)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines, 
e)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas, 
f)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices, 
g)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this ordinance, 
h)  Passive recreation areas, 
i)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials. 
2.  Prohibited uses of green space: 
a)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices, 
b)  Golf courses, 
c)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection, 
d)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections. 
Ownership and management of green space. 
1.  The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility (see ownership and management section of this ordinance). 
2.  The applicant must identify the owner of the green space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners association is the owner, membership in the association is mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners association is the owner, the homeowners association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the green space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
3.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the green space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the City of Emerson may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowners association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowners association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
1.  The green space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a)  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
i.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
ii.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
b)  If the entity accepting the easement is not [the jurisdiction], then a third right of enforcement favoring [the jurisdiction] shall be included in the easement; 
c)  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
d)  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the City of Emerson. 
2.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the green space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this ordinance, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the green space. 
Sec. 8.64. - RM-12, Multifamily Residential (12 units/acre). 
Purpose and intent. 
The RM-12 district is intended to provide suitable areas for multifamily housing designed in a compatible and complementary manner so as to function as a singular and integrated land use. This zoning district may serve as a transitional zone between commercial/office uses and residential districts of a lesser intensity. 
Permitted uses. 
1.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use. 
2.  Assisted living, personal care and retirement home facilities, provided: 
a)  Such facilities must obtain all necessary state licenses and/or certifications. 
b)  The maximum number of beds permitted shall be determined by multiplying the site's acreage by the district's density limitation and a factor of 1.5. 
x. A 2-acre site could include 18 beds [(2.0 acres) x (12 DUA) x (1.5) = 36]. 
c)  Minimum parking of one space per bedroom and one space per each employee on largest shift. 
3.  Condominiums and townhouses, provided: 
a)  Maximum density: 12 units per acre. 
b)  Minimum floor area: 1100 square feet per unit. 
c)  Homeowners association required for maintenance of common areas and amenities. 
4.  Leasing office, clubhouse, gazebo or other structures related to apartment development. 
5.  Neighborhood recreation centers or swimming pools, provided: 
a)  Lighting shall be established in such a way that it shall not adversely affect neighboring properties. 
b)  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than 75 feet from any property line. 
c)  All pools must adhere to the standards of the standard swimming pool code, as amended. 
6.  Private parks and playgrounds. 
7.  Public buildings and utilities. 
8.  Rooming and boardinghouses. 
a)  Maximum ten beds per acre. 
b)  Minimum parking of one space per bedroom. 
9.  Sign(s), (as permitted in the City of Emerson sign ordinance). 
10.  Home occupations - See standards in section 8.92. 
Conditional uses permitted by mayor and city council. 
1.  Halfway houses. See standards in section 8.90. 
2.  Religious institutions, including all accessory uses, including, but not limited to, child care centers, provided: 
a)  Minimum lot size is five acres. 
b)  Accessory schools and cemeteries are permissible provided an additional three acres is provided in addition to the five-acre church requirement. 
c)  All parking areas shall include a 30-foot landscaped buffer when abutting any property used for single-family residential purposes. 
d)  Minimum parking space of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
3.  Telecommunication towers and antennas - See standards in article 7, division 1. 
Accessory structures. 
1.  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
3.  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
4.  No accessory structure may exceed the mean height of the principal building. 
5.  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than five feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable laws and safety and health ordinances. 
6.  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach five feet into the required rear or side setback. 
Use limitations. 
1.  All outside storage associated with non-residential uses must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by an opaque fence no less than six feet in height. The zoning administrator may approve the substitution of plantings for the required fence. Unenclosed carports and front porches may not be used for storing any materials other than firewood or recyclable materials within a city approved container. 
2.  Buildings must be separated by at least 60 feet unless a side face is involved in which case the buildings shall be separated by no less than 40 feet. 
3.  No building may exceed 250 feet in length. 
4.  A recreation area must be provided at a ratio of one acre per 50 units (or a proportional percentage thereof) with a minimum of 10,000 square feet provided. Such area may serve as green space and/or developed for recreational purposes such as pools or basketball and tennis courts. Non-passive recreational areas must be located in such a manner that at least 75 percent of the units are within 300 feet, as measured from building footprints. 
5.  When over 50 percent of the required parking is provided underground, a density bonus of two dwelling units per acre shall be allowed. 
6.  Apartment complexes, which convert to condominium use, must file a new final plat and meet all requirements of the City of Emerson. 
7.  No off-street parking space shall be utilized to park buses, tractor-trailers (attached or otherwise) or semi-trailer. 
Bulk and area regulations. 
Minimum tract size: two acres. 
Maximum density: 12 dwelling units per acre. 
Minimum tract width: 100 feet. 
Maximum building height: 50 feet. 
Minimum floor area: 
550 square feet for an efficiency. 
650 square feet for one-bedroom unit. 
900 square feet for two-bedroom unit. 
1,100 square feet for three-bedroom unit. 
Maximum building coverage: 35 percent. 
Maximum impervious surface: 67 percent. 
Minimum parking required: 
Two spaces per unit. 
One visitor space per five units. 
Front setback (arterial): 50 feet. 
Front setback (other): 40 feet. 
Side setback (major): 35 feet. 
Side setback (minor): 25 feet. 
Rear setback: 50 feet. 
Minimum floor area for townhomes, condominiums: 1,200 square feet. 
Floor area ratios: At least 25 percent of MF units must be 900 square feet or above. 
Landscape and buffer requirements. 
When a RM-12 district abuts a single-family residential district or use, a 40-foot greenbelt buffer shall be established. Such buffer shall be undisturbed where practical or enhanced where devoid of significant vegetation and must include a solid fence or wall (finished side to the exterior) no less than six feet in height or trees or shrubbery. 
Green space requirement. 
1.  For every RM-12 development, 40 percent of the gross tract area green space shall be required. 
2.  Where applicable, the green space shall remain primarily undisturbed. 
3.  For housing density calculation purposes, the maximum number of lots shall be determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size, as described in the bulk and area requirements section of this ordinance. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a)  100-year floodplain, 
b)  Floodway, 
c)  Wetlands-as defined by the US Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act, 
d)  Retention/detention areas, utility areas, 
e)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area, 
f)  Road rights-of-way and areas reserved for utilities. 
4.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within green space, unless the applicant demonstrates that with this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this ordinance: 
a)  100-year floodplain, 
b)  All required stream bank buffer zones, 
c)  Floodway, 
d)  Wetlands-as defined by the US Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act, 
e)  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species, 
f)  Archaeological sites, cemeteries, and burial grounds, 
g)  Retention/detention areas, utility areas, 
h)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area, 
i)  Roadways. 
5.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and are required to be included within green space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a)  Important historic sites, 
b)  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one-acre contiguous area, 
c)  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches in caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line, 
d)  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads, 
e)  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres' contiguous area, 
f)  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
6.  All green space must be organized and designed so that at least 75 percent of the green space shall be in a contiguous tract. The green space shall adjoin any neighboring areas of green space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would-be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected green space. 
7.  Above ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected green space, but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the green space. 
8.  The green space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the green space. 
9.  Green Space Management Plan Required. A green space management plan ("plan") shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. This plan shall, at a minimum that consists of the following: 
a)  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the green space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements, 
b)  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the green space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided, 
c)  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the board of commissioners, 
d)  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
10.  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant shall be placed on the green space property concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
Permitted/prohibited uses of green space. 
1.  Permitted uses of green space: 
a)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total green space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected green space, 
b)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture, or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas, 
c)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources, 
d)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines, 
e)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas, 
f)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices, 
g)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this ordinance, 
h)  Passive recreation areas, 
i)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials. 
2.  Prohibited uses of green space: 
a)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices, 
b)  Golf courses, 
c)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
d)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections. 
Ownership and management of green space. 
1.  The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility (see ownership and management section of this ordinance). 
2.  The applicant must identify the owner of the green space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners association is the owner, membership in the association is mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners association is the owner, the homeowners association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the green space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
3.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the green space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the City of Emerson may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowners association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowners association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
1.  The green space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a)  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
i.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
ii.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
b)  If the entity accepting the easement is not [the jurisdiction], then a third right of enforcement favoring [the jurisdiction] shall be included in the easement, 
c)  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
d)  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the City of Emerson. 
2.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the green space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this ordinance, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the green space. 
Sec. 8.65. - C-1, Neighborhood Retail Commercial. 
Purpose and intent. 
The C-1 district is intended to provide suitable areas for limited retail and personal services serving those neighborhoods in the immediate area. Uses located within this district supply those goods and services that require frequent purchasing with a minimum of customer travel. The scope at which properties are developed within the C-1 district should reflect their relatively small market areas. This zoning district may serve as a step down from more intense commercial uses to residential uses. Goals and objectives of the C-1 district are: 
1.  To create attractive living areas that will reduce pressure and demand for sprawling development. 
2.  To accommodate, in compatible fashion, appropriate mixes of residential, employment, and commercial uses in close proximity. 
3.  To create neighborhoods that are visually coherent. 
4.  To create compact, identifiable settlements, with visually discernible boundaries. 
5.  To protect and promote suitable areas for business and commercial uses which benefit from proximity to each other. 
6.  To encourage the intensive development of a centralized business center for the City of Emerson. 
Permitted uses. 
1.  Animal grooming shops. 
2.  Athletic and health clubs. 
3.  Banks and financial institutions. 
4.  Barber and beauty shops. 
5.  Care Homes (Professional). 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per bedroom and one space per each employee on largest shift. 
6.  Coin operated laundries and dry cleaning pickup establishments. 
7.  Convenience stores. Such uses may include self-service fuel sales, provided: 
a)  All gasoline pumps, tanks and other service facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines. 
b)  Canopies over fuel islands shall not encroach within 15 feet of any property line. 
c)  No automotive repair is allowed. 
8.  Car washes permitted as accessory use only. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per 200 square feet. 
9.  Copy centers. 
10.  Day care centers and nursery schools, provided: 
a)  Such use must obtain certification from the Georgia Department of Human Resources 
b)  Any outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height and located in the rear yard area of the principal building with a self-closing, self-latching gate. 
c).  Minimum parking regulations required per district along with one space per employee on largest shift. 
11.  Eating and drinking establishments. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per 200 square feet. 
12.  Grocery/food stores. Limited to 20,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
13.  Neighborhood retail uses (excluding pawn shops) with floor areas under 10,000 square feet. Appropriate uses include: 
a)  Apparel stores. 
b)  Beverage shops. 
c)  Book and video stores (non-adult). 
d)  Camera shops. 
e)  Drug stores. 
f)  Florists. 
g)  Gift shops. 
h)  Jewelry stores. 
i)  Pet grooming and supply shops. 
j)  Other similar and customary uses. 
k)  Sporting goods and hobbies. 
l)  Toy stores. 
14.  Non-automotive repair services such as cameras, shoes, jewelry and the like. 
a)  Parking for vehicles. If such use abuts a single-family residential district, a 15-foot-wide landscaped buffer with a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees; no less than six feet in height shall be provided. 
15.  Pharmacies and drug stores. 
16.  Photo studios. 
17.  Professional offices with floor areas under 15,000 square feet. 
18.  Public buildings and utilities. 
19.  Radio, recording and television studios. 
20.  Religious institutions, provided: 
a)  Minimum lot size is five acres. 
b)  Accessory schools and cemeteries are permissible provided an additional three acres is provided in addition to the five-acre church requirement. 
c)  Minimum parking space of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
21.  Shopping centers, neighborhood markets (up to 30,000 square feet in gross floor area). 
a)  No out parcels allowed. 
b)  All businesses and uses within these centers must be permissible within the district in their own right. 
c)  All loading areas shall be located to the rear. 
22.  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
23.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use. 
24.  Sign(s), (as permitted in the City of Emerson sign ordinance). 
Conditional uses permitted by mayor and city council. 
1.  Construction contractors' offices (including, but not limited to, building, heating, plumbing and electrical) and related activities provided the following conditions are met: 
a)  The use must provide for the main office of the contracting company. 
b)  A maximum of 50 percent of the net floor area will be set aside for storage of equipment and materials and the fabrication of and assembly of said materials. 
c)  There shall be no outdoor storage of materials, supplies, equipment, or construction vehicles. Construction vehicles means any vehicles whose primary purpose is use in land development including but not limited to earth-moving equipment, dump trucks, and bucket trucks. 
2.  Mixed use retail and limited manufacturing as produced by an artisan, as defined, provided the following conditions are met: 
a)  Items assembled or produced on-site as part of the manufacturing function must be offered for sale as part of the retail function; 
b)  No more than 50 percent of the floor area shall be used for manufacturing purposes; 
c)  In as much as the manufacturing component of the business entity is considered a secondary use, it should be situated in such a way as not intrude on the retail activities. Furthermore, public access to the manufacturing component shall only be permitted through the retail portion of the business entity; 
d)  All signage associated with the business entity shall only advertise the retail component; 
e)  Outdoor mechanical equipment associated with the manufacturing component of the business entity shall be screened from public view with lattice-work or some other similar screening material; 
f)  When located adjacent to an R-District, such use shall restrict its hours to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. In addition, the building shall be designed so that no wall greenings face the R-District; 
g)  Parking requirements shall be met for both retail and manufacturing functions. 
3.  Residential lofts provided the following conditions are met: 
a)  Maximum density of five units per acre. 
b)  Residential units shall be located only on the second story (entry ways may be accessed from the ground level). 
c)  Minimum parking regulations required per district along with one space per unit. 
4.  Bed and breakfast, provided: 
a)  The facility is operated by the resident-owner with a maximum of five guestrooms rented for a daily or weekly fee, which use is subordinate and incidental to the primary residence. 
b)  The structure shall contain 2,000 square feet or more of gross heated floor area. 
c)  No freestanding signs are permitted. All signage must be attached to the structure used for the bed and breakfast house and not exceed six square feet and be indirectly illuminated. 
d)  The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family character, and, if changes are made, the changes must be approved by mayor and city council. 
e)  All bed and breakfast houses must meet all applicable health and safety codes. 
f)  Maximum length of stay shall not exceed 14 days. 
g)  A minimum of one parking space per rental room is provided in addition to those required for the resident. 
5.  Telecommunication towers and antennas - See standards in article 7, division 1. 
6.  Billiards, pool halls and video arcades. 
Accessory structures. 
1.  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2.  Any accessory building in excess of 1,000 square feet of gross space must meet the setback standards of the principal use and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. 
3.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed a part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk area requirements of the same. 
4.  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building, nor shall it contain a greater amount of floor space than the principal structure. 
5.  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either 15 feet or the height of the principal building. Heating and air condition units may encroach five feet into the required rear or side setback. 
a)  All rooftop units must be screened. 
b)  All dumpsters shall be located in the rear or side yard and hidden from view. 
c)  No outside storage allowed. 
Use limitations. 
1.  All outside storage areas must be located in the rear yard and must be screened by a solid fence, wall, shrubbery, or trees; no less than six feet in height. 
2.  No manufacturing processes are permitted, except for those explicitly listed above. 
3.  Building design and materials may be of the developer's choosing; as long as all structures within a development are designed and constructed with a consistent architectural theme. However, any facade of the building facing a roadway shall be constructed with brick, glass, stucco, stone, or rock. 
4.  All new developments must submit a site plan. 
Bulk and area regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
Minimum lot width: 35 feet. 
Maximum building height: 50 feet. 
Maximum impervious surface: 80 percent. 
Minimum landscaped area: 20 percent. 
Front setback (arterial): ten feet. 
Front setback (other): ten feet. 
Side setback (major): ten feet. 
Side setback (minor): zero feet. 
Rear setback: ten feet. 
Minimum parking required: one space per 300 square feet. 
Landscape and buffer requirements. 
1.  When a property in this district directly abuts a residential district, a 20-foot greenbelt buffer shall be established. Such buffer must include a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees; no less than six feet in height. Buffers may be natural, planted or a combination thereof. 
2.  Landscaped areas must contain appropriate materials such as grass, hedges, trees, natural vegetation and the like. Landscaping along rights-of-way and within parking lots may be counted within this figure, however, no more than 33 percent of the required landscaping provided may be within stormwater retention facilities. 
3.  Stormwater retention facilities are not permitted within required buffers. 
Supplemental provisions. 
1.  When such buildings are adjacent to existing development, facades shall be built within a distance of the frontage line that equals the average of five feet and the setback distance of adjacent development. 
2.  All uses shall be conducted within complete enclosed buildings unless otherwise specified. 
3.  No less than 75 percent of parking spaces shall be to the side or rear of the building and shall be screened from the sidewalk by low walls, fences or hedges. 
4.  Parking lots and parking garages as primary uses shall not abut street intersections. 
Design provisions. 
1.  New buildings shall be compatible in size, scale and mass with buildings and architectural styles prevalent in the area. 
2.  Building frontages shall face the street whenever possible. 
3.  The maximum height of walls or fences shall be eight feet. Barbed wire is prohibited. 
4.  A consistently high quality of architecture shall be used throughout the development. 
Sec. 8.66. - C-2, Community Retail Commercial. 
Purpose and intent. 
The C-2 district is intended to provide suitable areas for the provision of retail and personal services for the community at large. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation of compatible and economically healthy business and service uses which benefit from close proximity to each other. 
Permitted uses. 
1.  Permitted uses listed under C-1. 
2.  Ambulance services. 
3.  Animal hospitals, kennels clinics. 
a)  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned for residential purposes. 
b)  All animals shall be located within an enclosed building and adequate sound and odor control shall be maintained. 
4.  Automobile, trailer and boat sales. 
a)  Minimum one-acre lot size. 
b)  All vehicles shall be set back at least ten feet from the street right-of-way line. 
c)  When such use abuts residentially zoned properties, a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees; no less than six feet in height shall be provided for visual screening. 
5.  Automotive repair shops (including paint and body). 
a)  Such use shall not be permitted within 50 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground or hospital. 
b)  All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
c)  Such use shall not be established on a lot which is adjacent to or directly across the street from any single-family residential district. 
d)  All outdoor storage must be to the rear of the principal structure and enclosed by a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees; no less than six feet in height. 
6.  Automobile service stations. 
a)  All gasoline pumps, tanks and other service facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines. 
b)  Canopies over fuel islands shall not encroach within 15 feet of any property line. 
c)  Minor automobile repair shall be allowed in conjunction with such use provided all such activities shall take place within an enclosed building. 
d)  No outside storage or engine/body dismantling is allowed. 
7.  Car washes. 
8.  Car maintenance facilities such as brake repair, installation of tires, tune-up shops, oil change services, emission stations and the like. 
a)  All activities shall take place within an enclosed building. 
b)  No outside storage or engine/body dismantling is allowed. 
9.  Clinics and health centers. 
10.  Clubs and lodges, including assembly halls and conference centers. Such use may include office space where incidental to the principal use. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
11.  Coliseum, stadium. 
a)  Minimum lot size of five acres. 
b)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
12.  Commercial landscapers. 
a)  Outdoor storage shall be at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way. 
b)  Such use shall be at least 100 feet from any property zoned single-family residential. 
13.  Cultural facilities. Art galleries, museums, theaters, libraries, and other uses similar in character to those listed. 
14.  Dry cleaning utilizing petrochemicals. 
a)  Such use shall not be established within 100 feet of any property used or zoned for residential purposes. 
15.  Exterminating facilities. 
16.  Farm and garden supply stores, including nurseries and greenhouses. 
a)  Outdoor storage shall be at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way. 
17.  Funeral homes. 
a)  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned for residential purposes. 
b)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
18.  Golf courses and driving ranges, provided: 
a)  The facility shall be enclosed by a wall or fence and buffer area of ten feet in depth to screen adjacent property. 
b)  Central loudspeakers are prohibited. 
c)  Any building or structure established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from rear and side property lines. 
d)  Minimum parking of 2½ spaces per hole for golf courses and 0.75 spaces per tee for driving ranges. 
19.  Grocery and food stores. 
20.  Hospitals. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per bedroom and one space per each employee on largest shift. 
21.  Hotels and motels. 
a)  Such use shall not be established within 300 feet of any property zoned for residential use. 
b)  Maximum density of 100 guest units per acre. 
c)  Motel rooms shall open to inside corridors only. 
d)  Minimum parking of one space per guest room and one space per each employee on largest shift and one space per 50 square feet in largest assembly room without fixed seating. 
22.  Lumber, hardware, paint, glass and wallpaper stores. 
a)  Outdoor storage shall be at least 50 feet from the street right-of-way line and be screened with a solid fence or wall no less than six feet in height. 
23.  Medical and dental laboratories, provided chemicals are not manufactured on site. 
24.  Mini-warehouses (including boat, R.V. and other vehicle storage). 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per 40 storage units. 
25.  Movie theaters. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats. 
26.  Multi-lease shops. 
a)  No outdoor display or stalls permitted. 
27.  Parking lots and garages. 
a)  Up to 75 percent of the gross floor area of the ground floor level may be devoted toward commercial use oriented towards pedestrian traffic. 
b)  If a surface parking lot abuts a single-family residential district, a 15-foot-wide landscaped buffer with a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees; no less than six feet in height shall be provided. 
28.  Plumbing and heating equipment dealers. 
29.  Printing services. 
30.  Private parks and playgrounds including commercial recreation facilities (indoor and outdoor). 
a)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
31.  Professional and general business offices. 
a)  No outside storage is permitted. 
32.  Public buildings and utilities. 
33.  Retail automobile parts and tire stores. 
a)  There shall be no dismantling of vehicles on the premises to obtain auto parts. 
b)  The only auto part installation that shall be permitted in connection with such use shall be the installation of tires and the installation of minor maintenance or accessory parts. 
c)  Major auto repair shall not be permitted in connection with such uses. Minor repair and maintenance may be permitted provided such repair and maintenance shall be incidental to the normal up-keep of an automobile. 
34.  Retail trade. Appropriate uses include, but are not limited to: 
a)  Apparel stores. 
b)  Beverage shops. 
c)  Department stores. 
d)  Book and video stores (non-adult). 
e)  Camera shops. 
f)  Chiropractor. 
g)  Drug stores. 
h)  Electronic sales/repair. 
i)  Florists. 
j)  Furniture, home furnishings and equipment stores. 
k)  General commercial merchandise (variety or department store). 
l)  General commercial wholesale club. 
m)  Gift shops. 
n)  Hardware stores/home improvement. 
o)  Jewelry stores. 
p)  Nail salons. 
q)  Office supplies. 
r)  Packing/shipping. 
s)  Pawn shops. 
t)  Pet grooming and supply shops. 
u)  Spas. 
v)  Sporting goods and hobbies. 
w)  Toy stores. 
x)  And other similar uses. 
35.  Shopping centers (up to 400,000 square feet in gross floor area, excluding out parcels). All businesses and uses within these centers must be permissible within the district in their own right (and remain subject to any relevant distancing requirements) except dry cleaning plants utilizing petrochemicals. 
a)  All loading areas shall be located to the rear. 
b)  All out parcels must meet the minimum standards. 
c)  The shopping center must allow for vehicular and pedestrian interconnectivity with the neighboring properties and out parcels, where the topography difference is less than a two to one slope. 
36.  Sign(s), (as permitted in the City of Emerson sign ordinance). 
37.  Stations, bus or train terminals for passenger service with minimum freight. 
a)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
38.  Taxi stands and dispatching agencies. 
39.  Telecommunications offices (excluding towers). 
40.  Vehicle leasing, rental facilities meeting the following criteria: 
a)  All vehicles must be stored or otherwise kept to the rear of the shopping center. 
b)  No vehicle maintenance shall be performed on site except vacuuming and washing of vehicles. 
c)  The number of vehicles stored or otherwise kept on site cannot exceed 20. 
d)  All vehicles on site must be in good working order. 
41.  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
42.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use. 
Conditional uses permitted by mayor and city council. 
1.  Construction contractors' offices (including but not limited to building, heating, plumbing and electrical) and related activities provided the following conditions are met: 
a)  The use must provide for the main office of the contracting company. 
b)  A maximum of 75 percent of the net floor area will be set aside for storage of equipment and materials and the fabrication of and assembly of said materials. 
c)  There shall be no outdoor storage of materials, supplies, equipment, or construction vehicles. Construction vehicles means any vehicles whose primary purpose is use in land development including but not limited to earth-moving equipment, dump trucks, and bucket trucks. 
2.  Extended stay facilities - See standards in section 8.91. 
3.  Religious institutions with a lot size less than five acres, provided: 
a)  All applications must include a specific site plan. 
b)  The use of a church in an existing shopping center, (as defined in this ordinance) shall not affect the ability of neighboring businesses within the shopping center from applying for alcohol permits under the city ordinances. Such businesses, whether established prior to or after the location of a church shall not be required to meet the minimum distance requirements within the shopping center. 
4.  Shopping centers (over 400,000 square feet in gross floor area, excluding out parcels). All businesses and uses within these centers must be permissible within the district in their own right (and remain subject to any relevant distancing requirements) except dry cleaning plants utilizing petrochemicals. 
a)  All loading areas shall be located to the rear. 
b)  The shopping center must allow for vehicular and pedestrian interconnectivity with the neighboring properties and out parcels, where the topography difference is less than a two to one slope. 
c)  Such use shall be located at least 750 feet from residentially zoned property. 
d)  Such use may not be established within 1,000 feet of any other shelter for the homeless. 
5.  Telecommunication towers and antennas - See standards in article 7, division 1. 
6.  RV parks - See standards in article 7, division 10. 
7.  Amusement centers and arcades, including billiards and pool halls. 
Accessory structures. 
1.  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten feet from side or rear lot lines. Accessory structures may not be located within 25 feet of any residential property. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2.  Any accessory building in excess of 1,500 square feet of gross space must meet the setback standards for a principal use and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. 
3.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
4.  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building, nor shall it contain a greater floor area than the principal structure. 
5.  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either 25 feet or the height of the principal building, 
6.  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than five feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
7.  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach five feet into the required rear or side setback. 
8.  All rooftop units shall be screened. 
9.  All dumpsters shall be located in the rear or side yard and shall have a roof structure. 
10.  Recycling collection/drop off centers. 
a)  No outside storage allowed. 
b)  Location of container bins must be approved by the administrator. 
Use limitations. 
1.  All outside storage areas must be located in the side or rear yard and must be screened by a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees; no less than six feet in height. Limited to 25 percent of total lot. 
2.  No manufacturing processes are permitted. 
3.  Building design and materials may be of the developer's choosing; however, any facade of the building facing a roadway shall be constructed with brick, stone, rock or wood covering. 
4.  All new developments must submit a site plan for approval. 
Bulk and area regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet. 
Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
Maximum building height: 50 feet. 
Maximum impervious surface: 80 percent. 
Minimum landscaped area: 15 percent. 
Front setback (arterial): 45 feet. 
Front setback (other): 35 feet. 
Side setback (major): 30 feet. 
Side setback (minor): 20 feet. 
Rear setback: 40 feet. 
Minimum parking required: one space per 300 square feet. 
Landscape and buffer requirements. 
1.  When a property in this district directly abuts a residential district, a 40-foot greenbelt buffer shall be established. Such buffer must include a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees; no less than six feet in height. 
2.  Landscaped areas must contain appropriate materials such as grass, hedges, trees, natural vegetation and the like. Landscaping along rights-of-way and within parking lots may be counted within this figure, however, no more than 25 percent of the required landscaping provided may be within stormwater retention facilities. 
3.  Stormwater retention facilities are not permitted within required buffers. 
Zoning incentives. 
The following zoning incentives are designed to allow specific benefits to property owners, developers, and end users of a property and not for the purpose of circumventing any other provision of this ordinance. If a specific incentive is determined to be contrary to any provision of this ordinance, the city reserves the right to deny a specific incentive on that basis alone. 
1.  If required parking is provided exclusively in the rear yard, then the required front yard setback may be reduced 50 percent. 
2.  Where parking spaces are provided in on-site underground or deck parking, a bonus floor area of 350 square feet for each provided parking space shall be allowed. 
3.  Any entity that retrofits an existing site without vehicular or pedestrian interconnection to provide permanent access to adjacent sites' parking and sidewalks shall be allowed a 20 percent reduction in required parking. 
4.  All developments wherein the front door is located within 250 feet of a public transit stop shall be allowed a ten percent reduction in required parking. 
Sec. 8.67. - LI, Light Industrial. 
Purpose and intent. 
The LI district is intended to provide suitable areas for business distribution/service facilities, transportation terminals and manufacturing/assembly processes which do not emit noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odors or any other effluents from an enclosed building. These districts should have access to arterial roadways and utilities and discourage uses that are incompatible with light manufacturing. When located on the perimeter of an industrial node, the LI district should provide for uses that are low in intensity and scale to ensure compatibility with adjacent properties. 
Permitted uses. 
1.  Administrative and distribution offices including contractors' offices. 
a)  All outdoor storage must be screened with an opaque fence or wall, shrubbery or trees no less than six feet in height and at least 50 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes and 25 feet from city right-of-way. 
2.  Agriculture and forestry, provided: 
a)  All buildings used for livestock shall be set back not less than 200 feet from any property line. 
b)  All animals, domesticated or livestock, shall be maintained at least 100 feet from any property line. 
c)  Livestock and poultry rearing are not permitted on lots containing less than two acres. 
d)  Abattoirs and hatcheries shall be located at least 500 feet from any property zoned for residential use. 
3.  Ambulance services. 
4.  Animal grooming shops. 
a)  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned for residential purposes. 
5.  Animal hospitals, kennels and veterinary clinics. 
a)  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned for residential purposes. 
b)  All animals shall be located within an enclosed building and adequate sound and odor control shall be maintained. 
6.  Assembly halls including union halls, conference centers, fraternal clubs and uses of a similar nature. 
a)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
7.  Automobile, trailer and boat sales/service. 
a)  Minimum one-acre lot size. 
b)  All vehicles shall be set back at least ten feet from the street right-of-way line. 
c)  Such use shall be located at least 50 feet from any properties zoned for residential purposes. 
d)  A solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees no less than six feet in height shall be maintained to provide a visual screening between the residential and commercial properties. 
8.  Automotive repair shops (including paint and body). 
a)  Such use shall not be permitted within 50 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground or hospital. 
b)  All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
c)  Such use shall not be established on a lot, which is adjacent to or directly across the street from any single-family residential district. 
d)  All outdoor storage must be to the rear of the principal structure and enclosed by an opaque fence, wall, shrubbery or trees no less than eight feet in height. 
9.  Automobile service stations. 
a)  All gasoline pumps, tanks and other service facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines. 
b)  Canopies over fuel islands shall not encroach within 15 feet of any property line. 
c)  Minor automobile repair shall be allowed in conjunction with such use provided all such activities shall take place within an enclosed building. 
d)  No outside storage or engine/body dismantling is allowed. 
10.  Car maintenance facilities such as brake repair, installation of tires, tune-up shops, oil change services, emission stations and the like. 
a)  All activities shall take place within an enclosed building. 
b)  No outside storage or engine/body dismantling is allowed. 
11.  Car washes. 
12.  Coliseum, stadiums and amusement parks. Minimum five-acre lot size. 
a)  The facility shall have a buffer area of ten feet in depth to screen adjacent property. 
b)  No building shall not be permitted within 500 feet of property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
c)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
13.  Commercial greenhouse or plant nursery. 
14.  Commercial recreation and entertainment facilities. 
a)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
15.  Community fairs. 
16.  Cultural facilities. Art galleries, museums, legitimate theaters, libraries, and other uses similar in character to those listed. 
17.  Drive-in movie theater. 
a)  The theater screen and all buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from any property line. 
b)  Central loudspeakers are prohibited. 
c)  The theater screen shall not be visible from an interstate or arterial roadway. 
18.  Dry cleaning plants. 
a)  Such use shall be at least 300 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
b)  All applicable state, federal and local codes must be met. 
19.  Exterminating facilities. 
20.  Farm and garden supply stores, including nurseries and greenhouses. 
a)  Outdoor storage shall be at least 25 feet from city right-of-way. 
21.  Farmers' markets. 
22.  Fuel and ice dealers. 
23.  Funeral homes. 
a)  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned for residential purposes. 
b)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
24.  Golf courses and driving ranges, provided. 
a)  The facility shall have a buffer area of ten feet in depth to screen adjacent property. 
b)  Central loudspeakers are prohibited. 
c)  Any building or structure established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from rear and side property lines. 
d)  Minimum parking of 2½ spaces per hole for golf courses and 0.75 spaces per tee for driving ranges. 
25.  Health service clinics (including accessory pharmacies). 
26.  Heavy repair services and trade shops, including sheet metal, upholstering, plumbing, carpentry, sign painting and other similar activities. 
27.  Helicopter landing areas. 
a)  Minimum one-acre lot. 
b)  Must be enclosed by a fence or wall no less than eight feet in height. 
28.  Industrial/warehouse parks. 
29.  Light assembly and fabrication. 
a)  No activity which produces liquid effluent, odor, fumes or dust which can be detected beyond the walls of the building is permitted. 
30.  Light manufacturing establishments. 
a)  Maximum lot size of five acres. 
b)  No activity which produces liquid effluent, odor, fumes or dust which can be detected beyond the walls of the building is permitted. 
31.  Movie theaters. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats. 
32.  Newspaper publishing facilities. 
33.  Office service and supply facilities (non-retail). 
34.  Outdoor advertising services. 
a)  Includes the construction, repair, and maintenance of outdoor advertising signs. 
b)  All non-storage activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
35.  Outdoor storage facilities, excluding junk and salvage yards. 
a)  Such use shall be enclosed by an opaque fence, wall, shrubbery or trees no less than eight feet in height which provides continuous visual screening. 
b)  No repair or other such activity shall be conducted. 
c)  Such use shall be at least 50 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes and 25 feet from city right-of-way. 
36.  Parking lots and garages. 
37.  Printing services. 
38.  Private parks and playgrounds including commercial recreation facilities (indoor and outdoor). 
a)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
39.  Public buildings and utilities. 
40.  Radio and television studio facilities. 
41.  Rail, bus and transit stations. 
a)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
42.  Research laboratories including medical and dental labs. 
43.  Sign(s), (as permitted in the City of Emerson sign ordinance). 
44.  Taxi stands and dispatching agencies. 
45.  Vocational schools. 
46.  Warehousing, including commercial mini-warehouses. 
47.  Wholesale trade and distribution facilities, including office showrooms and display areas. 
48.  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
49.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use, provided: 
a)  Retail sales and services must be conducted and accessed wholly within the building(s) housing the use to which the activities are accessory and comprise no more than ten percent of the gross floor area. 
b)  No show window or other advertising shall be visible from the exterior of the primary use structure. 
Conditional uses permitted by mayor and city council. 
1.  Extended stay facilities - See standards in section 8.91. 
2.  Junkyards - See standards in article 7, division 2. 
3.  Religious institutions, provided: 
a)  All applications must include a specific site plan. 
b)  The use of a church in an existing industrial park or shopping center, (as defined in this ordinance) shall not affect the ability of neighboring businesses within the shopping center from applying for alcohol permits under the city ordinances. Such businesses, whether established prior to or after the location of a church shall not be required to meet the minimum distance requirements within the shopping center. 
c)  Minimum parking space of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
4.  Rock, concrete and brick crushing operation which is limited to no more than five percent of the owner's overall business operation. 
a)  Upon the issuance of the conditional use permit, the permittee shall provide the City of Emerson a signed affidavit certifying said percentage and limitation on an annual basis on or before March of the current year. 
5.  Telecommunication towers and antennas - See standards in article 7, division 1. 
Accessory structures. 
1.  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least 15 feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2.  Any accessory building in excess of 2,000 square feet of gross space must meet the setback standards for a principal use and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. 
3.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
4.  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal structure. 
5.  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either 20 feet or the height of the principal building. 
6.  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than five feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
7.  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach five feet into the required rear or side setback. 
Use limitations. 
1.  All outside storage areas must be screened by an opaque fence, wall, shrubbery or trees no less than eight feet in height. Maximum of 67 percent of lot may be utilized for such use. 
2.  Building design and materials may be of the developer's choosing; however, any facade of the building facing a roadway shall be constructed with brick, stone, rock or wood covering. 
3.  All new developments must submit a site plan. 
Bulk and area regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
Maximum building height: 50 feet. 
Maximum impervious surface: 80 percent. 
Minimum landscaped area: 15 percent. 
Front setback (arterial): 40 feet. 
Front setback (other): 40 feet. 
Side setback (major): 30 feet. 
Side setback (minor): 20 feet. 
Rear setback: 40 feet. 
Minimum parking required: one space per 300 square feet. 
Landscape and buffer requirements. 
1.  When a property in this district directly abuts a residential district, a 100-foot greenbelt buffer shall be established. Such buffer must include a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees no less than six feet in height. All loading docks shall be screened by either landscaping or a stabilized berm. 
2.  Landscaped areas must contain appropriate materials such as grass, hedges, trees, natural vegetation and the like. Landscaping along rights-of-way and within parking lots may be counted within this figure, however, no more than 33 percent of the required landscaping provided may be within stormwater retention facilities. 
3.  Stormwater retention facilities are not permitted within required buffers. 
Sec. 8.68. - HI, Heavy Industrial. 
Purpose and intent. 
The HI district is intended to provide suitable areas for major manufacturing processing, warehousing and research facilities which require open storage and large amounts of land. Typical heavy industrial uses include manufacturing, chemical manufacturing and storage, petrochemical refining and storage, mining and other land uses that may affect the environment. These districts should have access to major streets and utilities. When located on the perimeter of an industrial node, the HI district should provide for uses that are lower in intensity and scale to ensure compatibility with adjacent properties. 
Permitted uses. 
1.  Permitted uses listed under LI. 
2.  Assembly and fabrication. 
3.  Coliseum, stadium. Five-acre minimum lot size. 
a)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
4.  Farm and garden supply stores, including nurseries and greenhouses. 
a)  Outdoor storage shall be at least 50 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
5.  Manufacturing establishments involving the conversion of raw materials into useable finished products, provided that any manufacturing process which generates liquid waste complies with all local, state and federal pollution standards. 
6.  Mining. 
a)  The extraction of dirt, sand or soil shall not be established within 500 feet of a residential use or 200 feet of any other use. 
b)  The extraction of rock and gravel shall not be established within 4,000 feet of a residential use or 2,000 feet of any other use. 
c)  The removal area shall be enclosed by a fence no less than eight feet in height to prevent access by the general public. This fence shall be locked during non-business hours. 
7.  Petroleum and petrochemical refining and storage. 
a)  All structures (excluding offices) shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line and 200 feet from any residentially zoned or used property. 
8.  Public buildings and utilities. 
9.  Rail yards. 
a)  Minimum ten acres. 
10.  Tire retreading and recapping. 
11.  Truck terminals. 
a)  Minimum five-acre lot size. 
b)  All structures shall be located and activities conducted (including parking) at least 300 feet from any property zoned for residential purposes. 
12.  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
Conditional uses permitted by mayor and city council. 
1.  Recycling collection centers (may also be defined by the state as a construction and demolition transfer station) are to be submitted and reviewed with the following: 
a)  Site plan detailing building location, business operation, curb cuts and traffic flow, distance from the nearest facility. 
b)  No outside storage allowed. 
c)  Location of container bins must be approved by the administrator. 
d)  There shall only be a transfer of construction and demolition debris. 
e)  There shall be no transfer of household solid and liquid waste. 
f)  The facility must be located on an arterial or higher classified public road. 
g)  The site shall be a minimum of two acres. 
h)  Must be approved and permitted by the State of Georgia and meet all local, state, and federal laws. 
2.  Construction and demolition waste management facility. 
3.  Solid waste management facility. 
4.  Inert waste management facility. 
5.  Biomedical waste management facility. 
6.  Transfer stations. 
7.  Junkyards - See standards in article 7, division 2. 
8.  Telecommunication towers and antennas - See standards in article 7, division 1. 
Accessory structures. 
1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least 15 feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2)  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
3)  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal structure. 
4)  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either 20 feet or the height of the principal building. 
5)  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than five feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
6)  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach five feet into the required rear or side setback. 
Use limitations. 
1.  All outside storage areas must be located in the rear yard and must be screened by an opaque fence, wall, shrubbery or trees no less than eight feet in height. 
2.  Building design and materials may be of the developer's choosing; however, any facade of the building facing a roadway shall be constructed with brick, stone, rock or wood covering. 
3.  All new developments must submit a site plan. 
Bulk and area regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet. 
Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
Maximum building height: 50 feet. 
Maximum impervious surface: 80 percent. 
Minimum landscaped area: ten percent. 
Front setback (arterial): 50 feet. 
Front setback (other): 50 feet. 
Side setback (major): 50 feet. 
Side setback (minor): 20 feet. 
Rear setback: 50 feet. 
Minimum parking required: one space per 300 square feet. 
Landscape and buffer requirements. 
1.  When a property in this district directly abuts a residential district, a 150-foot greenbelt buffer shall be established. Such buffer must include a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees no less than six feet in height. All loading docks shall be screened by either landscaping or a stabilized berm. 
2.  Landscaped areas must contain appropriate materials such as grass, hedges, trees, natural vegetation and the like. Landscaping along rights-of-way and within parking lots may be counted within this figure, however, no more than 50 percent of the required landscaping provided may be within stormwater retention facilities. 
3.  Stormwater retention facilities are not permitted within required buffers. 
Sec. 8.69. - MU, Mixed Use Development. 
Purpose. 
The mixed use zoning category is a floating zone which is established for the purpose of providing a compatible mixture of commercial, employment, residential, recreational, civic, and/or cultural uses which are planned and developed as a unit. The location of a mixed use district is restricted to areas which are designated mixed use (single-family, multifamily, commercial, office) in the Emerson comprehensive plan and future land use map. A mixed use development should complement surrounding areas. Among the goals of the mixed use zoning category are the following: 
1.  Encourage residential uses in conjunction with commercial activities in order to create an active street life, enhance the vitality of businesses, and reduce vehicular traffic; 
2.  Provide opportunities for horizontal and vertical mixed-use developments by permitting existing and planned commercial zones to be combined into unified development sites; 
3.  Encourage compatibility between residential and commercial uses in areas where residential zones directly abut commercial zones, by permitting greater design flexibility across the existing boundaries of the two zones; 
4.  Ensure that the appearance and effects of buildings and uses are harmonious with the character (topography, economy, society) of the area in which they are located. 
Effect and procedure. 
A site plan shall be filed and will be reviewed and a determination will be made as to whether the plan is consistent with the intent and standards of the mixed use district and whether the development of the tract serves the public welfare. 
Permitted uses. 
1.  Uses permitted under R (single-family residential). 
2.  Uses permitted under C-1 (neighborhood retail commercial). 
3.  Uses permitted under C-2 (community retail commercial). 
4.  Uses permitted under RM-6 (multifamily residential). 
5.  Uses permitted under RM-12 (multifamily residential). 
6.  Uses permitted under RC (residential conservation planned unit development). 
Conditional uses permitted by mayor and city council. 
1.  Bed and breakfast, provided: 
a)  The facility is operated by the resident-owner with a maximum of five guestrooms rented for a daily or weekly fee, which use is subordinate and incidental to the primary residence. 
b)  The structure shall contain 2,000 square feet or more of gross heated floor area. 
c)  No freestanding signs are permitted. All signage must be attached to the structure used for the bed and breakfast house and not exceed six square feet and be indirectly illuminated. 
d)  The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family character, and, if changes are made, the changes must be approved by mayor and city council. 
e)  All bed and breakfast houses must meet all applicable health and safety codes. 
f)  Maximum length of stay shall not exceed 14 days. 
g)  A minimum of one parking space per rental room is provided in addition to those required for the resident. 
2.  Religious institutions, including all accessory uses, including, but not limited to, child care centers, provided: 
a)  Minimum lot size is five acres. 
b)  Accessory schools and cemeteries are permissible provided an additional three acres is provided in addition to the five-acre church requirement. 
c)  All parking areas shall include a 30-foot landscaped buffer when abutting any property used for single-family residential purposes. 
d)  Minimum parking space of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
3.  Special event home, provided: 
a)  Establishment must be on a minimum of a two-acre site. 
b)  A maximum of 3,000 square feet may be dedicated to the reception floor area. 
c)  Trash receptacles must be located in a rear or side yard and shall be screened on all sides. Garbage shall be collected only during the daytime hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
d)  All applicants shall comply with the City of Emerson noise ordinance. 
e)  Capacity of the special events home will be limited to 300 persons. 
f)  The commercial operations of the facility shall not operate between 12:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
g)  Facility should only be located in appropriate areas of the city and not have a negative impact on surrounding properties. 
h)  If the facility ceases to operate as a special events home for a period of six consecutive months, the property shall lose its approval as a special events home. 
i)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
4.  Telecommunication towers and antennas - See standards in article 7, division 1. 
5.  Construction contractors' offices (including but not limited to building, heating, plumbing and electrical) and related activities provided the following conditions are met: 
a)  The use must provide for the main office of the contracting company. 
b)  A maximum of 50 percent of the net floor area will be set aside for storage of equipment and materials and the fabrication of and assembly of said materials. 
c)  There shall be no outdoor storage of materials, supplies, equipment, or construction vehicles. Construction vehicles means any vehicles whose primary purpose is use in land development including but not limited to earth-moving equipment, dump trucks, and bucket trucks. 
6.  Mixed use retail and limited manufacturing as produced by an artisan, as defined, provided the following conditions are met: 
a)  Items assembled or produced on-site as part of the manufacturing function must be offered for sale as part of the retail function; 
b)  No more than 50 percent of the floor area shall be used for manufacturing purposes; 
c)  In as much as the manufacturing component of the business entity is considered a secondary use, it should be situated in such a way as not intrude on the retail activities. Furthermore, public access to the manufacturing component shall only be permitted through the retail portion of the business entity; 
d)  All signage associated with the business entity shall only advertise the retail component; 
e)  Outdoor mechanical equipment associated with the manufacturing component of the business entity shall be screened from public view with lattice-work or some other similar screening material; 
f)  When located adjacent to an R-District, such use shall restrict its hours to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. In addition, the building shall be designed so that no wall openings face the R-District; 
g)  Parking requirements shall be met for both retail and manufacturing functions. 
7.  Residential lofts provided the following conditions are met: 
a)  Maximum density of five units per acre. 
b)  Residential units shall be located only on the second story (entry ways may be accessed from the ground level). 
c)  Minimum parking of one space per unit. 
8.  Extended stay facilities - See standards in section 8.91. 
9.  Mini warehouses and self-storage facilities. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per 40 storage units. 
10.  Shopping centers (over 400,000 square feet in gross floor area, excluding out parcels). 
a)  All businesses and uses within these centers must be permissible within the district in their own right (and remain subject to any relevant distancing requirements) except dry cleaning plants utilizing petrochemicals. 
b)  All loading areas shall be located to the rear. 
c)  The shopping center must allow for vehicular and pedestrian interconnectivity with the neighboring properties and out parcels, where the topography difference is less than a two to one slope. 
d)  Such use shall be located at least 750 feet from residentially zoned property. 
e)  Such use may not be established within 1,000 feet of any other shelter for the homeless. 
11.  RV Parks - See standards in article 7, division 10. 
12.  Garage sales, provided: 
a)  Limited to three consecutive days and one event every three months. 
b)  No consignment goods may be offered for sale. 
c)  Sales are conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
13.  Guest homes, garage apartments and servant quarters, provided: 
a)  Such structure is located to the rear of the principal structure and no less than 20 feet from any property line and ten feet from the principal building. 
b)  Such structure has 5,000 square feet of lot area dedicated to its use in addition to the district requirements for the principal use. 
c)  No paying guests or tenants are housed. 
d)  No other similar use or structure is located on the lot. 
e)  The building's height and/or area do not exceed that of the principal building. 
14.  Similar uses permitted under LI. 
15.  Golf courses and driving ranges, provided: 
a)  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than 100 feet from any property line, 
b)  Lighting shall be established in such a way that it shall not adversely affect neighboring properties. 
c)  Minimum parking of 2½ spaces per hole for golf courses and 0.75 spaces per tee for driving ranges. 
d)  Central loudspeakers are prohibited. 
16.  Group homes - See standards in section 8.89. 
17.  Horses or noncommercial riding stables, provided they are kept on a lot not less than three acres, all buildings are set back 150 feet from all property lines, all horses are kept 50 feet from property lines and have 5,000 feet of fenced area. 
18.  Noncommercial clubs or lodges. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
19.  Noncommercial horticulture and agriculture. 
20.  Personal care homes consisting of six or fewer individuals, inclusive of resident staff provided: 
a)  The principal structure contains a residential facade architecturally similar to adjacent buildings. 
b)  Such facilities obtain all necessary local and state licenses. 
c)  The use is limited to the principal structure only. 
d)  The maximum number of beds permitted shall be limited to one person per 250 gross square feet of heated floor space within the principal structure. 
e)  Minimum parking of one space per bedroom. 
21.  Similar uses permitted under LI. 
Use ratios. 
In general, proposed mixed use developments shall adhere to the types established the Emerson future land use map. The types and requirements are as follows: 
1.  Single-family (SF) mixed use: Detached and attached single-family residential structures shall be the dominant use, comprising the largest percentage of total building floor area. 
2.  Multifamily (MF) mixed use: Multifamily residential structure(s) shall be the dominant use, comprising the largest percentage of total building floor area. 
3.  Commercial mixed use: Commercial structures shall be the dominant use, comprising the largest percentage of total building floor area. 
At a minimum each mixed use must incorporate two of the permitted uses. In any mixed use development, no one use shall be less than 15 percent of the total acreage. 
Bulk and area regulations. 
Maximum lot coverage: 60 percent (one building); 75 percent (two or more buildings). 
Minimum undisturbed area or replanted area for sites already cleared: 20 percent (excludes floodplains, stream buffers, and setback buffers). 
Maximum building height: 50 feet. 
Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
Minimum lot depth: three times lot width. 
Front setback: 20 feet. 
Side setback ten feet. 
Rear setback: 15 feet. 
Minimum floor area for apartments: 
550 square feet for efficiency unit. 
650 square feet for one-bedroom unit. 
900 square feet for two-bedroom unit. 
1,100 square feet for three-bedroom unit. 
Minimum floor area for single-family detached, townhomes, condominiums: 1,200 square feet. 
Floor area ratios: At least 25 percent of MF units must be 900 square feet or above. 
Up to 25 percent of MF units may be 600 square feet or less. 
Minimum parking required: 
Residential: two spaces per unit. 
Multifamily: two spaces per unit and one visitor space per five units. 
Commercial: one space per 300 square feet. 
Landscape and buffer requirements. 
In general, the areas between the public rights-of-way and parking facilities or buildings shall be landscaped with deciduous trees and planter boxes or beds. The following additional landscape stipulations shall be required for mixed-use developments. 
1.  In order to reduce problems associated with runoff and water supply contamination, innovative stormwater management techniques shall be used in all mixed use district developments. This could include porous pavement and/or perforated brick or block, ground swales, reconstructed wetlands, depressions, etc. In no instance shall a retention pond be constructed as the sole means of controlling stormwater. 
2.  All off-street parking areas shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from all other property lines, and at least ten feet from any public right-of-way. 
3.  A buffer between a mixed use development and any surrounding residential developments shall be provided in the form of a minimum ten-foot-wide, ten-foot-tall landscaped area that includes native species trees, shrubs, flowers, and grasses. 
4.  Pedestrian pathways and sidewalks shall provide safe and aesthetically pleasing means of on-site movement and shall be an integral part of overall site design. Pedestrian pathways to buildings, parking areas, and other amenities shall be planned and installed in all developments. 
Green space requirement. 
1.  For every MU development, 25 percent of the gross tract area green space shall be required. 
2.  Where applicable, the green space shall remain primarily undisturbed. 
3.  For housing density calculation purposes, the maximum number of lots shall be determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size, as described in the bulk and area requirements section of this ordinance. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a)  100-year floodplain. 
b)  Floodway. 
c)  Wetlands, as defined by the US Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
d)  Retention/detention areas, utility areas. 
e)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area. 
f)  Road rights-of-way and areas reserved for utilities. 
4.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within green space, unless the applicant demonstrates that with this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this ordinance: 
a)  100-year floodplain. 
b)  All required stream bank buffer zones. 
c)  Floodway. 
d)  Wetlands, as defined by the US Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
e)  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species. 
f)  Archaeological sites, cemeteries, and burial grounds. 
g)  Retention/detention areas, utility areas. 
h)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area. 
i)  Roadways. 
5.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and are required to be included within green space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a)  Important historic sites. 
b)  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one-acre contiguous area. 
c)  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches in caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line. 
d)  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads. 
e)  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres of contiguous area. 
f)  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
6.  All green space must be organized and designed so that at least 75 percent of the green space shall be in a contiguous tract. The green space shall adjoin any neighboring areas of green space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected green space. 
7.  Above ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected green space, but cannot be counted towards the 25 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the green space. 
8.  The green space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the green space. 
9.  Green space management plan required. A green space management plan ("plan") shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. This plan shall, at a minimum that consists of the following: 
a)  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the green space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements. 
b)  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the green space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided. 
c)  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the board of commissioners. 
d)  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
10.  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant shall be placed on the green space property concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
Permitted/prohibited uses of green space. 
1.  Permitted uses of green space: 
a)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total green space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected green space. 
b)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture, or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas. 
c)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources. 
d)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines. 
e)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas. 
f)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices. 
g)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
h)  Passive recreation areas. 
i)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials. 
2.  Prohibited uses of green space: 
a)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices. 
b)  Golf courses. 
c)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
d)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections. 
Ownership and management of green space. 
1.  The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility (see ownership and management section of this ordinance). 
2.  The applicant must identify the owner of the green space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners association is the owner, membership in the association is mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners association is the owner, the homeowners association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the green space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
3.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the green space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the City of Emerson may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowners association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowners association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
1.  The green space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a)  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
i.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
ii.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
b)  If the entity accepting the easement is not [the jurisdiction], then a third right of enforcement favoring [the jurisdiction] shall be included in the easement; 
c)  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
d)  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the City of Emerson. 
2.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the green space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this ordinance, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the green space. 
Lighting. 
Lighting shall provide for the safe illumination of the site in order to maintain pedestrian and vehicle safety, security, and design accentuation. Building illumination and architectural lighting shall be indirect in character. Architectural lighting shall articulate the particular building design as well as provide the required functional lighting for safety of pedestrian movement. Pedestrian pathway lighting shall clearly identify the pedestrian walkway and direction of travel. All lighting shall be shown on site plans in sufficient detail to allow determination of the effects of such lighting upon adjacent properties and traffic. 
Design provisions. 
It is the intent of the mixed use district to provide an environment of high quality building and landscape design. Special emphasis shall be placed upon methods that tend to reduce the overwhelming visual impact of large buildings, encourage tasteful, imaginative design for individual buildings, and create a complex of buildings compatible with the streetscape and neighboring areas in terms of design, scale, and use. 
1.  Innovative and beautiful design is encouraged and welcomed as a means to enhance the overall quality of the built environment. 
2.  Minimum conflict shall exist between service vehicles, private automobiles, and pedestrians within the site. 
3.  Building entries shall be readily identifiable and accessible, with at least one main entrance facing and opening directly onto a connecting walkway with pedestrian frontage. 
4.  Building materials shall blend with those existing on adjacent properties. 
5.  There shall be structural variations in roof lines to reduce the massive scale of structures and add visual interest. 
6.  All building facades facing public rights-of-way shall have at least 30 percent windows. 
(Ord. No. 2016-016, § 8.69, 9-26-2016) 
Sec. 8.70. - MU-2, Mixed Use - Lakepoint. 
Purpose. 
The mixed use - Lakepoint (MU-2) zoning category is a site-specific zoning district which is established for the purpose of providing flexibility in developing a compatible mixture of commercial, employment, office, residential, commercial and public recreation, educational, medical, institutional, civic, industrial and/or cultural uses, centered around a sports complex. The location of the mixed use - Lakepoint district is restricted to the specific tract of land shown on the Emerson official zoning map. 
Among the goals of the mixed use - Lakepoint zoning district are the following: 
1.  Encourage residential uses in conjunction with commercial activities in order to create an active street life, enhance the vitality of businesses, and reduce vehicular traffic; 
2.  Provide opportunities for horizontal and vertical mixed-use developments by permitting existing and planned commercial zones to be combined into unified development sites; 
3.  Encourage compatibility between residential and commercial uses in areas where residential zones directly abut commercial zones, by permitting greater design flexibility across the existing boundaries of the two zones; 
4.  Ensure that the appearance and effects of buildings and uses are harmonious with the character (topography, economy, society) of the area in which they are located; 
5.  Allow for the mixed use development of large assemblage tracts, not for small individual properties. 
Prerequisite. 
All the property within the MU-2 zoning district can be currently developed as C-2 pursuant to the requirements of the City of Emerson zoning ordinance. When construction of the sport complex is within 180 days of completion, as certified by the sport complex developer's project engineer acceptable to the city by resolution, all property within the MU-2 zoning district may be developed pursuant to the requirements of MU-2 zoning district. 
The property designated as MU-2 (MF), as shown on the official zoning map, can be developed under the MU-2 zoning district requirements for multifamily, prior to the sports complex commencement. 
Effect and procedure. 
A site plan for individual, multiple or all of the parcels shall be filed and will be reviewed by the planning commission and city council and a determination will be made as to whether the plan is consistent with the intent and standards of the mixed use - Lakepoint district. 
Permitted uses: 
The following uses are permitted in the mixed use Lakepoint zoning district: 
1.  Commercial, retail and office uses (see subsection A. below). 
2.  Recreational and educational uses (see subsection B. below). 
3.  Industrial uses (see subsection C. below). 
4.  Residential uses (see subsection D. below). 
5.  Multifamily uses (see subsection D.1 below). 
6.  Single-family residential (see subsection D.2 below). 
7  Sign(s), (as permitted in the City of Emerson sign ordinance). 
Standards for lot or tract size, setbacks, height and other limitations for each type of use are set forth below. 
Conditional uses for mixed use 2 - Lakepoint district permitted by mayor and city council. 
1.  Garage sales, provided: 
a)  Limited to three consecutive days and one event every three months. 
b)  No consignment goods may be offered for sale. 
c)  Sales are conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
2.  Guest homes, garage apartments and servant quarters, provided: 
a)  Such structure is located to the rear of the principal structure and no less than 20 feet from any property line and ten feet from the principal building. 
b)  Such structure has 5,000 square feet of lot area dedicated to its use in addition to the district requirements for the principal use. 
c)  No paying guests or tenants are housed. 
d)  No other similar use or structure is located on the lot. 
e)  The building's height and/or area do not exceed that of the principal building. 
3.  Special event home, provided: 
a)  Establishment must be on a minimum of a two-acre site. 
b)  A maximum of 3,000 square feet may be dedicated to the reception floor area. 
c)  Trash receptacles must be located in a rear or side yard and shall be screened on all sides. Garbage shall be collected only during the daytime hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
d)  All applicants shall comply with the City of Emerson noise ordinance. 
e)  Capacity of the special events home will be limited to 300 persons. 
f)  The commercial operations of the facility shall not operate between 12:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
g)  Facility should only be located in appropriate areas of the city and not have a negative impact on surrounding properties. 
h)  If the facility ceases to operate as a special events home for a period of six consecutive months, the property shall lose its approval as a special events home. 
i)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
4.  Extended stay facilities - See standards in section 8.91. 
5.  Telecommunication towers and antennas - See standards in article 7, division 1. 
6.  RV parks - See standards in article 7, division 10. 
7.  Group homes - See standards in section 8.89. 
8.  Horses or noncommercial riding stables, provided they are kept on a lot not less than three acres, all buildings are set back 150 feet from all property lines, all horses are kept 50 feet from property lines and have 5,000 feet of fenced area. 
9.  Personal care homes consisting of six or fewer individuals, inclusive of resident staff provided: 
a)  The principal structure contains a residential facade architecturally similar to adjacent buildings. 
b)  Such facilities obtain all necessary local and state licenses. 
c)  The use is limited to the principal structure only. 
d)  The maximum number of beds permitted shall be limited to one person per 250 gross square feet of heated floor space within the principal structure. 
e)  A minimum of one parking space per bedroom. 
11.  Amusement centers and arcades, including billiards and pool halls. 
Use limitations. 
1.  No heavy manufacturing processes or facilities are permitted in this zoning district. 
2.  All new developments must submit a site plan. 
Special height provisions. 
1.  The height limitations set forth in this zoning district do not apply to structures such as unoccupied and inaccessible architectural features on stadiums, coliseums, commercial or institutional buildings (e.g., church spires, church belfries, cupolas and domes on commercial buildings), government-owned observation towers, water towers, chimneys, smokestacks (in industrial districts), conveyors (in industrial districts), flag poles, masts, aerials, and similar structures, except that none of the above shall, within a three mile radius of the Cartersville-Bartow County Airport, exceed a height above the "clear zone" required for a safe approach to said airport as set forth by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
2.  Any structure containing a sign shall be subject to the height requirements of the City of Emerson sign ordinance. 
3.  Buildings and structures may be built to a maximum height limitation of 75 feet, if approval is granted by the Bartow County fire chief. 
A.  Commercial, retail and office permitted uses: 
1.  Ambulance services. 
2.  Animal grooming shops. 
3.  Animal hospitals, kennels clinics. 
a)  All animals shall be located within an enclosed building and adequate sound and odor control shall be maintained. 
4.  Athletic and health clubs. 
5.  Automobile, trailer and boat sales. 
a)  All vehicles shall be set back at least ten feet from the street right-of-way line. 
b)  When such use abuts residentially zoned properties, a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees; no less than six feet in height shall be provided for visual screening. 
6.  Automotive repair shops (including paint and body). 
a)  Such use shall not be permitted within 50 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground or hospital. 
b)  All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
c)  Such use shall not be established on a lot, which is adjacent to or directly across the street from any single-family residential zoning district. 
d)  All outdoor storage must be to the rear of the principal structure and enclosed by a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees; no less than six feet in height. 
7.  Automobile service stations. 
a)  All gasoline pumps, tanks and other service facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines. 
b)  Canopies over fuel islands shall not encroach within 15 feet of any property line. 
c)  Minor automobile repair shall be allowed in conjunction with such use provided all such activities shall take place within an enclosed building. 
d)  No outside storage or engine/body dismantling is allowed. 
8.  Banks and financial institutions. 
9.  Barber and beauty shops. 
10.  Car washes. 
11.  Car maintenance facilities such as brake repair, installation of tires, tune-up shops, oil change services, emission stations and the like. 
a)  All activities shall take place within an enclosed building. 
b)  No outside storage or engine/body dismantling is allowed. 
12.  Care homes (professional). 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per bedroom and one space per each employee on largest shift. 
13.  Clinics and health centers. 
14.  Clubs and lodges, including assembly halls and conference centers. Such use may include office space where incidental to the principal use. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
15.  Coin operated laundries and dry cleaning pickup establishments. 
16.  Coliseum, stadium, amphitheater. 
a)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
17.  Commercial condominiums. 
a)  Minimum parking of two spaces per unit and one visitor space per five units. 
18.  Commercial landscapers. Outdoor storage shall be at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way. Such use shall be at least 100 feet from any property zoned single-family residential. 
19.  Construction contractor's offices (including, but not limited to, building, heating, plumbing and electrical) and related activities. 
a)  There shall be no outdoor storage of materials, supplies, equipment, or construction vehicles. "Construction vehicles" means any vehicles whose primary purpose is use in land development including, but not limited to, earth-moving equipment, dump trucks, and bucket trucks. 
20.  Convenience stores. Such uses may include self-service fuel sales, provided: 
a)  All gasoline pumps, tanks and other service facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines. 
b)  Canopies over fuel islands shall not encroach within 15 feet of any property line. 
c)  No automotive repair is allowed. 
d)  Car washes permitted as accessory use only. 
e)  Minimum parking of one space per 200 square feet. 
21.  Copy centers. 
22.  Cultural facilities. Art galleries, museums, theaters, libraries, and other uses similar in character to those listed. 
23.  Day care centers and nursery schools, provided: 
a)  Such use must obtain certification from the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
b)  Any outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height and located in the rear yard area of the principal building with a self-closing, self-latching gate. 
c)  Minimum parking regulations required per district along with one space per employee on largest shift. 
24.  Dry cleaning utilizing petrochemicals. Such use shall not be established within 100 feet of any property used or zoned for residential purposes. 
25.  Eating and drinking establishments. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per 200 square feet. 
26.  Farm and garden supply stores, including nurseries and greenhouses. Outdoor storage shall be at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way. 
27.  Fire and police protection services. 
28.  Golf courses and driving ranges, provided: 
a)  Minimum parking of 2½ spaces per hole for golf courses and 0.75 spaces per tee for driving ranges. 
29.  Government administrative services. 
30.  Grocery/food stores. 
31.  Hospitals. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per bedroom and one space per each employee on largest shift. 
32.  Hotels and motels. 
a)  Such use shall not be established within 300 feet of any property zoned single-family residential. 
b)  Motel rooms shall open to inside corridors only. 
c)  Minimum parking of one space per guest room and one space per each employee on largest shift and one space per 50 square feet in largest assembly room without fixed seating. 
33.  Lumber, hardware, paint, glass and wallpaper stores. Outdoor storage shall be at least 50 feet from the street right-of-way line and be screened with a solid fence or wall no less than six feet in height. 
34.  Marina. 
35.  Medical and dental laboratories. 
36.  Medical services. 
37.  Mini- warehouses (including boat, RV and other vehicle storage) and self-storage facilities. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per 40 storage units. 
38.  Mixed use retail and limited manufacturing as produced by an artisan and similar businesses. 
a)  No more than 50 percent of the floor area shall be used for manufacturing purposes. 
b)  In as much as the manufacturing component of the business entity is considered a secondary use, it should be situated in such a way as not intrude on the retail activities. Furthermore, public access to the manufacturing component shall only be permitted through the retail portion of the business entity. 
c)  All signage associated with the business entity shall only advertise the retail component. 
d)  Outdoor mechanical equipment associated with the manufacturing component of the business entity shall be screened from public view with lattice-work or some other similar screening material. 
39.  Movie theaters. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats. 
40.  Multi-lease shops. 
41.  Neighborhood retail uses individually or part of a neighborhood market in conjunction with a residential development. Appropriate uses include: 
a)  Book and video stores (non-adult). 
b)  Camera shops. 
c)  Florists. 
d)  Drug stores. 
e)  Gift shops. 
f)  Toy stores. 
g)  Pet grooming and supply shops. 
h)  Jewelry stores. 
i)  Sporting goods and hobbies. 
j)  Apparel stores. 
k)  Beverage shops. 
l)  Other similar and customary uses. 
42.  Non-automotive repair services such as cameras, shoes, jewelry and similar businesses. 
43.  Non-automotive repair service centers. No outside storage is permitted. 
44.  Office uses; professional, general, administrative, and business offices. 
45.  Outlet mall. 
46.  Parking for vehicles. If such use abuts a single-family residential district, a 15-foot-wide landscaped buffer with a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees, no less than six feet in height shall be provided. 
47.  Parking lots and garages free standing or included either above or below residential or commercial uses within the same structure. If a surface parking lot abuts a single-family residential district, a 15-foot-wide landscaped buffer with a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees; no less than six feet in height shall be provided. 
48.  Pharmacies and drug stores. 
49.  Photo studios. 
50.  Plumbing and heating equipment dealers. 
51.  Printing services. 
52.  Private parks and playgrounds including commercial recreation facilities (indoor and outdoor), and all other sports activity fields and playing surfaces and related structures. 
a)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
53.  Radio, recording and television studios. 
54.  Religious institutions. 
a)  Minimum parking space of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
55.  Residential lofts. 
a)  Residential units shall be located only on the second story (entry ways may be accessed from the ground level). 
b)  Minimum parking regulations required per district along with one space per unit. 
56.  Shopping centers. 
57.  Retail automobile parts and tire store. 
a)  There shall be no dismantling of vehicles on the premises to obtain auto parts. 
b)  The only auto part installation that shall be permitted in connection with such use shall be the installation of tires and the installation of minor maintenance or accessory parts. 
c)  Major auto repair shall not be permitted in connection with such uses. Minor repair and maintenance may be permitted provided such repair and maintenance shall be incidental to the normal up-keep of an automobile. 
58.  Retail trade. Appropriate uses include, but are not limited to: 
a)  Apparel stores. 
b)  Beverage shops. 
c)  Department stores. 
d)  Book and video stores (non-adult). 
e)  Camera shops. 
f)  Chiropractor. 
g)  Drug stores. 
h)  Electronic sales/repair. 
i)  Florists. 
j)  Furniture, home furnishings and equipment stores. 
k)  General commercial merchandise (variety or department store). 
l)  General commercial wholesale club. 
m)  Gift shops. 
n)  Hardware stores/home improvement. 
o)  Jewelry stores. 
p)  Nail salons. 
q)  Office supplies. 
r)  Packing/shipping. 
s)  Pawn shops. 
t)  Pet grooming and supply shops. 
u)  Spas. 
v)  Sporting goods and hobbies. 
w)  Toy stores. 
x)  Other similar uses. 
59.  RV parks - See standards in article 7, division 10. 
60.  Sports complex. 
a)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
61.  Stations, bus or train terminals. 
a)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
62.  Taxi stands and dispatching agencies. 
63.  Telecommunications offices. 
64.  Temporary outdoor sales. 
65.  Vehicle leasing/rental facilities meeting the following criteria: 
a)  No vehicle maintenance shall be performed on site except vacuuming and washing of vehicles. 
b)  All vehicles on site must be in good working order. 
66.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use. 
67.  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
B.  Recreational and educational permitted uses: 
1.  Bed and breakfast inn. 
a)  The facility is operated by the resident-owner with a maximum of five guestrooms rented for a daily or weekly fee, which use is subordinate and incidental to the primary residence. 
b)  The structure shall contain 2,000 square feet or more of gross heated floor area. 
c)  No freestanding signs are permitted. All signage must be attached to the structure used for the bed and breakfast house and not exceed six square feet and be indirectly illuminated. 
d)  The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family character. 
e)  All bed and breakfast houses must meet all applicable health and safety codes. 
f)  Maximum length of stay shall not exceed 14 days. 
g)  A minimum of one parking space per rental room is provided in addition to those required for the resident. 
2.  Cabins in conjunction with another permitted recreational use. 
3.  Campgrounds. 
4.  Colleges, public or private. 
5.  Conservation easements. 
6.  Cottages in conjunction with another permitted recreational use. 
7.  Educational and academic institutions. 
8.  Equestrian or other sport facilities. 
a)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
9.  Fraternal, sporting or other lodges or clubs commercial or noncommercial. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
10.  Hunting, fishing, and similar recreation use operated either as a nonprofit or commercial enterprise. 
11.  Kindergarten and pre-kindergarten facilities, public or private. 
12.  Rowing and aquatic facilities. 
a)  Minimum parking to be determined by parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator. 
13.  Passive recreational uses, including, but not limited to, parks, trails (walking, equestrian and cycling). 
14.  Primary and secondary schools, public or private. 
15.  Riding academies or breeding stables. 
16.  Woodland or game preserves or similar wildlife preservation or conservation uses. 
17.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use. 
18.  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
C.  Industrial permitted uses: 
1.  Commercial greenhouse or plant nursery. 
2.  Community fairs. 
3.  Drive-in movie theater. 
a)  The theater screen and all buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from any single-family residential zoned property line. 
b)  Central loudspeakers are prohibited. 
c)  The theater screen shall not be visible from an interstate or arterial roadway. 
4.  Farmers' markets. 
5.  Heavy repair services and trade shops, including sheet metal, upholstering, plumbing, carpentry, sign painting and other similar activities. 
6.  Helicopter landing areas. 
7.  Office and supply facilities (non-retail). 
8.  Outdoor storage facilities relating to commercial recreational facilities, excluding junk and salvage yards. 
9.  Printing services. 
10.  Public buildings and utilities. 
11.  Research laboratories including medical and dental labs. 
12.  Vocational schools. 
13.  Warehousing, including commercial mini-warehouses. 
14.  Wholesale trade and distribution facilities, including office showrooms and display areas. 
15.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use. 
16.  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
Standards for commercial, retail, office; recreational and educational; and industrial uses 
Accessory structures. 
1.  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten feet from side or rear lot lines. Accessory structures may not be located within 25 feet of any residential property. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2.  Any accessory building in excess of 1,500 square feet of gross space must meet the setback standards for a principal use and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. 
3.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
4.  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building, nor shall it contain a greater floor area than the principal structure. 
5.  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either 25 feet or the height of the principal building, 
6.  Outdoor swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than five feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
7.  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach five feet into the required rear or side setback. 
8.  All rooftop units shall be screened. 
9.  All dumpsters shall be located in the rear or side yard and shall have a roof structure. 
10.  Recycling collection/drop off centers (accessory use only). 
a)  No outside storage allowed. 
Bulk and area regulations: 
Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
Maximum building height 1 : 50 feet. 
Maximum impervious surface: 80 percent. 
Minimum landscaped area: 15 percent. 
Front setback (arterial): 45 feet. 
Front setback (other): 35 feet. 
Side setback (major): 30 feet. 
Side setback (minor): 20 feet. 
Rear setback: 40 feet. 
Minimum parking required: one space per 300 square feet. 
Landscape and buffer requirements 
1.  When a commercial, retail, office, recreational, educational, or industrial use directly abuts a residential district, a 40-foot greenbelt buffer shall be established. Such buffer must include a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees, no less than six feet in height. 
2.  Landscaped areas must contain appropriate materials such as grass, hedges, trees, natural vegetation and the like. Landscaping along rights-of-way and within parking lots may be counted within this figure, however, no more than 25 percent of the required landscaping provided may be within stormwater retention facilities. 
3.  Stormwater retention facilities are not permitted within required buffers. 
Zoning incentives. 
The following zoning incentives are designed to allow specific benefits to property owners, developers, and end users of a property and not for the purpose of circumventing any other provision of this ordinance. If a specific incentive is determined to be contrary to any provision of this ordinance, the city reserves the right to deny a specific incentive on that basis alone. 
1.  If required parking is provided exclusively in the rear yard, then the required front yard setback may be reduced 50 percent. 
2.  Where parking spaces are provided in on-site underground or deck parking, a bonus floor area of 350 square feet for each provided parking space shall be allowed. 
3.  Any entity that retrofits an existing site without vehicular or pedestrian interconnection to provide permanent access to adjacent sites' parking and sidewalks shall be allowed a 20 percent reduction in required parking. 
4.  All developments wherein the front door is located within 250 feet of a public transit stop shall be allowed a ten percent reduction in required parking. 
D.  Residential permitted uses. 
D.1.  Multifamily permitted uses: 
1.  Condominiums and apartments provided: 
a)  Maximum density: 13 units per acre, unless over four stories, then 40 units. 
b)  Maximum lot coverage 65 percent, unless over four stories, then 80 percent. 
2.  Leasing office, clubhouse, gazebo or other structures related to multifamily use. 
3.  Neighborhood recreation centers or swimming pools associated with multifamily uses, provided: 
a)  Lighting shall be established in such a way that it shall not adversely affect neighboring properties. 
b)  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than 75 feet from any property line. 
c)  All pools must adhere to the standards of the standard swimming pool code, as amended. 
d)  Minimum parking one space per 150 square feet of surface water area. 
4.  Townhouses. 
5.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use. 
6.  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
7.  Home occupations - See standards in section 8.92. 
Standards for multifamily uses. 
Bulk and area regulations: 
Minimum tract size: two acres. 
Maximum density: 13 dwelling units per acre. 
Minimum tract width: 100 feet. 
Maximum building height 1 : 50 feet or three-story with basement. 
Minimum floor area: 
400 square feet for an efficiency. 
500 square feet for one-bedroom unit. 
700 square feet for two-bedroom unit. 
900 square feet for three-bedroom unit. 
Maximum building coverage: 35 percent. 
Maximum impervious surface: 67 percent. 
Minimum parking required: two spaces per unit one visitor space per five units. 
Front setback (arterial): 50 feet. 
Front setback (other): 40 feet. 
Side setback (major): 35 feet. 
Side setback (minor): 25 feet. 
Rear setback: 50 feet. 
Landscape and buffer requirements. 
When a multifamily use in this district abuts a single-family residential district or use, a 40-foot greenbelt buffer shall be established. Such buffer shall be undisturbed where practical or enhanced where devoid of significant vegetation. 
Green space requirements. 
1.  For every senior living facility or multifamily use in this district development, 25 percent of the gross tract area green space shall be required. 
2.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and may be included within green space: 
a)  100-year floodplain. 
b)  All required stream bank buffer zones. 
c)  Floodway. 
d)  Wetlands-as defined by the US Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
e)  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species. 
f)  Archaeological sites, cemeteries, and burial grounds. 
g)  Retention/detention areas, utility easements. 
h)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area. 
i)  Roadways. 
3.  Green space management plan required. A green space management plan shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. This plan shall, at a minimum allocate responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the green space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements. 
Permitted uses of green space. 
1.  Permitted uses of green space: 
a)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total green space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space. 
b)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture, or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas. 
c)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources. 
d)  Easements for drainage, access, and utility lines. 
e)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas. 
f)  Stormwater management practices. 
g)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
h)  Passive recreation areas. 
i)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials. 
D.2.  Single-family residential permitted uses: 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings, but not including manufactured homes. 
2.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use. 
3.  Home occupations - See standards in section 8.92. 
Standards for single-family residential uses. 
Bulk and area regulations: 
Minimum lot size: 7,500 square feet. 
Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
Minimum lot width on a cul-de-sac: 35 feet. 
Maximum building height 1 : 50 feet. 
Minimum heated floor space: 900 square feet. 
Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent. 
Front setback: 20 feet. 
Minimum side setback: ten feet. 
Minimum back setback: 20 feet. 
Minimum parking required: two spaces per unit. 
Landscape and buffer requirements. 
Not applicable for this type of use. 
(Ord. No. 2016-016, § 8.70, 9-26-2016) 
Sec. 8.71. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8.72. - RC - Residential Conservation Planned Unit Development. 
Purpose and intent. 
The RC district is intended to provide opportunities for development that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. To achieve this, the RC district provides suitable areas for single-family attached and detached housing at medium densities in exchange for a minimum amount of green space/open space. These districts may also serve as transitional zones between light commercial/office uses and areas reserved for lower density single-family uses. This district is intended to be site-plan specific and shall require submission of a detailed site-plan at the time of rezoning application. 
Permitted uses. 
1.  Condominiums, provided: 
a)  Maximum density: five units per acre. 
b)  Minimum floor area: 1,500 square feet per unit. 
c)  Homeowners association required for maintenance of common areas and amenities. 
2.  Duplexes. 
3.  Fee simple townhomes. 
4.  Neighborhood recreation centers or swimming pools, provided: 
a)  Lighting shall be established in such a way that no direct light shall cast over any property line nor adversely affect neighboring properties. 
b)  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than 75 feet from any property line. 
c)  All pools must adhere to the standards of the standard swimming pool code, as amended. 
5.  Private parks and playgrounds. 
6.  Public buildings and utilities. 
7.  Signs, (as permitted in the City of Emerson sign ordinance). 
8.  Single-family residential. 
9.  Triplexes. 
10.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use. 
11.  Home occupations - See standards in section 8.92. 
Conditional uses permitted by mayor and city council. 
1.  Garage sales, provided: 
a)  Limited to three consecutive days and one event every three months. 
b)  No consignment goods may be offered for sale. 
c)  Sales are conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
2.  Guest homes, garage apartments and servant quarters, provided: 
a)  Such structure is located to the rear of the principal structure and no less than 20 feet from any property line and ten feet from the principal building. 
b)  Such structure has 5,000 square feet of lot area dedicated to its use in addition to the district requirements for the principal use. 
c)  No paying guests or tenants are housed. 
d)  No other similar use or structure is located on the lot. 
e)  The building's height and/or area do not exceed that of the principal building. 
3.  Bed and breakfast, provided: 
a)  The facility is operated by the resident-owner with a maximum of five guestrooms rented for a daily or weekly fee, which use is subordinate and incidental to the primary residence. 
b)  The structure shall contain 2,000 square feet or more of gross heated floor area. 
c)  No freestanding signs are permitted. All signage must be attached to the structure used for the bed and breakfast house and not exceed six square feet and be indirectly illuminated. 
d)  The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family character, and, if changes are made, the changes must be approved by mayor and city council. 
e)  All bed and breakfast houses must meet all applicable health and safety codes. 
f)  Maximum length of stay shall not exceed 14 days. 
g)  A minimum of one parking space per rental room is provided in addition to those required for the resident. 
4.  Religious institutions, including all accessory uses, including, but not limited to, child care centers, provided: 
a)  Minimum lot size is five acres. 
b)  Accessory schools and cemeteries are permissible provided an additional three acres is provided in addition to the five-acre church requirement. 
c)  All parking areas shall include a 30-foot landscaped buffer when abutting any property used for single-family residential purposes. 
d)  Minimum parking space of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
5.  Special event home, provided: 
a)  Establishment must be on a minimum of a two-acre site. 
b)  A maximum of 3,000 square feet may be dedicated to the reception floor area. 
c)  Trash receptacles must be located in a rear or side yard and shall be screened on all sides. Garbage shall be collected only during the daytime hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
d)  All applicants shall comply with the City of Emerson noise ordinance. 
e)  Capacity of the special events home will be limited to 300 persons. 
f)  The commercial operations of the facility shall not operate between 12:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
g)  Facility should only be located in appropriate areas of the city and not have a negative impact on surrounding properties. 
h)  If the facility ceases to operate as a special events home for a period of six consecutive months, the property shall lose its approval as a special events home. 
i)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
6.  Telecommunication towers and antennas - See standards in article 7, division 1. 
7.  Golf courses and driving ranges, provided: 
a)  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than 100 feet from any property line. 
b)  Lighting shall be established in such a way that it shall not adversely affect neighboring properties. 
c)  Minimum parking of 2½ spaces per hole for golf courses and 0.75 spaces per tee for driving ranges. 
d)  Central loudspeakers are prohibited. 
8.  Group homes - See standards in section 8.89. 
9.  Horses or noncommercial riding stables, provided they are kept on a lot not less than three acres, all buildings are set back 150 feet from all property lines, all horses are kept 50 feet from property lines and have 5,000 feet of fenced area. 
10.  Noncommercial clubs or lodges. 
a)  Minimum parking of one space per three fixed seats or one space per 50 square feet of largest assembly room for those without fixed seating. 
11.  Noncommercial horticulture and agriculture. 
12.  Personal care homes consisting of six or fewer individuals, inclusive of resident staff provided: 
a)  The principal structure contains a residential facade architecturally similar to adjacent buildings. 
b)  Such facilities obtain all necessary local and state licenses. 
c)  The use is limited to the principal structure only. 
d)  The maximum number of beds permitted shall be limited to one person per 250 gross square feet of heated floor space within the principal structure. 
e)  A minimum of one parking space per bedroom. 
Accessory structures. 
1.  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
3.  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
4.  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either 15 feet or the height of the principal building. 
5.  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed 50 percent that of the principal structure. 
6.  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than five feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
7.  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach five feet into the required rear or side setback. 
Use limitations. 
1.  Developments in this district shall be site-plan specific. Each plan shall require the submission of a site plan, architectural building elevations, proposed tree-save and grading plan, 
2.  All outside storage must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by a non-opaque fence or wall at least six feet in height. The mayor and city council may approve the substitution of plantings for the required fence. Unenclosed carports and front porches may not be used for storing any materials other than firewood or recyclable materials within a city approved container. 
3.  All front yards must be planted with sod grass. 
4.  No off-street parking space shall be utilized to park buses, tractor-trailers (attached or otherwise) or semi-trailer. 
Bulk and area regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 
9,000 square feet - single-family detached. 
12,000 square feet - duplexes. 
18,000 square feet - triplexes. 
5,000 square feet dedicated per unit. 
(note: actual size of fee simple lots will vary) - fee simple townhomes (with no more than six units per building). 
Maximum density: five dwelling units per acre. 
Minimum tract size: five acres. 
Minimum lot width: 
55 feet - single-family. 
25 feet - townhomes. 
100 feet - duplexes and triplexes. 
Maximum building height: 50 feet. 
Minimum floor area/unit: 
2,000 square feet - single-family. 
1,500 square feet - fee simple townhomes. 
1,000 square feet per unit - duplexes and triplexes. 
Maximum lot coverage: 35 percent. 
Maximum impervious surface: 40 percent. 
Front setback (arterial): 30 feet. 
Front setback (other): 20 feet. 
Side setback (major): 25 feet (not applicable with common walls). 
Side setback (minor): five feet with 20 feet spacing between buildings (zero feet for attached units). 
Rear setback: 30 feet. 
Minimum parking required: Two spaces per unit. 
One visitor space per five units. 
Landscape and buffer requirements. 
When a RC district over two acres in size abuts an "R" district, a 30-foot greenbelt buffer shall be established. Such buffer shall be undisturbed where practical or enhanced where devoid of significant vegetation and must include a solid fence, wall, shrubbery or trees no less than six feet in height (finished side to the exterior). 
Green space requirement. 
1.  For every RC development, a minimum of 40 percent of the gross tract area green space shall be required. 
2.  Where applicable, the green space shall remain primarily undisturbed. 
3.  For housing density calculation purposes, the maximum number of lots shall be determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size, as described in the bulk and area requirements section of this ordinance. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a)  100-year floodplain. 
b)  Floodway. 
c)  Wetlands, as defined by the US Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
d)  Retention/detention areas, utility areas. 
e)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area. 
f)  Road rights-of-way and areas reserved for utilities. 
4.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within green space, unless the applicant demonstrates that with this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this ordinance: 
a)  100-year floodplain. 
b)  All required stream bank buffer zones. 
c)  Floodway. 
d)  Wetlands-as defined by the US Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
e)  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species. 
f)  Archaeological sites, cemeteries, and burial grounds. 
g)  Retention/detention areas, utility areas. 
h)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area. 
i)  Roadways. 
5.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and are required to be included within green space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a)  Important historic sites. 
b)  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one-acre contiguous area. 
c)  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches in caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line. 
d)  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads. 
e)  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres of contiguous area. 
f)  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
6.  All green space must be organized and designed so that at least 75 percent of the green space shall be in a contiguous tract. The green space shall adjoin any neighboring areas of green space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected green space. 
7.  Above ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected green space, but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the green space. 
8.  The green space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the green space. 
9.  Green space management plan required. A green space management plan ("plan") shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. This plan shall, at a minimum, consists of the following: 
a)  Allocate responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the green space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements. 
b)  Estimate the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the green space and outline the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided. 
c)  Provide that any changes to the plan be approved by the mayor and city council. 
d)  Provide for enforcement of the plan. 
10.  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant shall be placed on the green space property concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
Permitted/prohibited uses of green space. 
1.  Permitted uses of green space: 
a)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total green space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected green space. 
b)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture, or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas. 
c)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources. 
d)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines. 
e)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas. 
f)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices. 
g)  Passive recreation areas. 
h)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials. 
i)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
2.  Prohibited uses of green space: 
a)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices. 
b)  Golf courses. 
c)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections. 
d)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
Ownership and management of green space. 
1.  The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
2.  The applicant must identify the owner of the green space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners association is the owner, membership in the association is mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners association is the owner, the homeowners association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the green space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
3.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the green space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the City of Emerson may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowners association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowners association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
1.  The green space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a)  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
(i)  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
(ii)  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
b)  If the entity accepting the easement is not [the jurisdiction], then a third right of enforcement favoring [the jurisdiction] shall be included in the easement; 
c)  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
d)  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the City of Emerson. 
2.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the green space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this ordinance, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the green space. 
Secs. 8.73—8.86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8.87. - Conditional use permits. 
8.87.1  Within each zoning district's standards, certain property uses may be allowed provided they obtain a conditional use permit. This additional review is necessary due to the increased possibility that such uses may have a negative impact on surrounding properties and their value. The city retains its right to subject certain uses to greater scrutiny to determine if they are appropriate or if additional safeguards may mitigate potentially harmful effects on neighboring properties. Table B below denotes those uses which are permitted only after issuance of a conditional use permit within the specified zoning districts. 
8.87.2  All applications for conditional use permits heard by the mayor and city council shall be advertised in the same manner as applications for variances and public hearings will be held thereon in the same manner. 
8.87.3  The mayor and city council may grant conditional use permits for any given period of time at their own discretion. 
8.87.4  The mayor and city council shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to grant a conditional use permit: 
1.  Whether or not there will be a significant adverse effect on the neighborhood or area in which the proposed use will be located. 
2.  Whether or not the use is compatible with the neighborhood. 
3.  Whether or not the proposed use will constitute a nuisance as defined by state law. 
4.  Whether or not property values of surrounding property will be adversely affected. 
5.  Whether or not adequate provisions are made for parking and traffic considerations. 
6.  Whether or not the site or intensity of the use is appropriate. 
7.  Whether or not adequate provisions are made regarding hours of operation. 
8.  The location or proximity of other similar uses (whether conforming or non-conforming). 
9.  Whether or not adequate controls and limits are placed upon commercial deliveries. 
10.  Whether or not adequate landscaping plans are incorporated to ensure appropriate transition. 
11.  Whether or not the public health, safety and welfare of the surrounding neighborhoods will be adversely affected. 
12.  Whether it is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
TABLE B. CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 

 
Sec. 8.88. - Community residences. 
The Fair Housing Amendment Act (1988) states that local zoning regulations may not prohibit community residences and requires that municipalities provide "reasonable accommodation" of such uses. The City of Emerson regulates community residences using criteria based upon the actual use of the facility and the number of individuals utilizing its services. This provides individuals with opportunities for normalization instead of institutionalization thereby reducing social costs and fostering personal growth and responsibility while also allowing the city to maintain viable neighborhoods based primarily upon similar single-family or planned multifamily dwellings. 
Sec. 8.89. - Group homes. 
Group homes are defined throughout the entirety of this ordinance as dwellings shared by non-related individuals who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential. This use shall also apply to homes for the handicapped; however, the term "handicapped" shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance or alcohol, nor shall it include any person whose residency in the home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals. The term "group home for the handicapped" shall not include alcohol or drug treatment centers, work release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts, or other housing serving as an alternative to incarceration. 
8.89.1  Group homes with six or fewer residents, inclusive of resident staff may be established within the R, RC, MU, MU-2 zoning districts, if granted a conditional use permit, provided: 
a)  The structure meets all aspects of the Standard Housing Code including minimum dwelling space requirements. 
b)  The operator of the group home obtains certification from the appropriate state licensing body. 
c)  No other such facility or halfway house is located within 1,000 feet as measured from property line to property line. 
d)  Minimum parking required one space per two residents. 
Sec. 8.90. - Halfway houses. 
Halfway houses are temporary residential living arrangements for persons leaving an institutional setting and in need of a supportive living arrangement in order to readjust to living outside the institution. These are persons who are receiving therapy and counseling from support staff who are present when residents are present, for the following purposes: 
•To help them recuperate from the effects of drug or alcohol addiction; 
•To help them reenter society while housed under supervision or while under the constraints of alternatives to imprisonment including, but not limited to, prerelease, work release, or probationary programs; or 
•To help persons with family or school adjustment problems that require specialized attention and care in order to achieve personal independence. 
8.90.1  Halfway houses may be permitted within RM-6 and RM-12 zoning districts only if granted a conditional use permit and are limited to one bed per 250 gross square feet of heated building space. 
a)  The structure meets all aspects of the standard housing code including minimum dwelling space requirements. 
b)  The operator obtains certification from the appropriate state licensing body. 
c)  No other such facility is located within 1,000 feet as measured from property line to property line. 
Sec. 8.91. - Extended stay facilities. 
8.91.1  Extended stay hotels or motels shall be defined as any hotel or motel in which 30 percent or greater of all guest rooms have facilities for both the storage and preparation of food and which are designed or utilized for weekly or monthly occupancy. 
8.91.2  Extended stay hotels and motels shall also be defined as any hotel or motel which has less than 30 percent facilities for both the storage and preparation of food, which also do not have daily maid services, and/or which are advertised, designed or utilized for weekly or monthly occupancy. 
8.91.3  Extended stay hotels and motels may be permitted within the C-2, MU, MU-2 and LI zoning districts only if granted a conditional use permit and shall comply with the following restrictions: 
a)  All guest rooms which have facilities for both the storage and preparation of food and have less than 300 square feet of floor area are limited to a maximum of two persons per such room; however, for all such guest rooms greater than 300 square feet, one additional person shall be allowable per each additional 75 square feet of floor area up to and including a maximum of four persons. 
b)  No more than ten percent of individual guests shall register, reside in, or occupy any room or rooms within the same licensed facility for more than a 180-day period. 
c)  An indoor or fenced outdoor active recreation area shall be provided. The size of each recreation area shall be calculated at a ratio of five square feet per room with a minimum provision of 750 square feet. All recreation areas must be approved by the administrator prior to development to ensure that all applicable safety specifications and standards are met. 
d)  No permanent business license shall be issued for the conduct of any business from any guest room of the facility. 
e)  No hotel or motel under this section is to be converted to or used as an apartment or condominium without prior approval of the mayor and city council. Any hotel or motel converted to such use must meet all applicable state and local codes including zoning standards. 
f)  Each guest room must be protected with a sprinkler system approved by the fire marshal or their designee. 
g)  Each guest quarters shall be accessible through a main entrance and by internal hallways. 
h)  Each guest room having a stove-top unit or other type burner unit shall be required to also include a maximum 60-minute automatic power off timer for each such unit. 
i)  A hard-wired smoke detector shall be provided and installed in each guest room. 
j)  No outside storage or permanent parking of equipment or vehicles shall be allowed. 
k)  All such facilities shall provide a 50-foot undisturbed buffer from any property zoned for multifamily residential purposes and/or a 100-foot undisturbed buffer from any property zoned for single-family residential purposes. 
l)  No building may be placed within 300 feet of any residentially zoned property, inclusive of the required buffer. 
m)  These restrictions shall apply to all facilities permitted. Owners of properly licensed and zoned extended stay facilities shall have 24 months from the adoption this ordinance to comply with these regulations. 
n)  All extended stay facilities shall have a maximum density of 75 guest units per gross acre of development. 
Sec. 8.92. - Home occupations. 
Certain occupational uses termed "home occupations" are allowed in dwelling units on the basis that such uses are incidental to the use of the premises as a residence. They have special regulations that apply to ensure that home occupations will not be a detriment to the character and livability of the surrounding neighborhood. The regulations ensure that the accessory home occupation remains subordinate to the residential use and the residential viability of the dwelling is maintained. The regulations recognize that many types of jobs can be done in a home with little or no effect on the surrounding neighborhood and, as such, may be permitted provided such uses: 
1.  Are incidental to the use of the premises as a residence; 
2.  Are conducted within the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner; 
3.  Are compatible with residential uses; 
4.  Are limited in extent and do not detract from the residential character of the neighborhood. 
Examples of permissible home occupations include residents use their home as a place of work, home office or business mailing address, artists, crafts people, writers, consultants, tutoring and family day care. 
Sec. 8.92.1. - All home occupations shall meet the following: 
1.  A home occupation shall be incidental and accessory to the use of a dwelling as a residence. No more than 25 percent of the floor space of the dwelling unit (including attached garages) may be used for the occupation. 
2.  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation or alteration of the residence and/or accessory buildings to accommodate the home occupation. Internal or external changes which will make the dwelling appear less residential in nature or function are prohibited. Examples of such prohibited alterations include construction of parking lots (either paved or through use of other material - gravel, etc.), paving of required setbacks, or adding commercial-like exterior lighting. Any alteration or addition which expands the floor area of the principal structure dedicated to the home occupation use shall void the existing business license and require a new business license be obtained, subject to property compliance verification by the city. There shall be no outside operations or exterior storage of inventory or materials to be used in conjunction with a home occupation. 
3.  Off-site employees shall not be permitted to work at the residence. 
4.  No article, product or service used or sold in connection with such activity shall be other than those normally found on the premises. 
5.  No more than one vehicle associated with the home occupation may be parked at the site. Such vehicle is limited to 1½-ton carrying capacity and must be used exclusively by the resident and parked on a valid improved surface (garage, driveway, dedicated parking pad, etc.) out of the public right-of-way. There shall be no parking allowed in the public street in association with or caused by the business. 
6.  No use or activity may create noise, dust, glare, vibration, smoke, smell, electrical interference or any fire hazard. 
7.  All home occupations shall be subject to periodic inspections by the city. 
8.  Any type of repair or assembly of vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines (such as autos, motorcycles, marine engines, lawn mowers, chain saws and other small engines) or of large appliances (such as washing machines, dryers, and refrigerators) or any other work related to automobiles and their parts is prohibited. 
9.  Group instruction, assembly or activity shall not be permitted (day care excluded). 
10.  Accessory home occupations may not serve as headquarters or dispatch centers where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations. 
11.  The city must approve all business licenses which shall be recertified annually. 
12.  Pickups from and deliveries to the site in regard to the business shall be restricted to vehicles which have no more than two axles and shall be restricted to no more than two pickups or deliveries per day between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
13.  Family day care facilities must be certified by Georgia Department of Human Resources prior to the issuance of a business. The number of children allowed by this ordinance shall be calculated at one child per 250 gross square feet of the residence with a maximum of eight (excluding those of the proprietor). The annual renewed certification from the Georgia Department of Human Resources shall be provided to the city upon renewal of the business license. 
14.  No advertisement shall be placed in any media (including flyers soliciting business) containing the address of the property for any reason other than billing or correspondence purposes. 
15.  No signage advertising the home occupation shall be permitted at the residence or directing to the residence. This includes, but is not limited to, wall signs, window signs, and free standing signs. 
Secs. 8.93—8.102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REGULATED USES 
DIVISION 1. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 

Sec. 8.103. - Purpose. 
To provide zoning classification requirements for the siting of all wireless, cellular, television and radio telecommunications towers and antennas; to encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas; to minimize the total number of towers within the community necessary to provide adequate personal wireless services to residents of the City of Emerson; to encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites among service providers; to locate telecommunications towers and antennas in areas where impacts on the community are minimized; to encourage the design and construction of towers and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts; and to enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to deliver such services to the community effectively and efficiently. 
Sec. 8.104. - Definitions. 
Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The work "erected" includes the words "constructed," "located" or "relocated." The word "map" or "zoning map" means the zoning map of the City of Emerson, Georgia. The word "parcel" includes the word "plot" or "lot." The word "person" includes the words "individual," "firms," "partnerships," "corporations," "associations," "governmental bodies" and all other legal entities. The word "shall" is always mandatory and never discretionary. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
For the purpose of this division, certain terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
Administrator means the city manager or his designee. 
Alternative tower structure means clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, light/power poles, electric transmission towers, on premises signs, outdoor advertising signs, water storage tanks, and similar natural or man-made alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication, radio or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Co-location means the placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower or alternative tower structure. 
Department means the City of Emerson planning, zoning and development department. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Geographic antenna placement area means the general vicinity within which the placement of an antenna is necessary to meet the engineering requirements of an applicant's cellular network or other broadcasting need. 
Governing authority means the City of Emerson, Georgia. 
Height when referring to a tower or other structure, means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower structure or appurtenance. 
Pre-existing towers and antennas means structures as set forth in section 8.89.4 of this division. 
Public officer means that definition specified in the City of Emerson unfit property ordinance. 
Scenic views means those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in the City of Emerson comprehensive plan. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telecommunication towers, man-made trees (with accessory buildings/structures) and other similar structures. 
Visual quality means the appropriate design, arrangement and location of tower structures in relation to the built or natural environment to avoid abrupt or severe differences. 
Sec. 8.105. - Applicability. 
8.105.1  Except as set forth in section 8.105.3 herein, the provisions, requirements and limitations of this division shall govern the location of all wireless telecommunication, cellular telecommunication, television, microwave or radio transmission tower or antenna installed within the jurisdiction of the governing authority. The provisions, requirements and limitations of this division shall only apply to wireless telecommunication, cellular telecommunication, television, microwave or radio transmission tower or antenna installed within the jurisdiction of the governing authority. In addition, any provisions, requirements or limitations contained in other articles of the zoning ordinance of City of Emerson, Georgia, which conflict in any way with the administration of this division or the provisions, requirements or limitations of this division shall be inapplicable. 
8.105.2  Governmental exemption. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this division, the provisions of this division shall not apply to the governing authority properties, facilities or structures. Private facilities and structures placed upon the governing authority's property shall be governed by a lease agreement between the governing authority and the provider. 
8.105.3  Amateur radio; receive-only antennas. This division shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is 75 feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator from the operator's residence, or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna; provided, however, only one such tower or antenna per residence shall be excluded from this division. 
8.105.4  Pre-existing towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be required to meet the provisions of this division, other than sections 8.106.11, 8.106.12, section 8.11; and the requirements of section 8.106.5 (except 8.106.5 item 6), 8.106.7 and 8.106.8 within six months from the date of adoption of this ordinance. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this division as "pre-existing towers" or "pre-existing antennas." Provided, however, that the placement of antennas on any nonconforming structure shall not create a vested right for the continued use of the structure should the nonconforming use cease. 
Sec. 8.106. - General provisions. 
8.106.1  Principal or accessory use. A tower and/or antenna is considered a principal use if located on any lot or parcel of land as the sole or primary structure, and is considered an accessory use if located on a lot or parcel shared with a different existing primary use or existing structure. An existing use or structure on the same lot or parcel shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning district requirements, including, but not limited to, setback, buffer and other requirements, the dimension of the entire lot or parcel shall control, even though the antenna or tower may be located on a leased area within such lot or parcel. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this division shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
8.106.2  Five-year plan and inventory of existing sites. To facilitate the co-location of antennas and future land use planning, each applicant seeking to locate a new tower, alternative tower structure or antenna, or modify any such existing structure, shall provide to the department an inventory of its existing towers or alternative tower structures, existing towers or alternative structures to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed towers or alternative structures. Applicants seeking to erect an amateur radio tower or antenna shall be exempt from this provision. 
A.  The inventory shall include all such structures that are within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; within Bartow County; or, within a neighboring county which currently is capable of providing coverage or capacity within the City of Emerson, and shall include specific information about the location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height design, tower type and general suitability for antenna co-location of each tower or alternative structure, and other pertinent information as may be required by the department. 
B.  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations but does know of areas where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide service, the applicant shall list the assessor's blocks contained within the geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
C.  The department may share the location of existing telecommunication facility sites with other applicants seeking to locate towers or antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; provided, however that the department is not by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. The location of any proposed telecommunication facility sites will be protected as privileged information if the applicant so requests and it is considered as such under the applicable laws and legal authority. 
8.106.3  Co-location; design requirements. In addition to all applicable building and safety codes, all towers, except amateur radio towers, shall be designed to accommodate the co-location of cellular telecommunication antennas according to the following: 
A.  For towers up to 150 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least three providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology, whichever is greater; 
B.  For towers greater than 150 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least four providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology, whichever is greater. 
8.106.4  Co-location; availability of suitable existing structures. No new tower, except amateur radio towers, shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that no existing tower or existing alternative tower structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the proposed antenna shall consist of one or more of the following: 
A.  That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are located within the geographic antenna placement area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
B.  That the existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
C.  That existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's antenna and related equipment; 
D.  That the applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna(s) on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna; 
E.  That the cost or contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing exceed the cost of new tower development; 
F.  That the applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable, other than economic reasons. 
8.106.5  Aesthetics. The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the design and construction of all towers, and the installation of all antennas, governed by this division and shall be approved by the city. 
1.  Towers and/or antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel or concrete finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
2.  At all tower sites, the design of all buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and building environment. Any equipment or cabinet that supports telecommunication facilities must be concealed from public view and made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
3.  For antennas installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical ground equipment shall be of a neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive. 
4.  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. The lighting shall be dimmer or changed to red lights from sunset to sunrise. 
5.  No signage or other identifying markings of a commercial nature shall be permitted upon any tower or alternative tower structure within the City of Emerson. 
6.  To the extent practical, telecommunication facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
7.  Access to the tower site shall be restricted so as to minimize visibility of the access. Where possible, existing roads shall be used. Where no roads exist, access shall follow the existing contours of the land. 
8.  Such other additional requirements as the administrator shall reasonably require to minimize the visual impact of the site on the surrounding area. 
8.106.6  Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers. 
1.  Towers shall be setback a distance equal to the height of the tower from its base to any public right-of-way, occupied structure, or property line of the lot or parcel containing the tower. 
2.  Guy-wires and accessory buildings and facilities shall meet the minimum accessory use location and setback requirements. 
3.  In zoning districts other than LI and HI towers shall not be located closer than 2,000 feet from any existing tower. This requirement shall not apply to amateur radio towers. 
8.106.7  Security fencing/anti-climbing devices. All towers and supporting equipment shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Fencing shall be of chain link, wood or other approved alternative. 
8.106.8  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern landscaping surrounding all towers. 
1.  Where adequate vegetation is not present, tower facilities shall be landscaped with a landscaped strip of plant materials which effectively screens the view of the tower compound. Landscaped strips shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and located outside the fenced perimeter of the compound. 
2.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Where natural vegetation around the perimeter of the site would provide an adequate visual screen, an undisturbed buffer may be utilized. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
3.  Landscaping shall be maintained by the provider and shall be subject to periodic review by the administrator to assure proper maintenance. Failure to maintain landscaping shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance. 
Amateur radio towers and antennas, or receive-only antennas shall not be subject to the provisions of this section unless required by the governing authority through the conditional use permit process. 
8.106.9  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street, utilizing existing access to the property on which such facility is to be located, where possible. 
8.106.10  Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the permittee or the lessee of the tower and antenna governed by this division shall bring such tower and/or antenna into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a more or less stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring such tower and/or antenna into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall be deemed to be a declaration of abandonment of the tower and constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's, permittee's, or lessee's expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided in City of Emerson unfit property ordinance then in effect. 
8.106.11  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee of a tower or alternative tower structure shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If upon inspection, the department concludes that a tower fails to comply with all applicable codes and standards, or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon receipt of written notice by the owner, permittee or lessee of the tower, said party shall have 15 days to bring the tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within 15 days shall be deemed a declaration of abandonment of the tower and constitute grounds for removal of the tower as provided in the City of Emerson unfit property ordinance. Prior to the removal of any tower, the department may consider detailed plans submitted by the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee for repair of substandard towers, and may grant a reasonable extension of the above referenced compliance period. 
8.106.12  Change of ownership notification. Upon the transfer of ownership of an interest in any tower, alternative tower structure, or lot upon which such a structure has been erected, the tower permittee shall notify the city of the transaction in writing within 30 days. 
Sec. 8.107. - Application procedures. 
8.107.1  General application requirements. Application for a permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the city by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The administrator is authorized to develop application forms to assist in providing the required information and facilitate the application process. Except for a co-location information submittal under section 8.107.2 of this division, the following information shall be submitted when applying for any permit required by this division and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
A.  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. 
B.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing, and type of plants required in section 8.106.8. 
C.  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streets capes or scenic view corridors. 
D.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
E.  Reports from a professional qualified engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, or other appropriate qualified industry expert(s) documenting the following: 
i.  Tower or antenna type, height, and design; 
ii.  Engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
iii.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including numbers and types of antennas, which can be accommodated; 
iv.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower or alternative tower structure; 
v.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris; and 
vi.  Certification that the antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
F.  Identification of the geographic service areas for the subject installations, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network (i.e., whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity. 
G.  If the proposed site is zoned residential or commercial, applicants must describe why an alternate site zoned LI or HI was not proposed by identifying: 
i.  What good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure such an alternate site; 
ii.  Why such an alternate site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible and why such efforts were unsuccessful; and 
iii.  How and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area. 
The department will review special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The department shall carefully weight such claims and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
H.  The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power line easements impacting the proposed tower site. 
I.  The applicant must provide any other information, which may be requested by the department to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
8.107.2  Tower co-location information submittals. Any person or entity co-locating an antenna or antennas which will add no more than ten feet to the height of the tower and related equipment or appurtenances on or around a tower for which a permit has already been issued shall submit the following information only: 
1.  The name of the person or entity co-locating the antenna. 
2.  The name of the owner of the tower. 
3.  The tower's permit number. 
4.  The location of the tower. 
5.  The remaining structural capacity of the tower. 
6.  Certification that the antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
Sec. 8.108. - Administrative approvals. 
8.108.1  General. 
A.  The department may administratively approve the uses set forth in section 8.108.5 of this division. All such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in this division and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
B.  Except as provided in section 8.108.4, the department shall respond to each application within 45 days of its receipt by either approving or denying the application. One 45-day extension of this review period may be exercised by the department if such additional time is deemed necessary to adequately assess the request. If the department fails to respond to the applicant within a maximum of 90 days, the application shall be deemed to be approved. 
C.  As part of any administrative approval, the department may administratively reduce setback requirements by up to ten percent to compensate for irregularly shaped lots or parcels. 
D.  Any decision by the department that results in the denial of a request to place, construct, or modify wireless telecommunications facilities shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence. In addition to the requirements set forth in section 8.108.5 for uses allowed by administrative approval, the department shall consider the applicable factors set forth in section 8.109.5 in acting upon an application for administrative approval. 
8.108.2  Application, contents, fee. All applications for administrative approval of a permit shall be submitted to the City of Emerson planning and zoning commission. Each application shall contain as a part thereof detailed plans and specifications as set forth in section 8.107. An application for administrative approval of a permit shall not be accepted for processing without the information required in section 8.107 of this division. An application fee shall be charged by the department. 
8.108.3  Co-location of antennas required. Applicants for the erection of a tower of a placement of an antenna shall be required to co-located upon an existing tower or alternative tower structure. An exception to co-location shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for co-location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 8.106.4. 
8.108.4  Independent expert review. If, in the opinion of the department, an independent expert review of an application is warranted, the department may engage a licensed professional engineer or other appropriate professional, as an independent expert to review any of the materials submitted by an applicant and render an opinion on any issue relevant to the application, the adequacy of the supporting data, structural integrity and the feasibility of alternative sites or co-location. Upon the review by an independent expert, the department shall convey its concerns to the applicant in writing and shall allow the applicant a reasonable opportunity to address those concerns. If the applicant is unable to satisfactorily address those concerns, the applicant shall be allowed a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed 30 days, in which to modify the application to alleviate the department's concerns or withdraw the application altogether. The expert's opinion shall be considered determinative, unless the applicant agrees to pay the expenses of submitting both opinions for a peer review, which review shall then be considered final. If the dependent third-party expert supports the applicant's expert, then the department shall pay the expenses of said third-party expert. If the independent third-party expert supports the position of the department, then the applicant shall pay the expenses of said third-party experts. The department shall respond within 30 days following the final review as herein provided. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has paid all expenses incurred under this section. 
8.108.5  Uses allowed by administrative approval. The following uses may be approved by the department after conducting an administrative review: 
A.  If it is adequately demonstrated that antenna co-locations, as required in section 8.108.3 above, is not possible for a given geographic antenna placement area, construction of a new tower up to a height of 150 feet, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, may be permitted in the following zoning districts: 
a.  LI 
b.  HI 
Provided, however, that all structures shall meet the setback, screening and buffer requirements contained herein. 
B.  So long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than ten feet to the height of the existing alternative tower structure: 
i.  Installation of an antenna on an existing alternative tower structure in any non-residential district; or 
ii.  Installation of an antenna on an existing county owned alternative tower structure in any non-residential district, provided a lease authorizing the antenna has been approved by the governing authority. 
C.  So long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than ten feet to the height of the existing tower: 
i.  Installation of an antenna on an existing tower of any height in any non-residential district, and further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna; or 
ii.  Installation of an antenna on an existing tower located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city in any non-residential district, and further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, provided a lease authorizing the tower has been approved by the governing authority. 
D.  Construction of a new tower up to a height of 150 feet, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, if placed upon property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city in any non-residential district, providing a lease authorizing the tower has been approved by the governing authority. 
8.108.6  Reserved. 
Sec. 8.109. - Conditional use permit required. 
8.109.1  General. 
A.  If the proposed location, height, setback or other aspect of a proposed tower or antenna cannot comply with the minimum requirements established in this division, then a conditional use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in any zoning district. All such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in this division and all other applicable codes and ordinances, unless the applicant can show that the denial of a permit is such a location will cause a significantly harmful and permanent degradation of service which cannot be overcome by any other means including planned or potential locations which would provide the same or similar coverage or capacity. 
B.  In granting a conditional use permit, the governing authority may impose conditions to the extent that it concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize adverse effects from the proposed tower on adjoining or nearby properties as set out in section 8.109.5. 
8.109.2  Application, contents, fee. All applications for conditional use permits shall be submitted to the City of Emerson zoning administrator. Each application shall contain as a part thereof detailed plans and specifications as set forth in this division. An application for a conditional use permit shall not be accepted for processing without the required information. An application fee shall be charged as set forth in the City of Emerson fee schedule. 
8.109.3  Co-location of antennas required. Applicants for the erection of a tower or antenna, except amateur radio operators, shall be required to co-located upon an existing tower structure. An exception to co-location shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for co-location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 8.106.3 contained herein. 
8.109.4  Independent expert review. The governing authority may engage a licensed professional engineer as an independent expert to review any of the materials submitted by an applicant for a conditional use permit and render an opinion regarding any concerns about the proposal, including but not limited to, structural integrity and the feasibility of alternative sites or co-location. Following the review of an independent expert, the governing authority shall convey its concerns to the applicant in writing and shall allow the applicant a reasonable opportunity to address those concerns. If the applicant is unable to satisfactorily address those concerns, the applicant shall be allowed a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed 30 days, following the receipt of the letter, in which to modify the application to alleviate the governing authority's concerns or withdraw the application altogether. The expert's opinion shall be considered determinative, unless the applicant agrees to pay the expenses of submitting both opinions for a peer review, which review shall then be considered final. If the independent third-party expert supports the applicant's expert, then the department shall pay the expenses of said third-party expert. If the independent third-party expert supports the position of the department, then the applicant shall pay the expenses of said third-party expert. No permit shall issue until the applicant has paid all expenses incurred under this section. 
8.109.5  Considerations in approval or denial of conditional use permits. Any denial of a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The following factors may be taken into consideration in acting upon a conditional use permit application under the provisions of this division: 
A.  The height and setbacks of the proposed tower or antenna(s); 
B.  The proximity of the tower or antenna(s) to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
C.  The nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
D.  The surrounding topography; 
E.  The surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
F.  The design of the tower or antenna(s), with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
G.  The proposed ingress and egress; 
H.  The availability of suitable existing towers or other structures for antenna co-location; 
I.  The impact of the proposed tower or antenna(s) upon scenic views and visual quality of the surrounding area; 
J.  The needs of the applicant as balanced against the detrimental effects on surrounding properties; 
K.  The impact of the proposed tower or antenna(s) on adjacent and nearby properties. 
8.109.6  Requirements for issuance of conditional use permit. The conditional use permit may be issued by the governing authority only upon satisfaction of the following requirements: 
A.  A proper application filed in accordance with the requirements of section 8.107; 
B.  The application is otherwise in compliance with the conditions for the proposed conditional use required by this section; 
C.  The applicant complies with the conditions proposed by the governing authority for the purpose of reducing the harmful effects of the use on surrounding uses and ensuring compatibility with surrounding uses; 
D.  The governing authority determines that the benefits and need for the proposed conditional use are greater than any possible depreciating effects or damages to neighboring or nearby properties; and 
E.  All fees, including expert fees, have been paid in full. 
8.109.7  Resubmitted of conditional use application. An application for a conditional use permit which has been denied shall not be resubmitted for a period of 12 months and then only if the applicant can document a substantial change in need for a tower or antenna at the same location. 
Sec. 8.110. - Towers and antennas in residential areas. 
8.110.1  Placement of towers and antenna. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, no tower or antenna shall be permitted in a residential neighborhood or within 2,000 feet of any residentially used property unless the applicant can show that the denial of a permit in such a location will cause a significantly harmful and permanent degradation of service which cannot be overcome by any other means including planned or potential locations which would provide the same or similar coverage or capacity. For the purposes of this section, the phrase "residentially used property" shall mean the property on which the residence is located and not more than one acre of land, determined as if the residence was situated in the center of said tract. 
Sec. 8.111. - Removal of abandoned towers and antennas. 
8.111.1  Notice of abandoned antenna and structures. The owner of lessee of a tower or antenna shall promptly notify the department of its intent to abandon or the abandonment of any tower or antenna. 
8.111.2  Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period exceeding 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the structure within 90 days of such abandonment. If said tower or antenna is not removed within said 90 days, the governing authority may, in the manner provided in the City of Emerson unfit property ordinance, take such action as may be deemed necessary to remove, or cause to be removed, such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease utilizing the tower. 
Secs. 8.112—8.121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUNKYARDS 

Sec. 8.122. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words have the following meanings: 
"Automobile graveyard" - Any location which is maintained or used for storing, buying, or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled, motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. 
"Junk" - Old or scrap copper; brass; rope; rags; batteries; paper; trash; rubber; wood; lumber; debris; waste; junked, immobile, dismantled or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof; or iron, steel, and other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous material. 
"Junkyard" - Any location which is maintained or used for storing, buying, or selling junk as defined above, or for an automobile graveyard as defined above; and the term shall include, but not be limited to, garbage dumps, sanitary fills, and scrap processor establishments. 
"Scrap processor" - Any person engaged only in the business of buying iron and metal, including, but not limited to, old automobiles, for the specific purpose of processing into raw material for re-melting purposes only, and whose principal product is ferrous and nonferrous scrap for shipment to steel mills, foundries, smelters, and refineries, and who maintains an established place of business in this state and has facilities and machinery designed for such processing. 
Sec. 8.123. - Limitations on location of junkyards. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate, or maintain any junkyard, any portion of which is within 1,000 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of any highway, street, avenue, or alley, located in the city, except the following: 
A.  Those which are screened by natural objects, plantings, fences, or other appropriate means so as not to be visible from the main traveled way of such highway systems, or otherwise removed from sight; 
B.  Those located within areas which are zoned light industry (LI) and heavy industry (HI). 
Sec. 8.124. - Authority to promulgate regulations governing junkyards. 
The mayor and city council may promulgate uniform and reasonable regulations governing the screening or fencing of junkyards, including the materials used in such screening or fencing, and the location, construction, and maintenance thereof. 
Sec. 8.125. - Duty of zoning administrator to notify violators. 
Whenever the zoning administrator discovers any of the aforesaid violation conditions to exist, he shall prepare a formal notice to the owner or occupant, which said notice shall be delivered to the owner or occupant by the zoning administrator, or his designee. If said notice cannot be served upon the owner or occupant, then said notice shall be left at the premises in violation of this division. 
Sec. 8.126. - Contents of notice of violation. 
Said notice shall advise the tenant or occupant of the violation of this division, or the suspected violation, and shall give to the tenant or occupant not less than five nor longer than 30 days either to remove all of said materials and waste from the premises, or to screen or fence the premises as prescribed in section 8.123(A) above, and on occupant's or tenant's failure to comply with said notice and this division, a charge of violation of this division shall be referred by the city, as for any other unlawful act. 
Sec. 8.127. - Unlawful junkyard declared nuisance; authority to remove. 
Any junkyard, the establishment operation or maintenance of which is made unlawful and which is not screened and/or fenced after proper notice of such violation, is declared to be a public and private nuisance and may be forthwith removed, obliterated or abated at the order of the zoning administrator. Fees for removal or abatement of the property in violation of this division may be charges, as set and determined by the mayor and city council, following such abatement or removal. The zoning administrator may then submit by registered mail a statement of the expenses of such removal or abatement to the person owning or operating such junkyard, and if payment is not made to the department within 30 days of receipt thereof, the zoning administrator shall certify the same for collection by judgment and fi. fa. 
Secs. 8.128—8.137. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 8.138. - Purpose. 
To preserve the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Emerson, Georgia and to preserve the character of the neighborhoods in the city, and to conserve the limited law enforcement resources of the City of Emerson by prohibiting "adult entertainment establishments." 
Sec. 8.139. - General provisions, definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words have the following meanings: 
A.  Adult business: Any business other than those expressly specified in this division, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas. 
B.  Adult dancing establishment: A business that features dancers, performing live, displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
C.  Erotic dance establishments: A nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities, as defined in this division, or specified anatomical areas as defined in this division. 
D.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
E.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation. 
F.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast. 
G.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain. 
H.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
I.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Specified anatomical areas, as defined in this division, shall include any of the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
2.  Clearly depicted human male genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
This division does not regulate, nor is it intended to regulate or prohibit mainstream theatrical performances, motion pictures, museums, art exhibitions, television broadcasts or any other mainstream performance, display, art form, business, profession, cultural activities, or educational activities. 
Sec. 8.140. - Restrictions, violations. 
For the reasons set forth in this division, no adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this division, shall be permitted to operate or conduct business within the city. 
Any firm, person or corporation who shall do anything prohibited by this chapter as the same exits, or as it may hereafter be amended or which shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the municipal court for the City of Emerson. 
Secs. 8.141—8.150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY 

Sec. 8.151. - Purpose. 
To provide location and operating standards for construction and demolition waste management facilities in the City of Emerson. This division will act in conjunction with the joint solid waste management plan for Bartow County and the Cities of Adairsville, Cartersville, Emerson, Euharlee, Kingston, Taylorsville and White to protect the health, safety, and well-being of the residents of Emerson and the natural resources of Emerson and the surrounding area. This division applies to all new and expanded construction and demolition waste management facilities within the city limits. 
Sec. 8.152. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words have the following meanings: 
The term: 
"Buffer" means a natural or enhanced vegetative area with no or limited land disturbances. 
"Fill" means gravel, rock, soil, sand, uncontaminated concrete or fully cured asphalt. 
"Holocene" means the most recent epoch of the Quaternary period, extending from the end of the Pleistocene Epoch to the present. 
"Construction and demolition waste" means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings, and other structures. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste containing asbestos, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper, cardboard, and other nonputrescible wastes associated with construction and demolition activities which have low potential for groundwater contamination. 
"Leachate" means a liquid that has passed through or emerged from solid waste and contains soluble, suspended, or miscible materials removed from such wastes. 
"Litter" means discarded materials of every kind as referenced in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(1). 
"Putrescible waste" means solid wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances because of odors, vectors, gases, or other offensive conditions and include such materials as, but not limited to, food wastes, offal and dead animals. 
"Vector" means animals and insects capable of transmitting the causative agents of human disease. 
Sec. 8.153. - Environmental protection and location standards. 
Environmental protection. 
1.  Waste may only be disposed of in a construction and demolition waste management facility if (1) it is construction and demolition waste and (2) it is not likely to produce leachate of environmental concern (either type of leachate or amount). 
2.  Construction and demolition waste may not contain any putrescible or hazardous wastes. 
Location standards. 
1.  No construction and demolition waste management facility may be located within 500 feet of a residentially-used parcel or sub-division, school or college, or public park. No construction and demolition waste management facility may be located within 200 feet of any property line. No construction and demolition waste management facility may be located upon any site less than 100 acres. 
2.  The construction and demolition waste management facility shall not be located on an unstable slope. 
3.  No construction and demolition waste management facility shall be located over a Holocene fault, in subsidence areas, or on geologic features which could compromise the structural integrity of the facility. 
4.  No solid waste management facility shall be constructed within a 200-foot buffer on both sides of a perennial stream. No impervious surface shall be constructed within 300 feet of either side of the stream. 
5.  No construction and demolition waste management facility shall be located in a 500-foot buffer around water supply reservoirs. 
6.  No construction and demolition waste landfill shall be located within 1,000 feet of any surface water intake point, down gradient drinking water supply well or within 200 feet of a stream, lake, pond, river, wetland or public land that is being used by a public water system for watershed control. 
7.  All buffers shall remain in their natural vegetative state. 
Sec. 8.154. - Operating standards. 
A.  Operating hours. 
1.  All operations, other than maintenance of equipment in fully enclosed buildings, shall be conducted only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. A sign clearly indicating the hours of operation and prohibiting dumping at all other times shall be placed in a conspicuous location at the entrance. Disposal facilities shall have qualified personnel on duty at all times to direct the dumping, spreading, compaction, and covering of materials. All such personnel shall reside in an area close enough to the landfill site to respond promptly in the event of a fire. 
B.  Other signage. 
1.  The owner or operator shall display the types of waste which may be disposed of at the facility and the types of waste prohibited. 
C.  The owner or operator shall control access to the facility and shall prevent unauthorized vehicular traffic and illegal dumping of wastes. 
D.  The owner or operator shall develop and implement procedures to identify and prevent non-construction and demolition wastes from being accepted or mixed with construction and demolition wastes, including procedures for ensuring that only construction and demolition wastes (as defined) are accepted and for handling unacceptable wastes. 
E.  The owner or operator shall provide suitable and effective means to prevent and control fires. 
F.  All construction and demolition wastes disposed of shall be handled in a manner that controls dust and prevents erosion and sedimentation. Procedures for routine filling and grading shall be developed and implemented. 
G.  The operator shall inspect and maintain the facility and equipment to prevent malfunctions and deterioration. 
H.  The operator shall maintain daily operating records of the quantities of construction and demolition waste disposed. 
I.  The operator shall not permit litter to accumulate. 
Sec. 8.155. - Closure. 
A.  A uniform compacted layer of final cover not less than two feet in depth and a vegetative cover shall be placed over the final layer not later than one month following final placement of construction and demolition waste within that layer. 
B.  Notice of final closure shall be provided to the city council no later than 30 days of receiving the final load of construction and demolition waste. 
C.  A facility shall be considered closed after six months of inactivity. 
Sec. 8.156. - Application requirements and procedures. 
A.  Each person proposing to locate a construction and demolition waste management facility within the boundaries of the city shall submit an application for determination of plan consistency demonstrating compliance with the provisions contained in this division and consistency with the city's solid waste management plan. 
B.  Upon enactment of this division, no new construction and demolition waste management facility shall be operated within the city's limits without a letter of assurance from the city council. 
C.  Application procedures. 
1.  An applicant shall prepare and file an application for determination of plan consistency with the city council. The application shall include all related documents submitted to any other governmental entity. The application shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the corporation, its financial capability, and a brief history of all of its past activities in the field of solid waste management. 
b.  Evidence of liability insurance coverage with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 for sudden events and $2,000,000.00 for non-sudden events. Such insurance shall cover injury or damage occurring upon the facility site and upon properties in the vicinity of the construction and demolition waste management facility as a result of conditions or activities occurring in connection with the operation of the facility. An insurance carrier approved by the city council shall issue such policies and such policies shall be filed with the city council. The coverage obtained to fulfill the requirements of this section shall include the provision that the insurer notify the city council 30 days prior to the cancellation of the insurance for any reason. The insured shall provide evidence that $2,000,000.00 liability insurance is to run for two years subsequent to closure of the facility to cover post-closure claims. 
c.  Justification for and anticipated benefits from the facility. 
d.  A description of the scope of the proposed facility, including an estimated schedule of how much waste the facility will accept, sources of the waste, and how long the facility is expected to be in operation. 
e.  Yearly site expenses and an estimate of the costs for the lifetime of the facility. 
f.  The proposed method of financing the facility, including development, operating, and closure stages. 
g.  Resumes of management personnel and the proposed number of employees and types of positions, including information about the training and experience required for each position and safety precautions undertaken for the protection of personnel. 
h.  Anticipated dates to begin construction and to begin operation. 
i.  A detailed estimate of the types and amounts of local government services, if any, required by the operator in each year of operation. 
j.  A description of emergency procedures and safety and security precautions that will be used in the facility. This information shall include details on emergency assistance and emergency medical treatment that will be required from the area's medical facilities, Bartow County Rescue Squad and nearby fire departments. 
k.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be taken by the applicant to prevent erosion and sedimentation in and around the facility site. 
l.  A description of anticipated need for post-closure care. 
2.  A map or other written material attached to the application shall include, but is not limited to, the following information. 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of the legal owner (and/or agent) of the property on which the facility is to be located. 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of professional person(s) responsible for the plat of survey. 
c.  Identification and description of any existing easements or rights-of-way affecting the property. 
d.  Reference to any restrictive covenants on the property. 
e.  Description of the property itself, including a location on a property tax map and the parcel number. The description should include reference to a deed book and page number or other evidence of title the current property owner may have. 
f.  The map shall be drawn to scale and shall show the location of the subject property in relation to the immediately surrounding area. Also, the map shall show surrounding property and roads, the names and addresses of adjacent property owners, as indicated by Bartow County tax records, and existing uses of the surrounding property. 
g.  The map shall contain the graphic scale, date of survey, North arrow and legend. 
h.  The location of all boundary lines of the property, the total acreage of the land in the project and the location of existing and/or platted streets, easements, buildings, cemeteries, sewers, water mains, culverts, wells and gas and electric transmission lines. 
i.  The location of water bodies, water courses, groundwater aquifers, springs, wetlands, and other related and similar features. 
3.  A topographic map with contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet at the same scale as to the project site map. The name of the preparer, date of preparation and the method of preparation shall be included. 
4.  The applicant shall provide 15 copies of the application and all associated documents to the city council. 
Sec. 8.157. - Application processing fees. 
A.  The city council shall require an application fee in the amount of $3,500.00 to reimburse the city for the costs of any needed professional services or assistance that may be required to evaluate the permit application and amendments, their contents, and evaluate the impact of a permit on the community, public health and the environment. Funds not expended in the legitimate review of the permit application shall be returned to the applicant. 
B.  Failure to provide these funds within 30 days of demand shall result in termination of the permit process or cancellation of the permit. The city council may take legal action against the applicant for any costs incurred by the city up to the point of termination. 
C.  Upon payment of the fee herein, the city may employ its own consultant to review the application and compliance with this division. 
Sec. 8.158. - Public meeting, public hearing, and communication. 
A.  Upon identifying a potential site for project, the applicant shall notify the city council and participate in a public meeting. 
1.  The city council or its designee shall give notice of the meeting to be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least twice a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date of the meeting. The applicant shall pay for the cost of publishing the notice. 
2.  The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting, which purpose shall be to discuss the waste management needs of the city, to describe the sitting process to be followed, and to allow for public input. 
3.  The meeting shall be conducted by the city council or its designee. 
B.  Within 45 days of receiving a completed application and the processing fee, the city council shall set a time for a public hearing. 
1.  The applicant shall arrange and pay for notice of such hearing to be published at least twice prior to the hearing in the newspaper which is the legal organ in Bartow County. Notice shall be published at least seven and no more than 30 days prior to said hearing and shall include the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Copies of said notices or certification from the publisher shall be submitted to the city council prior to the hearing. 
C.  Once a completed application is submitted to the city council, the applicant shall also be required to send a letter via first class mail to all adjoining property owners, as shown on the tax records of Bartow County as of the date of application and to all owners of property any portion of which is within 1,000 feet of the boundary of the facility. This letter shall state that the applicant is seeking a letter of assurance for a construction and demolition waste management facility. Certification of sending this letter shall be provided to the city council, along with a list of all owners, prior to the hearing for public comment on the completed application. 
D.  The applicant shall give notice by regular mail of the time and place of the hearing to the owner and adjacent property owners. Said notice shall be mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the meeting. Notice of said meeting shall also be posted by the applicant at the proposed facility site on each and every street of access at least 14 days prior said meeting. Posting of the notice shall be at intervals not greater than 1,500 feet. The applicant shall also place notice in a newspaper of general circulation in Bartow County no less than 14 days prior to the hearing. 
E.  At the meeting, the general procedure will be: 
1.  The applicant shall present its application and supplemental information which may have been requested by the city council. 
2.  City councilmembers shall have the opportunity to ask questions of the applicant, the city council's experts and the applicant's experts, and of supporters and opponents of the facility. 
3.  Supporters and opponents of the facility shall have the same amount of time to present information and air their concerns. Such time period shall be of at least 15 minutes' duration and may be longer if the application is complex or the number of experts and other witnesses warrants an extended period of time. 
4.  If there are more than five opponents or supporters of the facility, the city council may require that a spokesperson be designated. 
5.  Opponents and supporters of the facility may be represented by an attorney or attorneys. The applicant, supporters and opponents shall have the right to provide testimony, including expert testimony, in support of their position and supporters and opponents (or their spokesperson) shall have the right to ask questions in an orderly fashion as determined by city council or its designee. 
6.  No later than 45 days after receipt of the final analysis, complete application, and final public meeting, the consultant(s) designated in Paragraph C of section 6 shall make a recommendation to the city council at a public meeting on whether to accept the application, deny it, or accept it with modifications. 
Sec. 8.159. - Evaluation criteria/evaluation. 
A.  The city council shall issue a letter of assurance for any construction and demolition waste management facility in the City of Emerson, as required by state law and regulations, if such facility complies with the location standards contained in this division and is consistent with the city's solid waste management plan. 
B.  Before deciding whether to accept the proposal or to accept it with modifications, the city council shall make the following determinations: 
1.  That there is a bona fide need for the facility and there is no reasonable alternative facility which will impact the environment less adversely; 
2.  That the construction and operation of the facility will not pose an unreasonable health or environmental risk to the surrounding area; 
3.  That the applicant or the operator has the capability and the financial resources to construct, operate, and maintain the facility; 
4.  That the applicant or operator has taken or consented in writing to take any and all reasonable measures to comply with the applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations, and divisions; 
5.  That the applicant's plan represents the best available technology for handling the waste and the applicant has demonstrated that it will use the best management practices in handling the waste at the proposed facility; 
6.  Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact on traffic on adjacent streets and/or on adjacent residential, commercial and industrial uses; 
7.  Whether the proposed use is compatible with the surrounding properties, uses, and governmental facilities; 
8.  Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact on health, safety, aesthetics, property values, or other elements of the community; 
9.  If there are environmentally sensitive areas on the subject property, whether the proposed plans adequately protect those areas; 
10.  That the facility is compatible with the City of Emerson's integrated long-range solid waste management plan, taking into account alternative methods of management such as recycling; 
11.  Impact a facility will have on the disposal capability of the county; 
12.  Facility's effect on the county's disposal reduction goal; 
13.  Facility's impact on solid waste management rates; 
14.  Facility's impact on nearby cultural and natural resources; 
15.  Facility's impact on solid waste management infrastructure; 
16.  Facility's consistency with local zoning ordinances. 
C.  Subsequent to its consideration of the issues cited above, the city council shall, at its next scheduled meeting, make a decision to grant the permit, deny it, or grant it with specified conditions. Each councilmember may prepare a written decision to be voted on by the entire council. Each decision prepared and the final decision shall be based on evidence in the record and the criteria contained in this division. This final decision of the entire council shall be in writing. 
D.  Approval of a proposal shall be specifically conditioned to the site plan, maps, elevation renderings and other detailed plans to ensure that the development is constructed in accordance with all the previously presented materials. Approval may also impose additional conditions, if the conditions are designed to minimize the impact of the use on adjacent property, streets and the like. 
Sec. 8.160. - Appeal process. 
In the event the application is denied, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the superior court of Bartow County. Said appeal must be filed within 30 days of the day on which the decision was rendered. The applicant shall forward a copy of the appeal to the city clerk and the clerk shall forward a copy of the entire record (including all evidence submitted) to the superior court as soon as is practicable, along with the minutes of the hearings, copies of the tapes or transcriptions of the hearings, the written decision, a copy of this ordinance and all other relevant ordinances, maps and documents. 
Sec. 8.161. - Enforcement. 
Failure to comply with the operating or other requirements of this division shall result in a fine not less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00 per day per violation. 
Sec. 8.162. - Existing construction and demolition waste management facilities. 
This division shall not apply to any permitted construction and demolition waste management facility in operation on the effective date of this ordinance and any such facility shall be allowed to continue in operation. The division shall apply, however, to any new or expanded facility. 
Secs. 8.163—8.174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY 

Sec. 8.175. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide location and operating standards for solid waste management facilities and transfer stations in the City of Emerson. This division will act in conjunction with the joint solid waste management plan for Bartow County and the Cities of Adairsville, Cartersville, Emerson, Euharlee, Kingston, Taylorsville and White to protect the health, safety, and well-being of the residents and the natural resources of the City of Emerson. 
Sec. 8.176. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words have the following meanings: 
The term: 
"100-year floodplain" means the lowland and relatively flat areas adjoining inland and coastal waters, including flood-prone areas of offshore islands that are inundated by the 100-year flood. A 100-year flood is a flood with a one-percent or greater chance of recurring in any given year or a flood of a magnitude equaled or exceeded once in a 100 years on the average over a significantly long period of time. 
"Buffer" means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited land disturbances. 
"EPD" means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
"Fault" means a fracture or a zone of fractures in any material along which strata on one side have been displaced with respect to that on the other side. Displacement is the relative movement of any two sides of a fault measured in any direction. 
"Groundwater" means water below the land surface in a zone of saturation. 
"Holocene" means the most recent epoch of the Quaternary period, extending from the end of the Pleistocene Epoch to the present. 
"Landfill" means any disposal facility where any amount of waste (of any variety) is disposed of. 
"Lateral expansion" means a horizontal expansion of the waste boundaries of an existing landfill unit. 
"Leachate" means a liquid that has passed through or emerged from solid waste and contains soluble, suspended, or miscible materials removed from such wastes. 
"Letter of assurance" means the letter from the mayor or the city manager, as authorized by the city council, acknowledging that the planned landfill complies with local zoning and land use regulations required by the EPD to be submitted along with a solid waste management facility site design and operational plan. 
"Liner" means a continuous layer of natural or man-made materials, beneath or on the sides of a disposal site or disposal site cell which restricts the downward or lateral escape of solid waste, solid waste constituents, or leachate. 
"Litter" means discarded materials of every kind as referenced in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(1). 
"Operator" means the person(s) responsible for the overall operation of a solid waste facility or part of a solid waste facility. 
"Owner" means the person(s) who own a solid waste facility or part of a solid waste facility. 
"Person" means the State of Georgia or any other state or agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, county, political subdivision, solid waste authority, or special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, or public or private corporation, in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. 
"Seismic impact zone" means an area with a ten percent or greater probability that the maximum horizontal acceleration in lithified earth material, expressed as a percentage of the earth's gravitational pull, will exceed 0.10 g in 250 years. Maximum horizontal acceleration in lithified earth material means the maximum expected horizontal acceleration depicted on a seismic hazard map, with a 90 percent or greater probability that the acceleration will not be exceeded in 250 years or the maximum expected horizontal acceleration based on site-specific seismic risk assessment. Lithified earth material means all rock, including all naturally occurring and naturally formed aggregates or masses of minerals or small particles of older rock that formed by crystallization of magma or induration of loose sediments. This term does not include man-made materials such as fill, concrete and asphalt or unconsolidated earth materials, soil, or regolith lying at or near the earth surface. 
"Significant groundwater recharge area" means any area of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer that has been mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition) within Bartow County. Hydrologic Atlas 18, prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey, identifies the most significant groundwater recharge areas of Georgia as spotted areas labeled as "areas of thick soils." Hydrologic Atlas 18 is adopted by and incorporated herein as part of this division as if fully included within the four corners of this division. 
"Solid waste" means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permitting under 33 U.S.C. section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). 
"Solid waste management" means the systematic administration of activities which provides for the collection, source separation, storage, transportation, transfer, processing, treatment and disposal of solid waste. 
"Solid waste management facility" includes any facility for the collection, source separation, storage, transportation, transfer, processing, treatment or disposal of solid wastes. 
"Transfer station" is a facility where municipal solid waste is unloaded from collection vehicles and briefly held while it is reloaded onto larger long-distance transport vehicles for shipment to landfills or other treatment or disposal facilities. 
"Unstable areas" mean areas susceptible to natural or human-induced events or forces capable of impairing the integrity of some or all of the landfill structural components responsible for preventing releases from a landfill such as, but not limited to, poor foundation conditions, areas susceptible to mass movements and karst terrains. 
"Waste disposal boundary" means the limit of all waste disposal areas, appurtenances, and ancillary activities (including, but not limited to, internal access road and drainage control devices.) 
"Waters of the state" mean any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
"Wetlands" mean those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal conditions do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions and those areas defined as wetlands by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Sec. 8.177. - Environmental protection and location standards. 
A.  All landfills shall comply with the liner and leachate collection requirements as provided by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. At a minimum: 
1.  Liners and leachate collection systems: new landfill units and lateral expansions shall be constructed with liners and leachate collection systems. The liner and leachate collection system must ensure that the concentration values listed in Table 1 below will not be exceeded in the uppermost aquifer at the relevant point of compliance. The liner and leachate collection system must be designed and installed under the supervision of a professional engineer registered to practice in Georgia who shall certify the installation. 
TABLE 1 

 
2.  The liner and leachate collection system, shall at a minimum, be designed with the following: a composite liner (which means a system consisting of two components: an upper component consisting of at least a 30-mil flexible membrane liner (FML) and a lower component consisting of at least a two-foot layer of compacted soil with a hydraulic conductivity of no more than 1 x 10 <-7> cm/sec. FML components consisting of high density polyethylene (HDPE) shall be at least 60-rail thick. The FML component must be installed in direct and uniform contact with the compacted soil component) and a leachate collection system that is designed and constructed to maintain less than a 30-centimeter depth of leachate over liner and at least a five-foot separation between the synthetic liner and the seasonal high groundwater elevation. 
3.  Hazardous wastes, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-62(10) as may be amended from time to time, are prohibited. 
B.  Location standards. 
1.  In all discussions concerning compliance with the requirements of this division, the point at which determination of compliance is made (relevant point of compliance) shall be no more than 150 meters from the waste management unit boundary and shall be located on land owned by the owner of the solid waste management facility. In determining the relevant point of compliance, the following factors, at a minimum, shall be considered: hydrogeologic characteristics of the facility and surrounding land; the volume and physical and chemical characteristics of the leachate; the quantity, quality and direction of flow of groundwater; the proximity and withdrawal rate of the groundwater users; the availability of alternative drinking water supplies; the existing quality of the groundwater, including other sources of contamination and their cumulative impacts on the groundwater and whether groundwater is currently used or reasonably expected to be used for drinking water; the effects on public health, safety, and welfare; the capability of the owner and the operator. 
2.  Minimum acreage for a new landfill shall be 1,000 acres. 
3.  No new landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall be located within one mile of the outer boundary of a significant groundwater recharge area. 
4.  No solid waste management facility shall be constructed within a 200-foot buffer on both sides of a perennial stream. No impervious surface shall be constructed within 300 feet of either side of the stream. 
5.  No solid waste management facility shall be located in a 500-foot buffer around water supply reservoirs. 
6.  No solid waste management facility shall be located within two miles of any surface water intake point. 
7.  No new landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall be located in wetlands or within 250 feet of a wetland. 
8.  No solid waste management facility may be located in any 100-year flood plain. No solid waste landfill may be located within 250 feet of a 100-year flood plain. 
9.  No new landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall be located in a seismic impact zone. 
10.  No new landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall be located in unstable areas. 
11.  No new landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall be located within 200 feet of a fault that has had displacement during the Holocene era. 
12.  No solid waste management facility may be located within 500 feet of a residentially-used parcel or subdivision, school or college, or public park. No solid waste management facility may be located within 200 feet of any property line. 
13.  No disposal area shall interfere with the established natural flow of surface waters to the detriment or damage to adjoining public or private properties. The city council shall have the right to require the applicant to construct adequate sediment basins if it appears that substantial water or sediment may be carried into any nearby property or state waters. 
14.  Prior to commencing any landfill operation within the municipal limits, the owner/operator of the proposed landfill shall obtain a water sample from all state waters and from all water supply wells located within two miles of the outmost boundaries of the site on which the landfill is located. Said water sample(s) shall be analyzed for the presence of all constituents listed in Appendices I and II to 40 CFR para. 258, subpart E, as amended; 56 Fed Reg 51032-51039 (October 9, 1991) by a properly accredited laboratory approved by the city council. The said sample(s) shall be identified by the exact locations from which the sample(s) came, the name and address of the owner(s) of the property from which the sample(s) was/were taken and the name and address of the principal user(s) of the water supply well, if different from the owner, if such a well is located on the property. The results of the analysis/analyses shall be certified by the laboratory and submitted to each property owner from whose property a sample was taken and also to the city council. 
15.  All new landfills shall be located on a state highway or county primary road, as defined by the Bartow County commissioner, for ingress and egress and on a road which does not create traffic through an area developed primarily for residential purposes. Where necessary, the city council may require the owner/operator to construct or improve a road to accommodate truck traffic necessitated by the operation of the landfill, as a condition of operation and for the purpose of routing traffic around residential areas. 
16.  Sufficient setback shall be provided from all property lines and public highways to assure adequate lateral support for the maintenance of adjacent properties. No disposal area shall be permitted closer than 1,000 feet from the interior boundary lines of the landfill site. Disposal areas shall at no time be permitted where adjoining lateral support for the maintenance of adjoining land is not maintained. 
Sec. 8.178. - Operational requirements. 
A.  Sight barriers and fencing. 
1.  Sight barriers shall be provided between the property boundary and the 1000-foot setback for all sites lacking natural screening conditions. Sight barriers shall consist of berms and/or vegetation sufficiently thick as to be completely opaque in order to prevent viewing any landfill cell at all times of year. 
2.  The landfill cells and operations areas shall be completely fenced with chain-link material eight feet in height as measured from the ground and topped with three strands of barbed wire angled at 45 degrees toward the outside of the site. Such fencing shall be located inside any berms or screening following the exterior boundaries of the site. All entrances to the sites shall have an eight-foot high gate which shall be closed and secured at all times the landfill is not open. 
B.  Nuisance abatement. 
1.  Air pollution, noise, and vibration and their effects upon adjacent property owners shall be minimized by the use of adequate sound-proofed equipment and buildings designed to accomplish such minimization and approved by the city council and by the proper use of berms, walls, and natural planting screens. Interior and adjoining roads used in operations shall have their surfaces treated to minimize air pollution, noise, and vibration. 
2.  Rodent traps shall be placed 100 yards apart around the perimeter of the landfill, inside the fence, and shall be inspected and cleaned not less than once per day. 
3.  Any security lighting deemed necessary by the owner/operator shall be of the sodium vapor type and shall be placed and aligned so that no part of the illumination field falls on adjacent property. 
4.  Every landfill shall, at the expense of the owner/operator, connect to a public water supply and install at least one outlet per square acre in order to ensure adequate water supply and facilities for quick delivery of water to any part of the property for the purpose of extinguishing fires. Capacity shall be such that at least 50 gallons of water per minute can be applied to any fire, continuously, for at least ten hours. The source of the water supply and facilities to provide for the delivery of water shall be indicated on the plans submitted for approval to the city council. 
5.  Every landfill shall, at the owner/operator's expense, connect to a public sewer system for the disposal of its leachate. If it is determined that the public sewer system is inadequate to handle all of the landfill's leachate, the owner/operator shall fund the necessary improvements to said sewer system. 
6.  All litter shall be collected from the landfill site by the end of each working day and either placed in the fill and compacted and covered that same day or stored in a covered container. 
7.  All wells to be included in the groundwater monitoring program required by the EPD shall be monitored quarterly for all constituents in Appendix I and annually for all constituents contained in Appendix II of 40 CFR Para. 258, subpart E, as amended, 56 Fed. Reg. 51032-51039 (October 9, 1991). Copies of all monitoring test well results shall be delivered to the city council promptly upon receipt by the owner/operator. 
8.  Under no circumstances shall trucks transporting waste to the facility use private drives or private access routes within 300 feet of any residence. 
C.  Operating hours. 
1.  All operations, other than maintenance of equipment in fully enclosed buildings, shall be conducted only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. A sign clearly indicating the hours of operation and prohibiting dumping at all other times shall be placed in a conspicuous location at the entrance. Disposal facilities shall have qualified personnel on duty at all times to direct the dumping, spreading, compaction, and covering of materials. All such personnel shall reside in an area close enough to the landfill site to respond promptly in the event of a fire. 
D.  Access by residents of Emerson. 
1.  Any landfill shall be open to use by the city's residents, property owners and businesses during established business hours, at a rate to be agreed upon by the city council. Special handling fees may be imposed for bulky or difficult-to-process items. 
E.  Mitigation trust fund to address landfill problems. 
1.  A trust fund shall be established at any reputable bank in Bartow County which bank has been selected by the city council. The owner/operator shall pay $1.00 per ton of waste disposed into this trust fund for the life of the landfill. Expenditures from this trust fund are to be approved by a committee consisting of one resident appointed by the city council, the mayor or city manager, and one representative of the owner/operator. Funds may be used, without limitation, for off-site litter control, groundwater and surface water monitoring, alternative water supplies, and making payment to adjacent property owners and others, at the discretion of the committee, for damages caused as a result of the landfill or its related operations. The trust fund shall exist and earn interest for 20 years following the closing of the landfill and, at the expiration of the 20 years, the remaining funds shall be paid to the owner/operator, or its/their successor(s) and assign(s). 
2.  In the event there is a statistically significant increase over background values, as determined by the city council, of any constituent for which monitoring is required, further waste disposal shall cease until such time as the groundwater contamination has been remediated to background values. When any water supply well is located down-gradient and within one mile of a contaminant plume, as determined by the city council, an alternate water supply shall, at the discretion of the city council, be provided by the owner/operator, for the protection of public health and welfare. And the owner/operator shall supply bottled water as a temporary measure until a permanent alternate water supply can be provided by installing a new well in a location approved by the city council and the affected property owner by connecting the property owner to an existing city water supply, if acceptable to the property owner or, if requested by the city council, by building and donating to the city a public water supply system. 
F.  Reclamation or redevelopment. 
1.  A reclamation plan for closing a landfill shall be submitted to and approved by the city council along with the application required by this division. The plan shall propose reclamation or redevelopment that will best serve the needs and interests of the city's residents. Reclamation or redevelopment shall be accomplished as soon as practicable following closure of any areas of the landfill. Substantial completion of reclamation or redevelopment shall be effected within two years after closure of the waste disposal facility. Inactivity for six consecutive months shall constitute termination of disposal activities for the purpose of this division. 
2.  Approval of a reclamation or redevelopment plan by the city council will be based upon consideration of the following factors: most advantageous use of the land, resources, and property; character of the area in question and its particular suitability, if any, for the particular use; conservation of property values as well as natural resources and the general (appropriate) trend and character of development in the area involved; the protection and preservation of the general health, safety, and welfare of the city and its residents. 
Sec. 8.179. - Application requirements. 
A.  Each person proposing to locate a solid waste management facility within the boundaries of the City of Emerson shall submit an application for determination of plan consistency demonstrating compliance with the provisions contained in this division and consistency with the city's solid waste management plan. 
B.  Upon enactment of this division, no new landfills shall be operated within the city's limits without a letter of assurance from the city council. 
C.  Application procedures. 
1.  An applicant shall prepare and file an application for determination of plan consistency with the city council. The application shall include all related documents submitted to the federal government and to the State of Georgia. 
2.  The application shall contain the following information: 
a.  A description of the corporation, its financial capability, and a detailed history of all of its past activities in the field of solid waste management, including a synopsis of every other facility it has operated and including a detailed account of all past and pending litigation, including the outcome of said litigation. Also to be included is information about the record of any subsidiary or parent corporation holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the applicant corporation. Also to be included is a list of all past and present litigation in which the subsidiary and/or the parent corporation has been involved. 
b.  Evidence of liability insurance coverage with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 for sudden events and $10,000,000.00 for non-sudden events. Such insurance shall cover injury or damage occurring upon the site of the operation and upon properties in the vicinity of the landfill as a result of conditions or activities occurring in connection with the operation of the landfill. An insurance carrier approved by the city council shall issue such policies and such policies shall be filed with the city council. The deductible written into the insurance policy shall not exceed five of the per-incident limit of the liability of the policy. The coverage obtained to fulfill the requirements of this section shall include the provision that the insurer notify the city council 30 days prior to the cancellation of the insurance for any reason. The insured shall provide evidence that $10,000,000.00 liability insurance is to run for five years subsequent to closure of the facility to cover post-closure claims. The insured shall also provide a history of claims against the corporation at any site, including claims against a subsidiary and/or parent corporation. 
c.  Justification for and anticipated benefits from the facility. 
d.  A description of the scope of the proposed facility, including an estimated schedule of how much and what kinds of waste the facility would accept, sources of the waste, what pretreatment would be required of wastes unacceptable to the facility without such pretreatment, and how long the facility is expected to be in operation. 
e.  Yearly site expenses and an estimate of the costs for the lifetime of the facility. 
f.  The proposed method of financing the facility, including development, operating, and closure stages. Also to be included is the name of the financial institution(s) which will be funding the project. 
g.  Resumes of management personnel and the proposed number of employees and types of positions, including information about the training and experience required for each position and safety precautions undertaken for the protection of personnel. 
h.  Anticipated dates to begin construction and to begin operation. 
i.  A detailed estimate of the types and amounts of local government services required by the operator in each year of operation. 
j.  A description of emergency procedures and safety and security precautions that will be used in the facility. This information shall include details of emergency assistance and emergency medical treatment that will be required from the area's medical facilities, the Bartow County Rescue Squad and nearby fire departments. 
k.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be taken by the applicant to prevent contamination in and around the facility site and the description of planned monitoring systems, with an estimated annual budget for each of these items. 
l.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be used during the transportation of materials to and from the facility, with an estimated annual budget for those arrangements and an estimate of the volume of material to be transported during each year of operation. 
m.  A description of the site closure plan for the facility, the anticipated date of closure, and the estimated cost of closure, including post-closure costs, if any. 
n.  A description of anticipated need for post-closure care. 
3.  A map or other written material attached to the application shall include, but is not limited to the following information. 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of the legal owner (and/or agent) of the property on which the facility is to be located; 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of professional person(s) responsible for the plat of survey. 
c.  Identification and description of any existing easements or rights-of-way affecting the property. 
d.  Reference to any restrictive covenants on the property. 
e.  Description of the property itself, including a location on a property tax map and the parcel number. The description should include reference to a deed book and page number or other evidence of title the current property owner may have. 
f.  The map shall be drawn to a scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch and shall show the location of the subject property in relation to the immediately surrounding area. Also, the map shall show surrounding property and roads, the names and addresses of adjacent property owners, as indicated by Bartow County tax records, and existing uses of the surrounding property. 
g.  The map shall contain the graphic scale, date of survey, North arrow and legend. 
h.  The location of all boundary lines of the property, the total acreage of the land in the project, the location of existing and/or platted streets, easements, buildings, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, sewers, water mains, culverts, wells and gas and electric transmission lines. 
i.  The location of water bodies, water courses, groundwater aquifers, springs, wetlands, and other related and similar features. 
j.  The location, dimensions and acreage of all property proposed to be set aside for various uses on the applicant's property. 
k.  The location of all test wells and/or borings. 
l.  The location of the 500- and 100-year flood plain and records of flood, including inundation due to dam break. 
m.  The location of historic properties and grave sites, including any plans to relocate graves or to affect historic properties. 
4.  A geological map shall also be included in the application. Said map shall show the location of faults, dikes, sills and other pertinent geologic features, including bedrock type and strike and dip of any mappable bedding; the depth and degree of weathering (saprolite); identification and location of clay as to thickness, type and permeability; and location of the water table as to approximate depth, gradient, and surface configuration. 
5.  A topographic map with contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet at the same scale as to the project site map. The name of the preparer, date of preparation and the method of preparation shall be included. 
6.  A transportation route map showing the proposed transportation routes to and from the facility site, including the location of towns and emergency and safety facilities. Also included shall be an estimate of the volume of material to travel on each route. 
7.  The application shall address the following factors with regard to, but not limited to, on-site storage and/or disposal. 
a.  Contaminant flow to water table, including leachate monitoring, collecting and withdrawal systems, clay and synthetic liners (extra thickness, multiple liners); spill prevention and control measures. 
b.  Contaminant movement to groundwater, including groundwater monitoring systems at the site and in potentially affected areas; subsurface "slurry wall" barrier controls and other groundwater withdrawals in the area. 
c.  Predictability of contaminant movement, based on preconstruction borings and groundwater modeling. 
d.  Potential effect on surface waters, planned collection systems for surface water runoff, and planned exclusion systems for surface water run-on. 
e.  Potential effect on aquifers, planned provisions for alternate water supply systems and facilities for immediate pumping and treatment of contaminated water. 
f.  Potential effect on public water supply, planned runoff collection and treatment and provisions for an alternate supply system. 
g.  Possibility of site flooding; planned special facility design, special control dikes and buffer zone setback in the area of standard project flood area. 
8.  In addition to all of the above, the application must show the ability to comply with all the provisions contained in section 2, provision 3B, location standards. 
9.  The applicant shall provide 15 copies of the application and associated documents to the city council. 
Sec. 8.180. - Application processing fees. 
A.  The city council shall require an application fee in the amount of $25,000.00 to reimburse the city for the costs of any needed professional services or assistance that may be required to evaluate the permit application and amendments, verify its contents, and evaluate the impact of a permit in the community, public health and the environment. The professional services or assistance required may include, but not be limited to, lawyers, hydrologists, biologists, geologists, engineers, chemists, emergency response, transportation and public health experts, land appraisers and professional testing laboratories. Funds not so expended in the legitimate review of the permit application shall be returned to the applicant. 
B.  Failure to provide these funds within 30 days of demand shall result in termination of the permit process or cancellation of the permit. The city council may take legal action against the applicant for any costs incurred by the city up to the point of termination. 
C.  Upon payment of the fee herein, the city may employ its own consultant to review the application and compliance with this division. 
Sec. 8.181. - Public meetings, public hearing, communication. 
A.  Upon identifying a potential site for project, the applicant shall notify the city council and participate in a public meeting. 
1.  The city council or its designee shall give notice of the meeting to be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least twice a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date of the meeting. The applicant shall pay for the cost of publishing the notice. 
2.  The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting, which purpose shall be to discuss the waste management needs of the city, to describe the siting process to be followed, and to allow for public input. 
3.  The meeting shall be conducted by the city council or its designee. 
B.  Within 45 days of receiving a completed application and the processing fee, the city council shall set a time for a public hearing. 
1.  The applicant shall arrange and pay for notice of such hearing to be published at least twice prior to the hearing in the newspaper which is the legal organ in Bartow County. Notice shall be published at least seven and no more than 30 days prior to said hearing and shall include the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Copies of said notices or certification from the publisher shall be submitted to the city council prior to the hearing. 
C.  Once a completed application is submitted to the city council, the applicant shall also be required to send a letter via first class mail to all adjoining property owners, as shown on the tax records of Bartow County as of the date of application and to all owners of property any portion of which is within 1,000 feet of the boundary of the facility. This letter shall state that the applicant is seeking a letter of assurance for a solid waste disposal facility. Certification of sending this letter shall be provided to the city council, along with a list of all owners, prior to the hearing for public comment on the completed application. 
D.  The applicant shall give notice by regular mail of the time and place of the hearing to the owner and adjacent property owners. Said notice shall be mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the meeting. Notice of said meeting shall also be posted by the applicant at the proposed facility site on each and every street of access at least 14 days prior said meeting. Posting of the notice shall be at intervals not greater than 1,500 feet. The applicant shall also place notice in a newspaper of general circulation in Bartow County no less than 14 days prior to the hearing. 
E.  At the meeting, the general procedure will be: 
1.  The applicant shall present its application and supplemental information which may have been requested by the city council. 
2.  City councilmembers shall have the opportunity to ask questions of the applicant, the city council's experts and the applicant's experts, and of supporters and opponents of the facility. 
3.  Supporters and opponents of the facility shall have the same amount of time to present information and air their concerns. Such time period shall be of at least 15 minutes' duration and may be longer if the application is complex or the number of experts and other witnesses warrants an extended period of time. 
4.  If there are more than five opponents or supporters of the facility, the city council may require that a spokesperson be designated. 
5.  Opponents and supporters of the facility may be represented by an attorney or attorneys. The applicant, supporters and opponents shall have the right to provide testimony, including expert testimony, in support of their position and supporters and opponents (or their spokesperson) shall have the right to ask questions in an orderly fashion as determined by city council or its designee. 
6.  No later than 90 days after receipt of the final analysis, complete application, and final public meeting, the consultant(s) designated in paragraph C of section 5 shall make a recommendation to the city council at a public meeting on whether to accept the application, deny it, or accept it with modifications. 
Sec. 8.182. - Evaluation criteria/evaluation. 
A.  The city council shall issue a letter of assurance for any solid waste management facility in the City of Emerson, as required by state law and regulations, if such facility complies with the location standards contained in this division and is consistent with the city's solid waste management plan. 
B.  Before deciding whether to accept the proposal or to accept it with modifications, the city council shall make the following determinations: 
1.  That there is a bona fide need for the facility and there is no reasonable alternative facility which will impact the environment less adversely; 
2.  That the construction and operation of the facility will not pose an unreasonable health or environmental risk to the surrounding area; 
3.  That the applicant or the operator has the capability and the financial resources to construct, operate, and maintain the facility; 
4.  That the applicant or operator has taken or consented in writing to take any and all reasonable measures to comply with the applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations, and ordinances; 
5.  That the applicant's plan represents the best available technology for handling the waste and the applicant has demonstrated that it will use the best management practices in handling the waste at the proposed facility; 
6.  Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact on traffic on adjacent streets and/or on adjacent residential, commercial and industrial uses; 
7.  Whether the proposed use is compatible with the surrounding properties, uses, and governmental facilities; 
8.  Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact on health, safety, aesthetics, property values, or other elements of the community; 
9.  If there are environmentally sensitive areas on the subject property, whether the proposed plans adequately protect those areas; 
10.  That the facility is compatible with the City of Emerson's integrated long-range solid waste management plan, taking into account alternative methods of management such as recycling; 
11.  Impact a facility will have on the disposal capability of the county; 
12.  Facility's effect on the county's disposal reduction goal; 
13.  Facility's impact on solid waste management rates; 
14.  Facility's impact on nearby cultural and natural resources; 
15.  Facility's impact on solid waste management infrastructure; 
16.  Facility's consistency with local zoning ordinances. 
C.  Upon receipt of its consultant(s) final reports and subsequent to its consideration of the issues cited above, the city council shall, at its next scheduled meeting, make a decision to grant the permit, deny it, or grant it with specified conditions. Each councilmember may prepare a written decision to be voted on by the entire council. Each decision prepared and the final decision shall be based on evidence in the record and the criteria contained in this division. This final decision of the entire council shall be in writing. 
D.  Approval of a proposal shall be specifically conditioned to the site plan, maps, elevation renderings and other detailed plans to ensure that the development is constructed in accordance with all the previously presented materials. Approval may also impose additional conditions, if the conditions are designed to minimize the impact of the use on adjacent property, streets and the like. 
Sec. 8.183. - Appeal process. 
In the event the application is denied, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the superior court of Bartow County. Said appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the decision was rendered. The applicant shall forward a copy of the appeal to the city clerk and the clerk shall forward a copy of the entire record (including all evidence submitted) to the superior court as soon as is practicable, along with the minutes of the hearings, copies of the tapes or transcriptions of the meetings/hearings, the written decision, a copy of this division and all other relevant ordinances, maps and documents. 
Sec. 8.184. - Enforcement. 
Failure to comply with the operating or other requirements of this division shall result in a fine not less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00 per day per violation. 
Sec. 8.185. - Existing sanitary landfill operations. 
This division shall not apply to any permitted landfill operation existing on the effective date of this ordinance and any such landfill shall be allowed to continue in operation. The division shall apply, however, to any new facility, an expansion of an existing facility or a lateral expansion of an existing facility on or after the effective date of this ordinance. 
Secs. 8.186—8.195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INERT WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY 

Sec. 8.196. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide location and operating standards for inert waste management facilities in the City of Emerson. This division will act in conjunction with the joint solid waste management plan for Bartow County and the Cities of Adairsville, Cartersville, Emerson, Euharlee, Kingston, Taylorsville and White to protect the health, safety, and well-being of the residents of Emerson and the natural resources of Emerson and the surrounding area. This division applies to all new and expanded inert waste management facilities within the city limits. 
Sec. 8.197. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words have the following meanings: 
The term: 
"Active area" designates that part of an inert waste management facility onto which inert wastes are currently being placed or spread. 
"Buffer" means a natural or enhanced vegetative area with no or limited land disturbances. 
"Fill" means gravel, rock, soil, sand, uncontaminated concrete or fully cured asphalt. 
"Holocene" means the most recent epoch of the Quaternary period, extending from the end of the Pleistocene Epoch to the present. 
"Inert waste" means solid waste that does not contain hazardous waste or soluble pollutants at concentrations in excess of applicable water quality standards. Such wastes are likely to retain their physical and chemical structure under expected conditions of disposal including resistance to biological and chemical attack from acidic rainwater. 
"Litter" means discarded materials of every kind as referenced in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(1). 
"Putrescible waste" means solid wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances because of odors, vectors, gases, or other offensive conditions and include such materials as, but not limited to, food wastes, offal and dead animals. 
"Vector" means animals and insects capable of transmitting the causative agents of human disease. 
Sec. 8.198. - Environmental protection and location standards. 
A.  Environmental protection. 
1.  Waste may only be disposed of in an inert waste management facility if (1) it is inert waste and (2) it is not likely to produce leachate of environmental concern (either type of leachate or amount). This includes earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rocks, bricks, masonry, ceramic materials produced from fired clay or porcelain, glass, yard waste, and land-clearing debris such as stumps, limbs and leaves. 
2.  Inert waste may not contain any putrescible or hazardous wastes. 
B.  Location standards. 
1.  No inert waste management facility may be located within 500 feet of a residentially-used parcel or subdivision, school or college, or public park. No inert waste management facility may be located within 200 feet of any property line. No inert waste management facility may be located upon any site less than 100 acres. 
2.  The inert waste management facility shall not be located on an unstable slope. 
3.  No inert waste management facility shall be located over a Holocene fault, in subsidence areas, or on geologic features which could compromise the structural integrity of the facility. 
4.  No inert waste management facility shall be constructed within a 200-foot buffer on both sides of a perennial stream. No impervious surface shall be constructed within 300 feet of either side of the stream. 
5.  No inert waste management facility shall be located in a 500-foot buffer around water supply reservoirs. 
6.  No inert waste landfill shall be located within 1,000 feet of any surface water intake point, down gradient drinking water supply well or within 200 feet of a stream, lake, pond, river, wetland, or public land that is being used by a public water system for water shed control. 
7.  All buffers shall remain in their natural vegetative state. 
Sec. 8.199. - Operating standards. 
A.  Operating hours. 
All operations, other than maintenance of equipment in fully enclosed buildings, shall be conducted only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. A sign clearly indicating the hours of operation and prohibiting dumping at all other times shall be placed in a conspicuous location at the entrance. Disposal facilities shall have qualified personnel on duty at all times to direct the dumping, spreading, compaction, and covering of materials. All such personnel shall reside in an area close enough to the landfill site to respond promptly in the event of a fire. 
B.  Other signage. 
1.  The owner or operator shall display the types of waste which may be disposed of at the facility and the types of waste prohibited. 
C.  The owner or operator shall control access to the facility and shall prevent unauthorized vehicular traffic and illegal dumping of wastes. 
D.  The owner or operator shall develop and implement procedures to identify and prevent non-inert wastes from being accepted or mixed with inert wastes, including procedures for ensuring that only inert wastes (as defined) are accepted and for handling unacceptable wastes. 
E.  Inert wastes shall be spread in layers and compacted to the least practical volume. A uniform compacted layer of clean earth cover no less than one foot in depth shall be placed over all exposed inert waste material at least once a month. 
F.  The owner or operator shall provide suitable and effective means to prevent and control fires. 
G.  All inert wastes disposed of shall be handled in a manner that controls dust and prevents erosion and sedimentation. Procedures for routine filling and grading shall be developed and implemented. 
H.  The owner or operator shall develop and implement procedures for transporting inert wastes. 
I.  The operator shall inspect and maintain the facility and equipment to prevent malfunctions and deterioration. 
J.  The operator shall maintain daily operating records of the quantities of inert waste disposed. 
K.  The operator shall not permit litter to accumulate. 
Sec. 8.200. - Closure. 
A.  A uniform compacted layer of final cover not less than two feet in depth and a vegetative cover shall be placed over the final layer not later than one month following final placement of inert waste within that layer. 
B.  Notice of final closure shall be provided to the city council no later than 30 days of receiving the final load of inert waste. 
C.  A facility shall be considered closed after six months of inactivity. 
Sec. 8.201. - Application requirements and procedures. 
A.  Each person proposing to locate an inert waste management facility within the boundaries of the city shall submit an application for determination of plan consistency demonstrating compliance with the provisions contained in this division and consistency with the city's solid waste management plan. 
B.  Upon enactment of this ordinance, no new inert waste management facility shall be operated within the city's limits without a letter of assurance from the city council. 
C.  Application procedures. 
1.  An applicant shall prepare and file an application for determination of plan consistency with the city council. The application shall include all related documents submitted to any other governmental entity. The application shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the corporation, its financial capability, and a brief history of all of its past activities in the field of solid waste management. 
b.  Evidence of liability insurance coverage with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 for sudden events and $2,000,000.00 for non-sudden events. Such insurance shall cover injury or damage occurring upon the facility site and upon properties in the vicinity of the inert waste management facility as a result of conditions or activities occurring in connection with the operation of the facility. An insurance carrier approved by the city council shall issue such policies and such policies shall be filed with the city council. The coverage obtained to fulfill the requirements of this section shall include the provision that the insurer notify the city council 30 days prior to the cancellation of the insurance for any reason. The insured shall provide evidence that $2,000,000.00 liability insurance is to run for two years subsequent to closure of the facility to cover post-closure claims. 
c.  Justification for and anticipated benefits from the facility. 
d.  A description of the scope of the proposed facility, including an estimated schedule of how much waste the facility would accept, sources of the waste, and how long the facility is expected to be in operation. 
e.  Yearly site expenses and an estimate of the costs for the lifetime of the facility. 
f.  The proposed method of financing the facility, including development, operating, and closure stages. 
g.  Resumes of management personnel and the proposed number of employees and types of positions, including information about the training and experience required for each position and safety precautions undertaken for the protection of personnel. 
h.  Anticipated dates to begin construction and to begin operation. 
i.  A detailed estimate of the types and amounts of local government services, if any, required by the operator in each year of operation. 
j.  A description of emergency procedures and safety and security precautions that will be used in the facility. This information shall include details on emergency assistance and emergency medical treatment that will be required from the area's medical facilities, Bartow County Rescue Squad and nearby fire departments. 
k.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be taken by the applicant to prevent erosion and sedimentation in and around the facility site. 
l.  A description of anticipated need for post-closure care. 
2.  A map or other written material attached to the application shall include, but is not limited to, the following information. 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of the legal owner (and/or agent) of the property on which the facility is to be located. 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of professional person(s) responsible for the plat of survey. 
c.  Identification and description of any existing easements or rights-of-way affecting the property. 
d.  Reference to any restrictive covenants on the property. 
e.  Description of the property itself, including a location on a property tax map and the parcel number. The description should include reference to a deed book and page number or other evidence of title the current property owner may have. 
f.  The map shall be drawn to scale and shall show the location of the subject property in relation to the immediately surrounding area. Also, the map shall show surrounding property and roads, the names and addresses of adjacent property owners, as indicated by Bartow County tax records, and existing uses of the surrounding property. 
g.  The map shall contain the graphic scale, date of survey, North arrow and legend. 
h.  The location of all boundary lines of the property, the total acreage of the land in the project and the location of existing and/or platted streets, easements, buildings, cemeteries, sewers, water mains, culverts, wells and gas and electric transmission lines. 
i.  The location of water bodies, water courses, groundwater aquifers, springs, wetlands, and other related and similar features. 
3.  A topographic map with contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet at the same scale as to the project site map. The name of the preparer, date of preparation and the method of preparation shall be included. 
4.  The applicant shall provide one copy of the application and associated documents to the city council. 
Sec. 8.202. - Application processing fees. 
A.  The city council shall require an application fee in the amount of $2,500.00 to reimburse the city for the costs of any needed professional services or assistance that may be required to evaluate the permit application and amendments, its contents, and evaluate the impact of a permit on the community, public health and the environment. Funds not expended in the legitimate review of the permit application shall be returned to the applicant. 
B.  Failure to provide these funds within 30 days of demand shall result in termination of the permit process or cancellation of the permit. The city council may take legal action against the applicant for any costs incurred by the city up to the point of termination. 
C.  Upon payment of the fee herein, the city may employ its own consultant to review the application and compliance with this division. 
Sec. 8.203. - Public meetings, public hearing, communication. 
A.  Upon identifying a potential site for project, the applicant shall notify the city council and participate in a public meeting. 
1.  The city council or its designee shall give notice of the meeting to be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least twice a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date of the meeting. The applicant shall pay for the cost of publishing the notice. 
2.  The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting, which purpose shall be to discuss the waste management needs of the city, to describe the sitting process to be followed, and to allow for public input. 
3.  The meeting shall be conducted by the city council or its designee. 
B.  Within 45 days of receiving a completed application and the processing fee, the city council shall set a time for a public hearing. 
1.  The applicant shall arrange and pay for notice of such hearing to be published at least twice prior to the hearing in the newspaper which is the legal organ in Bartow County. Notice shall be published at least seven and no more than 30 days prior to said hearing and shall include the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Copies of said notices or certification from the publisher shall be submitted to the city council prior to the hearing. 
C.  Once a completed application is submitted to the city council, the applicant shall also be required to send a letter via first class mail to all adjoining property owners, as shown on the tax records of Bartow County as of the date of application and to all owners of property any portion of which is within 1,000 feet of the boundary of the facility. This letter shall state that the applicant is seeking a letter of assurance for an inert waste management facility. Certification of sending this letter shall be provided to the city council, along with a list of all owners, prior to the hearing for public comment on the completed application. 
D.  The applicant shall give notice by regular mail of the time and place of the hearing to the owner and adjacent property owners. Said notice shall be mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the meeting. Notice of said meeting shall also be posted by the applicant at the proposed facility site on each and every street of access at least 14 days prior said meeting. Posting of the notice shall be at intervals not greater than 1,500 feet. The applicant shall also place notice in a newspaper of general circulation in Bartow County no less than 14 days prior to the hearing. 
E.  At the meeting, the general procedure will be: 
1.  The applicant shall present its application and supplemental information which may have been requested by the city council. 
2.  City councilmembers shall have the opportunity to ask questions of the applicant, the city council's experts and the applicant's experts, and of supporters and opponents of the facility. 
3.  Supporters and opponents of the facility shall have the same amount of time to present information and air their concerns. Such time period shall be of at least 15 minutes' duration and may be longer if the application is complex or the number of experts and other witnesses warrants an extended period of time. 
4.  If there are more than five opponents or supporters of the facility, the city council may require that a spokesperson be designated. 
5.  Opponents and supporters of the facility may be represented by an attorney or attorneys. The applicant, supporters and opponents shall have the right to provide testimony, including expert testimony, in support of their position and supporters and opponents (or their spokesperson) shall have the right to ask questions in an orderly fashion as determined by city council or its designee. 
6.  No later than 45 days after receipt of the final analysis, complete application, and final public meeting, the consultant(s) designated in paragraph C of section 6 shall make a recommendation to the city council at a public meeting on whether to accept the application, deny it, or accept it with modifications. 
Sec. 8.204. - Evaluation criteria/evaluation. 
A.  The city council shall issue a letter of assurance for any inert waste management facility in the City of Emerson, as required by state law and regulations, if such facility complies with the location standards contained in this division and is consistent with the city's solid waste management plan. 
B.  Before deciding whether to accept the proposal or to accept it with modifications, the city council shall make the following determinations: 
1.  That there is a bona fide need for the facility and there is no reasonable alternative facility which will impact the environment less adversely; 
2.  That the construction and operation of the facility will not pose an unreasonable health or environmental risk to the surrounding area; 
3.  That the applicant or the operator has the capability and the financial resources to construct, operate, and maintain the facility; 
4.  That the applicant or operator has taken or consented in writing to take any and all reasonable measures to comply with the applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations, and ordinances; 
5.  That the applicant's plan represents the best available technology for handling the waste and the applicant has demonstrated that it will use the best management practices in handling the waste at the proposed facility; 
6.  Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact on traffic on adjacent streets and/or on adjacent residential, commercial and industrial uses; 
7.  Whether the proposed use is compatible with the surrounding properties, uses, and governmental facilities; 
8.  Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact on health, safety, aesthetics, property values, or other elements of the community; 
9.  If there are environmentally sensitive areas on the subject property, whether the proposed plans adequately protect those areas; 
10.  That the facility is compatible with the City of Emerson's integrated long-range solid waste management plan, taking into account alternative methods of management such as recycling; 
11.  Impact a facility will have on the disposal capability of the county; 
12.  Facility's effect on the county's disposal reduction goal; 
13.  Facility's impact on solid waste management rates; 
14.  Facility's impact on nearby cultural and natural resources; 
15.  Facility's impact on solid waste management infrastructure; 
16.  Facility's consistency with local zoning ordinances. 
C.  Subsequent to its consideration of the issues cited above, the city council shall, at its next scheduled meeting, make a decision to grant the permit, deny it, or grant it with specified conditions. Each councilmember may prepare a written decision to be voted on by the entire council. Each decision prepared and the final decision shall be based on evidence in the record and the criteria contained in this division. This final decision of the entire council shall be in writing. 
D.  Approval of a proposal shall be specifically conditioned to the site plan, maps, elevation renderings and other detailed plans to ensure that the development is constructed in accordance with all the previously presented materials. Approval may also impose additional conditions, if the conditions are designed to minimize the impact of the use on adjacent property, streets and the like. 
Sec. 8.205. - Appeal process. 
In the event the application is denied, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the superior court of Bartow County. Said appeal must be filed within 30 days of the day on which the decision was rendered. The applicant shall forward a copy of the appeal to the city clerk and the clerk shall forward a copy of the entire record (including all evidence submitted) to the superior court as soon as is practicable, along with the minutes of the hearings, copies of the tapes or transcriptions of the hearings, the written decision, a copy of this division and all other relevant ordinances, maps and documents. 
Sec. 8.206. - Enforcement. 
Failure to comply with the operating or other requirements of this division shall result in a fine not less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00 per day per violation. 
Sec. 8.207. - Existing inert waste management facilities. 
This division shall not apply to any permitted inert waste management facility in operation on the effective date of this ordinance and any such facility shall be allowed to continue in operation. The division shall apply, however, to any new or expanded facility. 
Secs. 8.208—8.219. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - BIOMEDICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY 

Sec. 8.220. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to establish standards and requirements for the location, construction, operation, management and closure of biomedical waste incinerator facilities, including autoclaves; the storage, transfer, treatment and disposal of biomedical waste; and other related topics in order to protect the health, safety, and well-being of the residents of Emerson and the natural resources of Emerson and the surrounding area. 
Sec. 8.221. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words have the following meanings: 
"Autoclave" means any equipment or facility, which treats and/or decontaminates biomedical waste by heating with steam and/or pressure, but does not include hospitals, physicians' offices or other medical service providers who may use autoclaves to decontaminate their own equipment. 
"Biomedical waste" means and includes the following; 
"Pathological waste" - all recognizable human tissues and body parts, except teeth, which are removed during surgery, obstetrical procedures, autopsy, and laboratory procedures; 
"Biological waste" - blood and blood products, exudates secretion, suctionings, and other body fluids, which contain free liquids and cannot be or are not directly discarded into a municipal sewer system; 
"Cultures and stocks" of infectious agents and associated biologicals - including cultures from medical and pathology laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the production of biologicals, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate, and mix cultures; 
"Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, their bedding," and other wastes from such animals which are infected with or which have been exposed to infectious agents and are capable of causing disease in humans. 
"Sharps" - any discarded article, which may cause punctures or cuts, including, but not limited to, needles, intravenous tubing, syringes with needles attached, and scalpel blades. 
"Chemotherapy waste" - any disposable material which has come into contact with cytotoxic/antineoplastic agents (agents toxic to cells) and/or antineoplastic agents (agents that inhibit or prevent the growth and spread of tumors or malignant cells) during the preparation, handling, and administration of such agents. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, masks, gloves, gowns, empty intravenous tubing bags and empty vials, and other contaminated materials. The above-mentioned waste must first be classified as empty (such a minute quantity that it is not subject to federal or state waste management regulations) prior to being handled as biomedical waste. 
"Discarded medical equipment and parts," excluding expendable supplies and materials mentioned in the paragraphs above, which have not been decontaminated and have been in contact with infectious agents. 
"Biomedical waste" does not include low-level radioactive waste and laboratory hazardous waste, the incineration and/or disposal of which is expressly prohibited, except as provided by federal and state law. 
"Biomedical waste disposal facility" - is any facility to which biomedical waste is transported for transfer, storage, treatment, decontamination, or disposal. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, biomedical waste incinerators, facilities which decontaminate by heating with steam under pressure (autoclave), and transfer stations where biomedical waste is held, stored, accumulated, or otherwise handled before being transported to another location. 
"Biomedical waste incinerator facility" - is an incinerator which accepts biomedical waste for the purpose of incineration. 
"City council" - means the city council of Emerson, Georgia. 
"Incineration" - is a controlled process by which solid, liquid, and gaseous combustible wastes are burned and transformed into gases and a residue, which is relatively free of combustible materials. 
"Incinerator" - is a device intended or used for the reduction or destruction of biomedical waste by incineration. 
"Operator ash" - is the residue remaining after the incineration of biomedical waste. 
"Person" - means the State of Georgia or any other state or agency or institution thereof, any municipality, political subdivision, public or private corporation, special district, partnership, association, or other entity in Georgia or any other state. The term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, or special district empowered to engage in solid waste management and disposal activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments and agencies of the federal government. 
Sec. 8.222. - Required permits/letter of assurance. 
A.  Owners/operators of biomedical waste incinerator facilities, autoclaves, or biomedical waste disposal facilities applying for a letter of assurance from the city council under this division shall first obtain permits as required by the rules and regulations of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (EPD) and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Any violation of the regulations of the EPD, the EPA, the Georgia Department of Transportation, and the United States Department of Transportation, and any violation of the rules and regulations promulgated under the Occupational Safety and Health Act shall also be a violation of this division. 
B.  No person shall engage in the construction or operation of a biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility without first obtaining a letter of assurance authorizing such activity from the city council. 
C.  Any person who began construction or operation of a biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility prior to enactment of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue the construction or operation of such facility. However, such person shall be strictly prohibited from transferring ownership of or operating responsibility for the facility or expanding its operations in any manner, unless the person applies to the city council for a letter of assurance in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
As used in this section, "construction" shall mean the active commencement of building a biomedical waste incinerator, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility. "Construction" does not include preliminary activities such as identifying and purchasing appropriate property, preparing plans, or clearing, grading, or fencing property. 
As used in this section, "expanding its operations," means any action to increase an existing state-permitted volume of waste incineration, disposal, or handling at the existing facility. 
Sec. 8.223. - Application for determination of plan consistency. 
A.  The application shall contain the following information: 
1.  A description of the corporation, its financial capability, and a detailed history of all of its past activities in the field of biomedical incineration or biomedical waste disposal, including a synopsis of every other facility it has operated and including a detailed account of all past and pending litigation, including the outcome of said litigation. Also to be included is information about the record of any subsidiary or parent corporation holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the applicant corporation. Also to be included is a list of all past and present litigation in which the subsidiary and/or the parent corporation has been involved. 
2.  The identity of the entity from whom the applicant purchased the incinerator, autoclave, or other equipment, the manufacturer of the equipment, and the contractor(s) responsible for the construction, installation and/or modification of the incinerator, autoclave, or other equipment and air pollution control devices, if any. 
3.  The applicant shall provide a history of any claims, charges and/or assessments against the applicant involving or arising out of the violation of any local, state, or federal rule or regulation which relates in any way to any biomedical waste incinerator, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility now or formerly owned or operated by the applicant, including biomedical waste incinerator, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility now or formerly owned or operated by any subsidiary or parent corporation of the applicant. 
4.  Justification for and anticipated benefits from the project. 
5.  A description of the scope of the proposed project, including an estimated schedule of how much and what kinds of waste the facility will accept, the source(s) of the waste material, how the waste will be handled/stored, what pretreatment will be required of wastes unacceptable to the facility without such pretreatment, and how long the facility is expected to operate. 
6.  Yearly site expenses and an estimate of the costs for the lifetime of the facility. 
7.  The proposed method of financing the facility, including development, operating, and closure stages. Also to be included is the name of the financial institution(s) which will be funding the project. 
8.  Resumes of management personnel and the proposed number of employees and types of positions, including information about the training and experience required for each position and safety precautions undertaken for the protection of personnel. 
9.  Anticipated dates to begin construction and to begin operation. 
10.  A detailed estimate of the types and amounts of local government services required by the operator in each year of operation. 
11.  A description of emergency procedures and safety and security precautions that will be used in the facility. This information shall include details of emergency assistance and emergency medical treatment that will be required from the area's medical facilities, the Bartow County rescue squad and nearby fire departments. 
12.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be taken by the applicant to prevent contamination in and around the facility site and the description of planned monitoring systems, with an estimated annual budget for each of these items. 
13.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be used during the transportation of materials to and from the facility, with an estimated annual budget for those arrangements and an estimate of the volume of material to be transported during each year of operation. 
14.  A description of the site closure plan for the facility, the anticipated date of closure, and the estimated cost of closure, including post-closure costs, if any. 
15.  A description of anticipated need for post-closure care. 
16.  A description of the means or method by which to capture any liquid waste, leachate, or runoff from waste feed and ash storage areas as well as areas in which trucks, equipment, containers, and tools that have come into contact with the waste are decontaminated and processed. 
17.  A detailed emergency plan to address the following issues. Include in the plans, as appropriate and necessary, safety procedures, protective garments, training for employees, back-up and redundant systems, effluent monitoring, automatic shutdown systems. 
a.  Site flooding; 
b.  Potential human exposure to biomedical waste, incinerator ash, wastewater. 
18.  The planned stack height of the incinerator, provisions for continuous stack monitoring and recording until emission levels are predictable. Also include data on the nature and predictability of pollution movement. 
19.  How incompatible wastes will be separated and segregated. 
B.  A map, plat, or similar document shall be attached to the application and shall contain the following information. 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of the legal owner (and/or agent) of the property on which the facility will be located. 
2.  Name, address, and telephone number of the professional person responsible for the plat of survey. 
3.  Description/location of any existing easements or rights-of-way crossing the property. 
4.  Reference to any existing restrictive covenants on the property. 
5.  Property tax map parcel number and deed book and page number of recorded deed or other evidence of title the current owner has. 
6.  The map or plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 100 feet to an inch. 
7.  Location sketch map, showing the relationship of the project to the surrounding area. 
8.  Graphic scale, date, North arrow, and legend. 
9.  Surrounding property and roads and the names and addresses of adjacent property owners according to county tax records. 
10.  Zoning classification of the project and properties adjacent to the project. 
11.  Boundary lines of the property which shall be not less than 100 acres. 
12.  Total acreage of land in the project and the location, dimensions, and acreage of all property proposed to be set aside for various uses on the property. 
13.  The location of existing and/or platted streets, easements, buildings, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, sewers, water mains, culverts, wells and gas and electric transmission lines. 
14.  The location of water bodies, watercourses, groundwater aquifers, springs, and any other pertinent features. 
15.  The location of all test wells and/or borings. 
16.  The location of the 500-year and the 100-year floodplains and records of flood, including inundation due to dam break. 
17.  No facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of any exterior boundary line. Such 1,000-foot buffer shall remain in its natural vegetative state. Any facility shall be completely fenced with chain link material eight feet in height as measured from the ground and topped with three strands of barbed wire angled at 45 degrees toward the outside of the site. All entrances to the sites shall have an eight-foot high gate which shall be closed at all times the facility is not open. 
C.  A topographic map (topo) shall be attached to the application. The topo shall show contours at vertical intervals of not more than ten feet; the scale of the topo shall be the same as that used for the project site map. The date and method of preparation shall be shown on the topo as well as the preparer of the topo. 
D.  A transportation route map shall also be attached to the application. Such map shall show the proposed transportation routes to and from the facility, including the location of towns and emergency and safety facilities. For each transportation route, an estimate of volume of material to be transported to the facility. 
E.  The owner/operator shall provide 15 copies of the application and all associated documents to the city council. 
Sec. 8.224. - Application and processing fees. 
The city council shall require a permit application fee of $50,000.00 to reimburse the city for the costs of any professional assistance needed to evaluate the permit application and amendments, verify the contents and evaluate the impact of the permit on the community, public health, and the environment. This assistance may include, but shall not be limited to, city staff, lawyers, biologists consultants, geologists, engineers, chemists, hydrologists, emergency response personnel, transportation and public health experts, land appraisers and professional testing laboratories. Funds not expended in the legitimate review of the permit application shall be returned to the applicant. 
Sec. 8.225. - Application procedure. 
A.  In addition to the information required by this division, the permit applicant shall submit to the city council 15 copies of all information required by federal and state agencies for the project. The city council's review of the application shall not begin until all required documents and data have been submitted and the appropriate fees paid or suitable arrangements have been made and approved by the city council. 
B.  Once the application is submitted, the city council shall have 60 days in which to determine if the application is complete and shall mail notice of its determination to the applicant. If the application is found to be incomplete, the applicant will have six additional months in which to complete the application. At the end of the six-month period and upon a showing of good cause to the city council, the applicant may be granted an additional period of up to three months. 
C.  City staff selected by the city council shall analyze the application. The analysis shall be completed within 90 days after the application is deemed to be complete. Where the complexity of the application requires more than 90 days, the staff may request from the city council an additional 60 days. If the staff has questions or wants additional data, the applicant may request from the city council an additional 60 days in which to respond to the questions or provide the data. 
D.  A designee of the city council shall compile copies of all reports, the application and attachments and all other relevant documents and place all these in one location accessible to the public. The public may, at cost, make copies of all or some of these documents. 
Sec. 8.226. - Public meeting, public hearing, communications. 
A.  Upon identifying a potential site for the project, the applicant shall notify the city council and participate in a public meeting. 
1.  The applicant shall give notice of the meeting to be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least twice a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date of the meeting. The applicant shall pay for the cost of publishing the notice. 
2.  The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting, which purpose shall be to discuss the waste management needs of the city, to describe the siting process to be followed, and to allow for public input. 
3.  The meeting shall be conducted by the city council or its designee. 
B.  Within 45 days of receiving a completed application and the processing fee, the city council shall set a time for a public hearing. 
1.  The applicant shall arrange and pay for notice of such hearing to be published at least twice prior to the hearing in the newspaper which is the legal organ in Bartow County. Notice shall be published at least seven and no more than 30 days prior to said hearing and shall include the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Copies of said notices or certification from the publisher shall be submitted to the city council prior to the hearing. 
C.  Once a completed application is submitted to the city council, the applicant shall also be required to send a letter via first class mail to all adjoining property owners, as shown on the tax records of Bartow County as of the date of application and to all owners of property any portion of which is within 1,000 feet of the boundary of the facility. This letter shall state that the applicant is seeking a letter of assurance for a biomedical waste incineration or disposal facility or autoclave facility. Certification of sending this letter shall be provided to the city council, along with a list of all owners, prior to the hearing for public comment on the completed application. 
D.  The applicant shall give notice by regular mail of the time and place of the hearing to the owner and adjacent property owners. Said notice shall be mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the meeting. Notice of said hearing shall also be posted by the applicant at the proposed facility site on each and every street of access at least 14 days prior said meeting. Posting of the notice shall be at intervals not greater than 1,500 feet. The applicant shall also place notice in a newspaper of general circulation in Bartow County no less than 14 days prior to the hearing. 
E.  At the hearing, the general procedure will be: 
1.  The applicant shall present its application and any supplemental information which may have been requested by the city council. 
2.  City councilmembers shall have the opportunity to ask questions of the applicant, the city council's experts and the applicant's experts, and of supporters and opponents of the facility. 
3.  Supporters and opponents of the facility shall have the same amount of time to present information and air their concerns. Such time period shall be of at least 15 minutes' duration and may be longer if the application is complex or the number of experts and other witnesses warrants an extended period of time. 
4.  If there are more than five opponents or supporters of the facility, the city council may require that a spokesperson be designated. 
5.  Opponents and supporters of the facility may be represented by an attorney or attorneys. The applicant, supporters and opponents shall have the right to provide testimony, including expert testimony, in support of their position and supporters and opponents (or their spokesperson) shall have the right to ask questions in an orderly fashion as determined by city council or its designee. 
6.  No later than 45 days after receipt of the final analysis, complete application, and final public meeting, the consultant(s) shall make a recommendation to the city council at a public meeting on whether to accept the application, deny it, or accept it with modifications. 
Sec. 8.227. - Evaluation criteria/evaluation. 
A.  The city council shall issue a letter of assurance for any biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility in the city, as required by state law and regulations, if such facility complies with the standards and requirements contained in this division and is consistent with the city's solid waste management plan. 
B.  Before deciding whether to accept the proposal or to accept it with modifications, the city shall make the following determinations: 
1.  That there is a bona fide need for the facility and there is no reasonable alternative facility which will impact the environment less adversely; 
2.  That the construction and operation of the facility will not pose an unreasonable health or environmental risk to the surrounding area; 
3.  That the applicant or the operator has the capability and the financial resources to construct, operate, and maintain the facility; 
4.  That the applicant or operator has taken or consented in writing to take any and all reasonable measures to comply with the applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations, and ordinances; 
5.  That the applicant's plan represents the best available technology for handling the waste and the applicant has demonstrated that it will use the best management practices in handling the waste at the proposed facility; 
6.  Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact on traffic on adjacent streets and/or on adjacent residential, commercial and industrial uses; 
7.  Whether the proposed use is compatible with the surrounding properties, uses, and governmental facilities; 
8.  Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact on health, safety, aesthetics, property values, or other elements of the community; 
9.  If there are environmentally sensitive areas on the subject property, whether the proposed plans adequately protect those areas; 
10.  That the facility is compatible with the city's integrated long-range solid waste management plan. 
C.  Upon receipt of its consultant(s) (as designated in section 4) final reports and subsequent to its consideration of the issues cited above, the city council shall, at its next scheduled meeting, make a decision to grant the permit, deny it, or grant it with specified conditions. Each councilmember may prepare a written decision to be voted on by the entire council. Each decision prepared and the final decision shall be based on evidence in the record and the criteria contained in this division. This final decision of the entire council shall be in writing. 
D.  Approval of a proposal shall be specifically conditioned to the site plan, application, maps, elevation renderings and other detailed plans to ensure that the development is constructed in accordance with all the previously presented materials. Approval may also impose additional conditions, if the conditions are designed to minimize the impact of the use on adjacent property, streets and the like. 
Sec. 8.228. - Permit modification requirements. 
A.  The holder of a city-issued permit shall be required to apply to the city council for a modification of its existing city permit in the event that any of the following changes or modifications occur subsequent to the date the city permit was originally issued: 
1.  Any modification of equipment used in the operation of a biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility. 
2.  Any change of owner or operator of a biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility. 
3.  Any change in the hours of operation of a biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility. 
4.  Any increase in waste throughput at a biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility. 
5.  Any change in the types of biomedical waste treated or handled at a biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility. 
6.  Any change in biomedical waste or biomedical waste liquid disposal practices at a biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility. 
7.  Any change in the biomedical waste incinerator facility's ash management plan. 
B.  The city council or its designee shall establish a short form application for the purpose of facilitating the review of permit modification requests under this section. 
Sec. 8.229. - Appeal process. 
In the event the application is denied, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the superior court of Bartow County. Said appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the decision was rendered. The applicant shall forward a copy of the appeal to the city clerk and the clerk shall forward a copy of the entire record (including all evidence submitted) to the superior court as soon as is practicable, along with the minutes of the hearings, copies of the tapes or transcriptions of the meetings/hearing, the written decision, a copy of this division and all other relevant ordinances, maps and documents. 
Sec. 8.230. - Record keeping, reporting requirements, inspections. 
A.  The holder of a city permit issued pursuant to this division shall be required to perform such monitoring and recording of process and operational parameters as deemed necessary and appropriate by the city council or its designee. Monitored parameters and required measuring and recording frequencies may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following: 
As to incinerators. 
Frequency and mass of waste charging (continuous). 
Ash generation (weekly). 
Primary and secondary chamber temperatures (continuous). 
Flue gas opacity (weekly). 
Auxiliary fuel usage (weekly). 
Primary and secondary combustion air flow rates (weekly). 
Fan motor current (weekly). 
Wet scrubbers (weekly) including scrubber liquid header pressure; scrubber liquid flow rate; scrubber liquid pH (daily); scrubber static pressure drop; demister static pressure drop. 
Dry scrubbers and spray dry absorbers, including reagent flow rate (daily); Slaker slurry outlet temperature (weekly); solids recycle rate (weekly); nozzle air and slurry pressures (weekly); wet and dry bulb temperature (weekly). 
Fabric filters, including bag failure records (continuous); static pressure drop (weekly); baghouse inlet and outlet temperatures (weekly). 
Flue gas concentrations of: acid gases, CO, O2, CO2, opacity. 
As to autoclaves. 
A recording thermometer shall be used each complete cycle to ensure the attainment of a temperature of 121 degrees Celsius (250 degrees Fahrenheit) for at least one-half hour in order to achieve decontamination of the entire load. 
The steam sterilization process shall be monitored. Monitoring may be through the use of biological indicators or other methods as approved by the city council. Indicators used to ensure the attainment of the proper temperature during steam sterilization shall be placed at the point of the load where the rate of thermal penetration is at a minimum. 
B.  The permit holder shall perform Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedures, Method 1311, EPA Publication SW.846 (TCLP) analysis of the ash based upon a schedule and with such frequency as determined by the city council or its designee. This analysis may include grab samples and the analysis of composite grab. 
C.  The city council or its designee may require the permit holder to engage in performance testing of the medical waste incinerator, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility at one or more of the following times: initial startup of a new facility, startup of an existing facility after significant modification or operational changes, prior to the issuance of an initial city permit and/or the renewal of an existing city permit. Said testing may include, but shall not be limited to, TCLP testing of ash, combustibility testing of ash, putrescibility testing of ash, stack testing for acid gases, metal, CO, VOCs dioxins/furans, PM, biologic tracer testing, temperature testing, and thermal penetration testing. 
D.  The permit holder shall be required to provide the city council or its designee and any applicable Bartow County agencies copies of all semi-annual reports the permit holder submitted to the EPD, all notices of violation issued by the EPD and the permit holder's responses thereto, EPD reports of no-notice site inspections, and all other correspondence with and submissions to the EPD. The permit holder shall also notify the city promptly of any serious occurrence likely to cause public concern such as fire, explosion or extensive uncontrolled emission. 
E.  Annually, the permit holder shall provide the city council or its designee the resumes of supervisory and management personnel responsible for operation of the biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility and all records of training and certification of employees working at the biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility. 
F.  The permit holder shall present to the city council or its designee an ash management plan or a decontaminated waste disposal plan in the case of autoclaves when initially applying for a permit and annually thereafter. Such plan shall include a description of the estimated quantity of ash or decontaminated biomedical waste to be disposed of during the upcoming year and the names, addresses, and telephone number of all landfills at which such ash or decontaminated biomedical waste will be disposed. 
G.  The city council or its designee shall have the right to inspect the biomedical waste incinerator or biomedical waste disposal facility during normal operating hours without prior notice to the owner/operator of the facility. The right to inspect shall include the authority to perform independent testing on any aspect of the biomedical waste incinerator facility or the biomedical waste disposal facility for the purpose of ascertaining the owner/operator's compliance with the requirements of this division. The city council or its designee shall have the authority to require the facility's owner/operator to install auxiliary sampling ports as a condition of its permit for the purpose of supporting inspections and independent testing. 
Sec. 8.231. - Insurance requirements. 
A.  The permit holder shall obtain and maintain environmental impairment liability insurance and general public liability insurance, naming the City of Emerson as loss payee, in such amounts as determined by the city council or its designee. Determination of the amount required shall be made on an objective basis, considering such factors as the permitted capacity of the facility, the performance history of the equipment to be installed at the facility, the permit holder's environmental safety record, estimated costs of closure and post-closure. 
B.  At a minimum, the permit holder shall show evidence of liability insurance coverage with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 for sudden events and $2,000,000.00 for non-sudden events. Such insurance shall cover injury or damage occurring upon the site of the operation and upon properties in the vicinity of the biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave or biomedical waste disposal facility as a result of conditions or activities occurring in connection with the operation of the facility. An insurance carrier approved by the city council and licensed to conduct business in Georgia shall issue such policies, and such policies shall be filed with the city council. The deductible written into the insurance policy shall not exceed five percent of the per-incident limit of the liability of the policy. The coverage obtained to fulfill the requirements of this section shall include the provision that the insurer notify the city council three days prior to the cancellation of the insurance for any reason. The insured shall also provide evidence that $2,000,000.00 liability insurance is to run for five years subsequent to closure of the facility to cover post-closure claims. The insured shall also provide a history of claims against the corporation at any site, including claims against a subsidiary and/or parent corporation. 
C.  Annually thereafter, the permit holder shall submit evidence satisfactory to the city council that the insurance remains in full force and effect. 
Sec. 8.232. - Packaging and refrigeration. 
A.  All biomedical waste transported to the biomedical waste incinerator facility or biomedical waste disposal facility and accepted for incineration or disposal at such facility shall be packaged in containers meeting or exceeding the requirements of 49 CFR 173.196-197 or future federal and/or state regulations setting forth the minimum packaging requirements for biomedical wastes. 
B.  Current minimum requirements shall include: 
1.  Packaging of biomedical waste so as to protect waste from animals, rain and wind, to prevent waste from becoming a food source or breeding ground for insects and rodents, and to minimize public exposure. 
2.  Biomedical waste shall be separated from other waste at the point of origin. Biomedical waste, except sharps, shall be placed in containers impervious to moisture having sufficient strength to preclude ripping, tearing, or bursting under normal conditions of use. The containers shall be securely closed so as to prevent leakage or expulsion of solid or liquid wastes during storage and transport. 
3.  For storage, transport, treatment and disposal, sharps shall be packaged in leak-proof, rigid, puncture-resistant containers which are taped closed or tightly lidded. 
4.  All disposable containers used to store and transport biomedical waste shall be red or orange or otherwise clearly identified with the universal biohazard symbol or the word "Biohazard." 
5.  Disposable containers of biomedical waste shall be placed for storage, handling or transport in a containment system of disposable or re-usable pails, cartons, boxes, drums, dumpsters, or portable bins. The containment system shall have a tight-fitting cover and be kept clean and intact. The containment system shall be conspicuously labeled with the universal biohazard symbol and the word "Biohazard" on the side so as to be visible from any lateral direction when the container is upright. 
6.  Reusable containers shall be thoroughly washed and decontaminated every time they are emptied. 
7.  Reusable containers shall not be used for any other purpose until they have been decontaminated and the universal biohazard symbol and the word "Biohazard" have been removed. 
C.  When transferring biomedical waste to an off-site treatment or disposal facility: 
1.  Generators of biomedical waste shall transfer custody of the waste only to a collector permitted and authorized under the requirements of this division. 
2.  Biomedical waste shall not be transported in the same vehicle with other solid waste unless the biomedical waste is contained in a separate, fully enclosed leak-proof container within the vehicle compartment, unless all of the waste is to be treated as biomedical waste. 
3.  Biomedical waste shall be delivered for storage, including intermediate transfer, and treatment only at a permitted facility. 
4.  The surface of transport vehicles which have come into contact with biomedical waste shall be decontaminated. 
5.  Equipment used to transport biomedical waste from the generator to an off-site treatment or disposal facility shall not destroy the integrity of the container. 
6.  Vehicles used to transport biomedical waste shall not be used to transport food or food products. 
7.  The owner/operator shall provide refrigerated transport and storage of biomedical waste that has been or is expected to be held for longer than 72 hours after being discarded at its origination point. 
Sec. 8.233. - Control of emissions. 
Emissions from all biomedical waste incinerators, autoclaves, and biomedical waste disposal facilities shall not cause ambient pollution concentrations to exceed levels established by the EPD and the EPA or levels established by the city council, if such levels are more stringent than those established by the EPD and the EPA. The city council or its designee may require as [a] condition of the initial or renewed permit that ambient pollution concentrations not exceed specific levels as established pursuant to this division. 
Sec. 8.234. - Certification of operator. 
No person shall operate a biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility unless such person obtains a certificate of training in medical waste incinerators issued by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Copies of the training certification for the operators and maintenance engineers shall be submitted to the city council or its designee and shall be available for inspection at the facility. 
Sec. 8.235. - Operating hours. 
All operations, other than maintenance of equipment in fully enclosed buildings, shall be conducted only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. A sign clearly indicating the hours of operation shall be placed in a conspicuous location at the entrance to the facility. 
Sec. 8.236. - Licensing fee, surcharge. 
A.  Each biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility operating in the city shall pay a yearly license fee of $25,000.00 which is due on the first business day in January. 
B.  Each privately owned biomedical waste incinerator facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility operating in the city shall additionally pay a per ton surcharge or volume equivalent on waste received at the facility. The fee shall be $5.00 per ton for owners/operators of biomedical waste incineration and biomedical waste disposal facilities and $5.00 per ton of equipment/materials processed through an autoclave. 
Sec. 8.237. - Determination of tonnage/expenditure of surcharge fees. 
A.  The tonnage or volume equivalent of waste incinerated, disposed of or autoclaved shall be determined by the EPD or other state agency and the EPD, other state agency, or the city council will inform the owner/operator of the tonnage or equivalency. The owner/operator shall pay to the city the amount of the surcharge within ten days of receiving that information. In the event the EPD fails to make a determination of tonnage or equivalency, the city council or its designee shall do so. 
B.  Upon receipt of the surcharge funds, the city council or its designee shall deposit the funds into a separate account. The funds so collected shall be used to offset the impact of the biomedical waste incineration facility, autoclave, or biomedical waste disposal facility, to further public education about waste management and waste minimization, to offset the costs of biomedical waste management and the administrative costs of local and regional solid/biomedical waste management plans, as determined by the city council from time to time. 
Sec. 8.238. - Enforcement. 
A.  Upon being found guilty of violating any provision of this division, the responsible owner/operator shall be liable for the following: 
1.  For the first offense, payment of a fine no less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 and incarceration for up to 30 days. Each day's violation constitutes a separate violation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council may also seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
2.  For the second and subsequent offenses, payment of a fine not less than $750.00 and not more than $1,000.00 and incarceration for up to 60 days. Each day's violation constitutes a separate violation. 
B.  Upon adjudication, the court of competent jurisdiction may order the responsible owner/operator to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation of this division, or all three options. 
C.  All expenses incurred by the city for cleanup and for enforcing the requirements of this division shall be chargeable to the responsible owner/operator and may include court costs, filing fees, special investigations, and assistance from federal and state agencies. 
D.  As a part of its enforcement responsibilities, the city council may issue citations for violations of this division. The magistrate's court of the city shall have jurisdiction to hear cases arising from the issuance of such citations. 
E.  In addition to all other remedies, the city may seek an injunction, institute an action for cleanup, place a lien on the offending facility, or revoke or suspend any and all business, building, or operating licenses or permits the city has previously issued to the owner/operator. Once the case has been adjudicated and a court of competent jurisdiction has found the owner/operator has remedied the violation(s) and is now in compliance with this division, the suspended or revoked license(s) may be reinstated as valid. 
F.  If the owner/operator of a facility violates a provision of this division and such violation is a first offense, the city's enforcement staff has the option of issuing a notice of violation in lieu of a citation. However, in the absence of immediate corrective measures or if a second violation occurs, evidence that a notice of violation was issued may be presented as evidence of a first offense, making the failure to correct or second violation a second offense to be punished as a second offense. 
G.  The city may request that the court of competent jurisdiction hearing the case involving violation of the division require the owner/operator to remedy all other violations. Notice of this requirement shall be made by personal service. In the event the responsible owner/operator cannot be so served, then notice shall be sent by registered mail to the owner/operator's last-known address. 
H.  If no corrective measures have been taken by the responsible owner/operator within 20 days of receiving the notice, the city shall take the necessary corrective measures. All necessary and reasonable expenses the city incurs in correcting the condition or situation shall be chargeable to the responsible owner/operator. The city shall send a statement of the charges to the responsible owner/operator by registered mail. 
I.  If the responsible owner/operator does not reimburse the city for correcting the condition or situation, the city council shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the costs incurred by the city, the dates of correction, the location(s) of property where corrective action was taken and the name of the responsible owner/operator. This recording shall constitute a lien on the responsible owner/operator's real and person property and shall remain in full force and effect until complete payment, including any accrued interest is made. 
Sec. 8.239. - Miscellaneous. 
It is the intention of this division to regulate all biomedical waste incineration facilities, autoclaves, and biomedical waste disposal facilities located within the municipal boundaries of the city. No incineration, autoclaving, or disposal of biomedical waste shall occur within the city except in compliance with this division. 
Secs. 8.240—8.249. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - TRANSFER STATIONS 

Sec. 8.250. - Location standards. 
A.  A transfer station shall be located only in an area zoned heavy industrial. 
B.  A transfer station shall not be located: 
1.  Within a floodplain; 
2.  Within 250 feet of any private water supply well or within 1,200 feet of any public water supply well; 
3.  Within 250 feet of any navigable lake, pond, flowage, river or stream; 
4.  Within 100 feet of land owned by a person other than the owner or operator of the facility, unless the waste handling operations are screened by natural objects, plantings, fences or other appropriate means so that the transfer station is not visible from the property boundary; 
5.  Within 1,000 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of any state trunk highway, interstate, or federal aid primary highway or the boundary of any public park or recreational area unless the waste handling operations are screened by natural objects, plantings, fences or other appropriate means so that the transfer station is not visible from the property boundary. 
Sec. 8.251. - Operating standards. 
A.  All waste transfer operations shall take place only in an enclosed structure. 
1.  Enclosed structure means a building consisting of an impermeable floor, roof, and at least three walls that are capable of confining all solid waste inside the building. The building must be constructed to prevent precipitation from reaching solid waste inside the building. No waste shall be allowed to scatter outside the building. 
2.  Unloading of solid waste may occur only within the enclosed structure. 
B.  Signage and other externally located information. 
1.  A sign shall be prominently posted at the entrance to the facility which indicates the name, license or permit number, hours of operation, waste types accepted, waste types prohibited, and necessary safety information. 
C.  Protection of health and safety. 
1.  The facility shall be operated under the direct supervision of responsible individuals who are thoroughly knowledgeable with the operating requirements and procedures of the transfer facility. 
2.  Roads, gates, doors, and the tipping floor shall be clear of obstructions at all times. 
3.  A qualified attendant or employee shall be on duty at all times the facility is receiving waste and access to the facility shall be denied when no qualified attendant or employee is present. 
4.  Waste shall be continuously removed from the tipping floor during the operating day for transport to a solid waste handling facility. At some time during each operating day, the tipping floor shall be scraped clean. From time to time, as needed, tipping floors shall be pressure washed to control odors and to limit the presence of rodents, flies, or other vectors. 
5.  All wastewater shall be collected and treated at a wastewater treatment facility permitted to accept it. 
6.  Storage of solid waste shall not remain on the premises for a period not greater than 24 hours unless the waste is contained in leak-proof vehicles or containers with impermeable tops used by a licensed collection and transportation service. 
7.  Burning of solid waste is not allowed. 
8.  Equipment shall be provided to control accidental fires and arrangements shall be made with the local fire department to provide immediate services when needed. 
9.  A list of emergency contacts shall be posted in an area accessible to all employees. 
10.  An approved alternative method of waste processing or disposal shall be provided in the event the transfer station is rendered inoperable. 
11.  Recyclable material may be separated from the incoming waste and stored provided that no fire hazard or nuisance conditions are created. 
12.  All unacceptable waste inadvertently received at the facility shall be properly managed in accordance with applicable standards. 
13.  Once a transfer station is no longer open for the purpose of receiving waste during the operating day, all putrescible waste remaining at the station shall be properly disposed of, stored in an enclosed structure, or stored in containers made of impervious materials and designed to prevent leakage and to prevent precipitation, insects, and other vectors from coming into contact with the waste. 
D.  Access. 
1.  An all-weather access road and parking area shall be provided and maintained. 
2.  Traffic to and from the transfer station shall not impede the normal flow of traffic in the area. 
Sec. 8.252. - Application requirements and procedures. 
A.  Each person proposing to locate a solid waste transfer station within the boundaries of the City of Emerson shall submit an application for a letter of assurance demonstrating compliance with the provisions contained in this division and consistent with the city's solid waste management plan. 
B.  Upon enactment of this ordinance, no new transfer stations shall be operated within the city's limits without a letter of assurance from the city council. 
C.  Application procedures. 
1.  An applicant shall prepare and file an application for a letter of assurance with the city council. The application shall include all related documents submitted to the federal government and to the State of Georgia. 
2.  The application shall contain the following information: 
a.  A description of the corporation, its financial capability, and a detailed history of all of its past activities in the field of solid waste management. 
b.  Evidence of liability insurance coverage with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 for sudden events and $2,000,000.00 for non-sudden events. Such insurance shall cover injury or damage occurring upon the site of the operation and upon properties in the vicinity of the transfer station as a result of conditions or activities occurring in connection with the operation of the transfer station. An insurance carrier approved by the city council shall issue such policies and such policies shall be filed with the city council. The deductible written into the insurance policy shall not exceed five percent of the per-incident limit of the liability of the policy. The coverage obtained to fulfill the requirements of this section shall include the provision that the insurer notify the city council 30 days prior to the cancellation of the insurance for any reason. The insured shall provide evidence that $2,000,000.00 liability insurance is to run for five years subsequent to closure of the facility to cover post-closure claims. The insured shall also provide a history of claims against the corporation at any site, including claims against a subsidiary and/or parent corporation. 
c.  Justification for and anticipated benefits from the facility. 
d.  Yearly site expenses and an estimate of the costs for the lifetime of the facility. 
e.  The proposed method of financing the facility, including development, operating, and closure stages. Also to be included is the name of the financial institution(s) which will be funding the project. 
f.  Resumes of management personnel and the proposed number of employees and types of positions, including information about the training and experience required for each position and safety precautions undertaken for the protection of personnel. 
g.  Anticipated dates to begin construction and to begin operation. 
h.  A detailed estimate of the types and amounts of local government services required by the operator in each year of operation. 
i.  A description of emergency procedures and safety and security precautions that will be used in the facility. This information shall include details on emergency assistance and emergency medical treatment that will be required from the area's medical facilities, the Bartow County rescue squad and nearby fire departments. 
j.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be taken by the applicant to prevent contamination in and around the facility site and the description of planned monitoring systems, with an estimated annual budget for each of these items. 
k.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be used during the transportation of materials to and from the facility, with an estimated annual budget for those arrangements and an estimate of the volume of material to be transported during each year of operation. 
l.  A description of anticipated need for post-closure care. 
3.  A map or other written material attached to the application shall include, but is not limited to, the following information. 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of the legal owner (and/or agent) of the property on which the facility is to be located; 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of professional person(s) responsible for the plat of survey. 
c.  Identification and description of any existing easements or rights-of-way affecting the property. 
d.  Reference to any restrictive covenants on the property. 
e.  Description of the property itself, including a location on a property tax map and the parcel number. The description should include reference to a deed book and page number or other evidence of title the current property owner may have. 
4.  A transportation route map showing the proposed transportation routes to and from the transfer station, including an estimate of the volume of material to travel each route shall be attached to the application. 
5.  The applicant shall furnish 15 copies of the application and associated documents to the city council. 
Sec. 8.253. - Application processing fees. 
A.  The city council shall require an application fee in the amount of $4,000.00 to reimburse the city for the costs of any needed professional services or assistance that may be required to evaluate the permit application and amendments, verify its contents, and evaluate the impact of a permit in the community, public health and the environment. Funds not so expended in the legitimate review of the permit application shall be returned to the applicant. 
B.  Failure to provide these funds within 30 days of demand shall result in termination of the permit process or cancellation of the permit. The city council may take legal action against the applicant for any costs incurred by the city up to the point of termination. 
C.  Upon payment of the fee herein, the city may employ its own consultant to review the application and compliance with this division. 
Sec. 8.254. - Public meeting, public hearing and communication. 
A.  Upon identifying a potential site for project, the applicant shall notify the city council and participate in a public meeting. 
1.  The city council or its designee shall give notice of the meeting to be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least twice a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date of the meeting. The applicant shall pay for the cost of publishing the notice. 
2.  The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting, which purpose shall be to discuss the waste management needs of the city, to describe the siting process to be followed, and to allow for public input. 
3.  The meeting shall be conducted by the city council or its designee. 
B.  Within 45 days of receiving a completed application and the processing fee, the city council shall set a time for a public hearing. 
1.  The applicant shall arrange and pay for notice of such hearing to be published at least twice prior to the hearing in the newspaper which is the legal organ in Bartow County. Notice shall be published at least seven and no more than 30 days prior to said hearing and shall include the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Copies of said notices or certification from the publisher shall be submitted to the city council prior to the hearing. 
C.  Once a completed application is submitted to the city council, the applicant shall also be required to send a letter via first class mail to all adjoining property owners, as shown on the tax records of Bartow County as of the date of application and to all owners of property any portion of which is within 1,000 feet of the boundary of the facility. This letter shall state that the applicant is seeking a letter of assurance for a transfer station. Certification of sending this letter shall be provided to the city council, along with a list of all owners, prior to the hearing for public comment on the completed application. 
D.  The applicant shall give notice by regular mail of the time and place of the hearing to the owner and adjacent property owners. Said notice shall be mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the meeting. Notice of said meeting shall also be posted by the applicant at the proposed facility site on each and every street of access at least 14 days prior said meeting. Posting of the notice shall be at intervals not greater than 1,500 feet. The applicant shall also place notice in a newspaper of general circulation in Bartow County no less than 14 days prior to the hearing. 
E.  At the meeting, the general procedure will be: 
1.  The applicant shall present its application and supplemental information which may have been requested by the city council. 
2.  City councilmembers shall have the opportunity to ask questions of the applicant, the city council's experts and the applicant's experts, and of supporters and opponents of the facility. 
3.  Supporters and opponents of the facility shall have the same amount of time to present information and air their concerns. Such time period shall be of at least 15 minutes' duration and may be longer if the application is complex or the number of experts and other witnesses warrants an extended period of time. 
4.  If there are more than five opponents or supporters of the facility, the city council may require that a spokesperson be designated. 
5.  Opponents and supporters of the facility may be represented by an attorney or attorneys. The applicant, supporters and opponents shall have the right to provide testimony, including expert testimony, in support of their position and supporters and opponents (or their spokesperson) shall have the right to ask questions in an orderly fashion as determined by city council or its designee. 
6.  No later than 45 days after receipt of the final analysis, complete application, and final public meeting, the consultant(s) designated in paragraph C of section 4 shall make a recommendation to the city council at a public meeting on whether to accept the application, deny it, or accept it with modifications. 
Sec. 8.255. - Evaluation criteria/evaluation. 
A.  The city council shall issue a letter of assurance for any solid waste transfer station in the City of Emerson, as required by state law and regulations, if such facility complies with the location standards contained in this division and is consistent with the city's solid waste management plan. 
B.  Before deciding whether to accept the proposal or to accept it with modifications, the city council shall make the following determinations: 
1.  That there is a bona fide need for the facility and there is no reasonable alternative facility which will impact the environment less adversely; 
2.  That the construction and operation of the facility will not pose an unreasonable health or environmental risk to the surrounding area; 
3.  That the applicant or the operator has the capability and the financial resources to construct, operate, and maintain the facility; 
4.  That the applicant or operator has taken or consented in writing to take any and all reasonable measures to comply with the applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations, and ordinances; 
5.  That the applicant's plan represents the best available technology for handling the waste and the applicant has demonstrated that it will use the best management practices in handling the waste at the proposed facility; 
6.  Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact on traffic on adjacent streets and/or on adjacent residential, commercial and industrial uses; 
7.  Whether the proposed use is compatible with the surrounding properties, uses, and governmental facilities; 
8.  Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact on health, safety, aesthetics, property values, or other elements of the community; 
9.  If there are environmentally sensitive areas on the subject property, whether the proposed plans adequately protect those areas; 
10.  That the facility is compatible with the City of Emerson's integrated long-range solid waste management plan, taking into account alternative methods of management such as recycling. 
C.  Upon receipt of its consultant(s) final reports and subsequent to its consideration of the issues cited above, the city council shall, at its next scheduled meeting, make a decision to grant the permit, deny it, or grant it with specified conditions. Each councilmember may prepare a written decision to be voted on by the entire council. Each decision prepared and the final decision shall be based on evidence in the record and the criteria contained in this division. This final decision of the entire council shall be in writing. 
D.  Approval of a proposal shall be specifically conditioned to the site plan, maps, and other detailed plans to ensure that the development is constructed in accordance with all the previously presented materials. Approval may also impose additional conditions, if the conditions are designed to minimize the impact of the use on adjacent property, streets and the like. 
Sec. 8.256. - Appeal process. 
In the event the application is denied, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the superior court of Bartow County. Said appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the decision was rendered. The applicant shall forward a copy of the appeal to the city clerk and the clerk shall forward a copy of the entire record (including all evidence submitted) to the superior court as soon as is practicable, along with the minutes of the hearings, copies of the tapes or transcriptions of the hearings, the written decision, a copy of this division and all other relevant ordinances, maps and documents. 
Sec. 8.257. - Enforcement. 
Failure to comply with the operating or other requirements of this division shall result in a fine not less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00 per day per violation. 
Sec. 8.258. - Existing transfer station operations. 
This division shall not apply to any permitted transfer station existing on the effective date of this ordinance and any such landfill shall be allowed to continue in operation. The division shall apply, however, to any new or expanded transfer station for which a permit by rule is issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division on or after the effective date of this division. 
Secs. 8.259—8.271. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - MANUFACTURED HOMES (PARKS) 

Sec. 8.272. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for the administration and enforcement of regulations relating to manufactured homes, manufactured home parks, and industrialized homes in the city; to promote the public health, safety and welfare; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote aesthetic and natural beauty in the neighborhood environments; to provide for adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to preserve the character of the area and its peculiar suitability for particular uses; to promote desirable living conditions; to prevent the erection of unpermitted or unsafe structures; to comply with Georgia state laws; to prevent nuisances; to protect property from blight and depreciation in market value; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings and other structures in the City of Emerson. 
Sec. 8.273. - Definitions. 
The following words shall have the following meanings in this division. Except as specifically defined herein all words used in this division shall carry their customary meaning as defined by a standard dictionary. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory. 
Building: Any structure intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property, and usually having a roof supported by columns or by walls. 
Building official: The City of Emerson building official, or a duly authorized designee. 
Commercial: An activity undertaken for profit, income, or other business purposes, including sales or manufacture of goods or items, sale of animals, and boarding, training, and breeding of animals, and similar activities. 
Dwelling: A building or other structure designed, arranged, or used for temporary or permanent living quarters for one or more persons. 
Dwelling unit: A building or portion thereof, providing complete living facilities for one family. 
Family: One or more related persons or three or less unrelated persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit provided that all related persons are related by blood, marriage or adoption. The term "family" shall not be construed to mean fraternity, sorority, club, student center, group care homes, or foster homes and is to be distinguished from persons occupying a boarding home, rooming house, hotel, or apartment unit. 
Industrialized building: Any structure or component thereof which is designed and constructed in compliance with the state minimum standards codes and is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. 
Install: To construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home or industrialized building on such foundation system. With regard to manufactured homes, such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Line, lot: A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or property or from a public or private street or any other public space. 
Lot: The basic development unit of land, also called a parcel or tract, with fixed boundaries, typically used or intended to be used by one building and its accessory building and not divided by any public road or alley. 
Lot, width of: The distance between side lot lines measured along the front building line of the lot as determined by the prescribed minimum front setback requirement. 
Manufactured house (a.k.a. mobile home): A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. section 5401 et seq. 
Pre-owned manufactured home: Any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
Recreational vehicle: A camper, camp trailer, travel trailer, house car, motor home, trailer bus, trailer coach, fifth wheel or similar vehicle, with or without motive power, designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel use or emergency occupancy, constructed with integral wheels to make it mobile and/or towable by motor vehicle. 
Residential industrialized building: Any dwelling unit designed and constructed in compliance with the Georgia State Minimum Standard One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in a manufacturing facility and cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Any such structure shall not contain a permanent metal chassis and shall be affixed to a permanent load-bearing foundation. The term shall not include manufactured homes as defined by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. section 5401 et seq. 
Sec. 8.274. - General requirements for manufactured homes. 
8.274.1  HUD compliance. Any pre-owned manufactured homes located in or brought into the city shall bear a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. section 5401, et seq. Homes not in compliance with this requirement are not permitted in the city. 
8.274.2  Tax decal. All manufactured homes must display a mobile home location permit from the county tax commissioner, on or before May 1 of the current tax year, if such permit is required by state law. 
8.274.3  Location of manufactured homes. A manufactured home may only be brought into the city or moved within the city to replace an existing grandfathered manufactured home or to be placed in an existing manufactured home park, as the primary use on the lot. Manufactured homes may not be used as accessory uses, except for commercial or industrial sales offices. 
8.274.4  Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy and fees. A city permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned or new manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
(A)  Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the building inspector: 
1.  An application form signed by the applicant containing such information as is required by the city. 
2.  A signed affidavit that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by this division 
3.  Photographs providing evidence that minimum health and safety standards are met (not required for new homes); 
4.  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (d). 
(B)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home to a residential site for purposes of inspection. The applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held on the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(C)  Alternative inspection. At the request of the applicant, the building official may, at his or her discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located within 20 miles of the city. An on-site inspection surcharge shall be charged for this inspection in addition to the regular fees set forth in subsection (d) below. The manufactured home shall still be required to be inspected after installation. 
(D)  Fees. A permit and inspection fee shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the city to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home once installed. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow-up inspection. The applicant shall be charged a fee for each additional follow up inspection that may be necessary. Fees shall be set by the city in a separate fee ordinance or resolution. 
(E)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this division have been met. In the event the manufactured home, once installed, cannot meet the requirements of this division, it either must be repaired up to the standards herein or removed. 
(F)  False information. Giving false information, including false pictures, of a proposed manufactured home in an effort to secure a certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of this ordinance and upon conviction thereof, shall carry a minimum fine of $750.00. 
8.274.5  Installation requirements. The following installation requirements must be satisfied for a manufactured home to secure a certificate of occupancy: 
(A)  Installation regulations. Manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 and the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(B)  Utility connections. Utility connections prior to the final inspection of the installation will be considered temporary and will be approved only when arrangements for complete installations have been made. 
(C)  Entry landing. All manufactured house installations shall provide an adequate means of entry (including steps and a landing at each doorway), of a minimum size of four feet by eight feet. 
(D)  Sewage management. Approval of an on-site sewage management system by the health department, or a sewer tap must be secured and provided to the city before a permit for a manufactured home will be issued. 
(E)  Underpinning. Except as otherwise provided herein, any manufactured house, whether on an individual lot or in a manufactured house subdivision, shall be required to be underpinned prior to occupancy. 
1)  The underpinning shall consist of one of the following: masonry, vinyl siding/panels or aluminum siding/panels or such other material as may be approved by the city prior to installation. The following types of materials are not permitted to be used, including, but not limited to, tin, wood (unless of natural decay resistance type such as cedar), plastic sheeting or gypsum board (black board). 
2)  The underpinning must be adequately secured to the manufactured house and where necessary for stability, secured to the ground. Two access doors are required to be installed in a manner which will provide adequate access for inspections and maintenance. Provisions must be made for adequate ventilation for the crawl space underneath the manufactured house. 
8.274.6  Minimum health and safety standards. All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
(A)  HUD code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. § 5401-5445 (the HUD code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD code. 
(B)  Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(C)  Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(D)  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(E)  Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Un-vented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(F)  Electrical systems. Electrical systems (including switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to ensure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
(G)  Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(H)  Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(I)  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(J)  Smoke detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
8.274.7  Additions to manufactured homes, mobile homes. Additional living space is prohibited to be added to a manufactured home. 
8.274.8  Single-family occupancy. All manufactured homes in the city in residential areas or manufactured home parks are limited to occupancy by a single-family. 
8.274.9  Commercial/industrial sales office. A manufactured home used for a commercial or industrial sales office shall be exempt from the requirements of this division, except for sections 8.274.1, 8.274.6(b), 8.274.6(c) and 8.274.10, which shall apply. 
8.274.10  Damage by fire/disaster. Any manufactured home damaged by fire, flood, tornado or other disaster such that the cost to repair the damage exceeds 50 percent of its current market value shall be fully repaired or removed within 45 days from the date the damage occurred. The city council may approve an extension of time of up to 45 days. 
Sec. 8.275. - General requirements for industrialized buildings. 
8.275.1  Industrialized buildings. Industrialized buildings shall comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq. and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
8.275.2  Non-discrimination. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-112, the city shall not exclude residential industrialized buildings from being sited in a residential district solely because the building is a residential industrialized building. 
8.275.3  Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy and fees. A city installation permit shall be required to locate an industrialized building in the jurisdiction. 
(A)  Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the building inspector: 
1.  An application form signed by the applicant containing such information as is required by the city. 
2.  The permit and inspection fee required by 8.275.3(D). 
(B)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the industrialized building to a site for purposes of inspection. The applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the building is complete. 
(C)  Fees. A permit and inspection fee of shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the city to process the permit application and inspect the building once installed. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow-up inspection. The applicant shall be charged a fee for each additional follow up inspection that may be necessary. Fees shall be set by the city in a separate fee ordinance or resolution. 
(D)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this division have been met. In the event the building, once installed, cannot meet the requirements of this division, it either must be repaired up to the standards herein or removed. 
8.275.4  Additional requirements. The following requirements must be satisfied for an industrialized building to secure a certificate of occupancy: 
(A)  Installation requirements. Industrialized homes must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq. and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(B)  Utility connections. Utility connections prior to the final inspection of the installation will be considered temporary and will be approved only when arrangements for complete installations have been made. 
(C)  Entry landing. All industrialized home installations shall provide an adequate means of entry (including steps and a landing at each doorway), of a minimum size of four feet by eight feet. 
(D)  Sewage management. A septic permit or a sewer tap must be secured and provided to building inspections approval of an on-site sewage management system by the health department, or a sewer tap must be secured and provided to the city before an installation permit for an industrialized home will be permitted. 
(E)  Foundations. The dwelling must be placed on a foundation and a curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access, must be installed so that it encloses the area located under the home to ground level. Such a wall shall have a minimum thickness of four inches and shall be constructed of masonry or similar material as approved by the building inspector. 
Sec. 8.276. - Manufactured home parks. 
8.276.1  Existing parks grandfathered. New manufactured home parks are not permitted uses under the existing Emerson zoning ordinance. Any manufactured home brought into an existing manufactured home park must meet the regulations of this division. Existing manufactured home parks are grandfathered, and are subject to the following regulations: 
(A)  No space shall be rented for residential use of a manufactured home in any such park except for periods of 30 days or more. 
(B)  Existing manufactured home parks may not be expanded. 
Sec. 8.277. - Additional regulations; enforcement. 
8.277.1  Illegal residential living. No lot may be used for temporary or permanent residential living quarters unless a permanent dwelling unit has been lawfully erected on the lot, pursuant to the provisions of this division and applicable building and safety codes. Indications that a property is being used as temporary or permanent residential living quarters include actions such as spending significant time at the location on more than one day, repeated eating and sleeping at the location, and performing other life activities at the location repeatedly. Tents, boats, RVs and other structures that are not permitted permanent dwelling units cannot be occupied either on a permanent or temporary basis on a residential lot, except that tents may be occupied for no more than three days in any two-month period when erected in the rear yard of a permanent dwelling unit. 
8.277.2  Occupancy of recreational vehicles. No recreational vehicle shall be occupied as a temporary or permanent residential living quarters except as follows. Recreational vehicles can be occupied as temporary dwellings as a temporary accessory use, for no more than ten days in any two-month period, only if there is a permanent dwelling unit as a principal use on the lot, and only if the vehicle is parked in the side or rear yard of the property, outside of any building setback area. No more than one recreational vehicle can be so occupied on the same lot. This shall not apply to recreational vehicles parked in a lawfully permitted RV Park as set forth and defined in the City of Emerson zoning ordinance. 
8.277.3  Enforcement officials. The building official along with the police department are empowered to enforce this division. The building official shall have the power to revoke a certificate of occupancy and to order a building be vacated, in cases of threat to the public health, safety or welfare. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity who shall do anything prohibited by this division as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended or which shall fail to do anything required by this division as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be subject to an enforcement action. 
8.277.4  Right of inspection. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this division, or whenever any official enforcing this division has have reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the official, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the city shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, including inspection warrants or search warrants. No warrant shall be required to investigate visible and open violations or uses. 
8.277.5  Interference with enforcement. When the enforcing official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any others persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this division. 
8.277.6  Persons who may be cited. Owners are ultimately responsible for the condition of their property and ensuring that their property and all activity occurring on such property is in compliance with this division. For any violation, both the owner of the property and/or the individual agent, tenant or invitee of the owner responsible for the violation may be cited, where appropriate. Agents of the owner would include, but not be limited to, developers, builders, contractors, and sub-contractors. Tenants and invitees would include, but not be limited to, any renter, leaseholder, owner of any vehicle or structure on the property, or other person conducting an activity on the property who is not a trespasser. Corporations and companies responsible for the work may be cited in addition to or in lieu of citations issued to the actual individuals on site committing violations. 
(A)  Daily violations. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation, subjecting the offender to a new citation, or other civil or criminal proceeding. 
(B)  Multiple violations. Each separate action, omission, or occurrence relating to any specific provision of this division shall be a separate violation, subjecting the offender to a separate citation. Any offender may be cited with a maximum of ten citations per day. 
8.277.7  Criminal prosecution. The enforcement officials may issue criminal citations for violations of this division, or violation of any stop-work order. 
(A)  Criminal prosecutions for violation of this division shall be commenced by the completion, signing, and service of a citation by an authorized enforcement official. No warning need be issued prior to a citation being issued. The original of the citation shall be personally served upon the accused, his or her authorized representative or, if a corporation, an officer of the corporation or its on-site representative or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and a copy shall be promptly filed with the municipal court. 
(B)  Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial in municipal court, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the official who completes and serves it. 
(C)  Any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall thereafter be arrested on the warrant of the municipal court and be required to post a bond for his or her future appearance. 
(D)  The city attorney, or another attorney designated by the city may act as prosecuting attorney for violations of this division. 
(E)  Persons cited criminally are also subject to the other penalties within the jurisdiction of the municipal court, including incarceration of up to 60 days, community service, and probation. 
8.277.8  Civil fines and proceedings. In addition to or in lieu of any other remedy, the city may seek injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate relief in superior court to enjoin or prevent a violation of any provision of this division. Such action may also seek civil fines at the mandatory rates specified in sec. 8.1 for violation of this division, and may additionally seek the costs of restitution, and any other costs associated with the action to enjoin or prevent any violation of any provision of this division. The city shall be entitled to its reasonable attorney's fees and costs for bringing an action in superior court wherein any relief is granted or fine assessed. 
8.277.9  Revocation of permission. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this division, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this division, upon determination by the building official that the approval was in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this division. 
Sec. 8.278. - Minimum fines. 
8.278.1  Fine schedule. Fines assessed under this division shall be assessed according to the following mandatory minimum schedule, whether assessed as a civil fine in superior court, or assessed as a criminal penalty upon conviction in municipal court. In no event shall a fine be reduced below the mandatory minimum, as set forth below. Fines may be increased by mandatory add-ons under state law. As a deterrent to violation, second and subsequent violations by the same offender of any provision of this division, whether violations of the same or different provisions of this division as the initial violation, and whether involving the same or different property, shall increase the fine owing. However, repeated citations for the same violation on a second and subsequent days shall not count as a subsequent violation, but shall rather be assessed at the same rate as the initial violation. 
(A)  First violation. For the first violation of any provision of this division by any violator (whether an individual or corporation), the minimum fine shall be $200.00. 
(B)  Second violation. For the second violation of any provision of this division (whether the same or different as the first violation) by the same violator (whether an individual or corporation), the minimum fine shall be $400.00. 
(C)  Third and subsequent violations. For the third and subsequent violation of any provision of this division (whether the same or different as the prior two violations) by the same violator (whether an individual or corporation), the minimum fine shall be $600.00. 
Secs. 8.279—8.290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - RECREATION VEHICLE PARKS 

Sec. 8.291. - Purpose. 
The city council finds that properly planned and operated recreational vehicle communities (i.e., recreational vehicle (RV) parks): (1) promote the safety and health of the residents of such communities and of other nearby communities; (2) encourage economical and orderly development of such communities and of other nearby communities. It is, therefore, declared to be the policy of the city to eliminate and prevent health and safety hazards and to promote the economical and orderly development and utilization of land by providing for planned and supervised recreational vehicle communities by providing for the standards and regulations necessary to accomplish these purposes. This division is enacted in order to achieve orderly development of recreational vehicle parks (RV parks), to promote and develop the use of land to minimize possible impacts, and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public 
Sec. 8.292. - Applicability. 
This division shall apply to any recreational vehicle park to be located within the city limits. 
Sec. 8.293. - Definitions. 
The following words shall have the following meanings within this division: 
Accessory structure. Any structural addition to the recreational vehicle or site, including awnings, cabanas, carports, garages, porches, storage cabinets, storage sheds, and similar appurtenant structures. 
Administrator, a.k.a. zoning administrator, shall mean city manager or designee. 
Biodegradable. Means capable of being decomposed by biological agents, especially bacteria. 
Controlling interest. A person or developer who controls at least 51 percent of ownership. 
Dry hydrant. An un-pressurized, permanently installed pipe that has one end below the water level of a lake, pond or container. 
Full-time employee. A person who is responsible for maintenance of the RV park seven days per week. This person may or may not be the owner of the RV park. 
Licensee or agent. A person who may or may not own the RV park but is person responsible for the day to day operations including records and license of the park. 
Opaque fence. A fence made of solid materials designed to shield from public view the RV park (i.e. is difficult to see through or perceive). 
Public use telephone. A telephone used by registrants of the RV park for emergency purposes. 
Recreational vehicle or RV. A camper, camp trailer, travel trailer, house car, motor home, trailer bus, trailer coach, fifth wheel or similar vehicle, with or without motive power, designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel use or emergency occupancy, constructed with integral wheels to make it mobile and/or towable by motor vehicle. 
Recreational vehicle park or RV park. Any lot, tract, or parcel of land upon which accommodation is provided for two or more recreational vehicles used as living or sleeping quarters by the day, week, or month, whether a charge is or is not made. A recreational vehicle park is a unified development of recreational vehicle spaces provided for recreational vehicle use with or without community facilities and permitted permanent buildings. 
Recreational vehicle site or RV site. That part of a lot or area in a recreational vehicle park or RV park that has been reserved for the placement of one recreational vehicle or RV. 
Sample well site. A connection at the property line where the customer's line and city line connect shall be installed a vertical riser of four inches in circumference, shall extend four to six inches above grade, for the detection of non-biodegradable materials. 
Sec. 8.294. - License. 
A.  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any RV park within the city limits unless he/she holds a valid license issued annually by the City of Emerson in the name of such person for the specific park. The applicant shall make all applications for the licenses on forms furnished by the City of Emerson, which shall issue a license upon compliance with the provisions of this division. 
B.  Hearing on denial. Any person whose application for a license under this division has been denied may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on this matter before the planning and zoning commission with recommendation forwarded to city council for approval or disapproval. 
C.  Application for renewal. Application for renewal of a license shall be made in writing by the licensee on forms furnished by the City of Emerson on or before December 31 of each year. Such application shall contain any changes in the information occurring after the original license was issued or the latest renewal granted. 
D.  Fee. All applications shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the City of Emerson fee schedule. 
E.  Approval of transfer. Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the City of Emerson within ten days after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any RV park. Application for transfer of a license shall be made within ten calendar days after notification of change covered in this subsection. Within 30 calendar days thereafter, the City of Emerson shall act on the application for license transfer and it shall be approved if the RV park is in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
F.  Transfer fee. All applications for license transfer shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the City of Emerson fee schedule. 
G.  Suspension. 
1.  Whenever, upon inspection of any RV park, the city finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provisions of this division applicable to such park, the city shall give notice in writing to the owner and/or manager of the park, and if such conditions or practices have not been corrected in the time frame set forth in the notice, the city will suspend the license and give notice of such suspension. Upon suspension of the license, the licensee shall cease operation of such park. 
2.  The suspension of the license may be appealed to the city council as set forth in subsection B of section 8.296. 
Sec. 8.295. - Inspections. 
A.  Authorized. The administrator is hereby authorized to make such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with this division. 
B.  Entry on premises. The administrator shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property within the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this division. 
Sec. 8.296. - Notices, hearings and orders. 
A.  Notice of violation. Whenever it is determined that there are grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this division, the City of Emerson shall give notice of such alleged violation to the licensee or agent, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall: 
1)  Be in writing. 
2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance. 
3)  Allow ten days for compliance. 
4)  Be served upon the licensee or his agent; provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such licensee or agent when a copy thereof has been served in person or sent by certified mail to his/@@her last-known address. 
5)  Contain an outline of remedial action that, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this division. 
6)  After all procedures outlined above are exhausted citations may be issued. 
If a municipality mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with section 8.296 A and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
B.  Appeal from notice. Any person affected by any notice that has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this division applicable to such park may [request] a hearing before the planning and zoning commission; provided that such person shall file within ten days after the day the notice was served, in the city secretary's office, with a copy to the office of the administrator, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds thereof. The decision of the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the city council. The filing request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension, except in the case of an order issued under subsection D of this section. 
C.  Issuance of order. After such hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying, or withdrawing the notice of violation, which order shall be served by certified mail upon the petitioner. Any failure to comply with an order sustaining or modifying the finding of a violation shall constitute grounds for immediate revocation of the license of the park affected by the order. 
D.  Order without notice. Whenever the city finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, the designated official may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring the action to be taken as deemed necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, such order shall be effective immediately, but upon written petition to the city shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of subsection C of this section shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
Sec. 8.297. - Violations declared nuisance; abatement; penalty. 
Any noncompliance with this division is hereby deemed a nuisance. The city may abate and remove the nuisance and punish the person(s) responsible for causing or allowing the nuisance condition to exist. Any person(s) violating this division shall be subject to a fine for each provision violated, and each day that there is a failure to comply with the terms of any provision of this division is declared to be a separate offense. 
Sec. 8.298. - Site development plan. 
A site development plan must be prepared and submitted to the administrator and must include the requirements for site plans contained herein. 
Sec. 8.299. - Location and fencing. 
A.  RV parks shall be located in an area regulated by section 8.300 of this ordinance. 
B.  An opaque fence at least eight feet in height must be placed on the property line to buffer the RV park from view. The fence shall be installed on both sides and at the rear of the property. The fence must be of metal or galvanized materials. No wood fences are allowed. 
C.  Conditional use permit. RV parks are allowed under C2, MU and MU-2 zoning as a conditional use. 
Sec. 8.300. - Size and density. 
Each RV park must have a minimum size of ten acres. The maximum site density for RV parks shall be 15 sites per acre. Only one recreational vehicle is permitted per recreational vehicle site. 
Sec. 8.301. - Size of individual sites; pad requirements; landscaping. 
A.  Each recreational vehicle site within the RV park shall have a minimum area of 1,950 square feet and shall be at least 30 feet wide and 65 feet in depth. The sites shall be designed as pull-through for ease of entering and leaving the site. A roadway is therefore required to the front and rear. In addition, the space shall be clearly marked identifying the space number. 
B.  The left 1/3 (10 x 65) of the site or driver's side must be planted with grass and other landscaping; the middle (10 x 65) must be paved with cement and the remaining 1/3 or passenger side can be paved with either cement, asphalt, crushed rock or similar material. The middle portion is to be used for the parking of the recreational vehicle with the paved area on the right used as a parking or patio area. 
Sec. 8.302. - Street access; street lighting. 
A.  Each recreational vehicle site within the RV park shall have access to an internal private roadway, which shall have access to a public street. The entrance of the internal roadway, pavement width, and other roadway requirements set forth within the City of Emerson development regulations may be required to be enlarged, however never decreased, due to the large areas needed for the safe operation of RVs. Dead-end streets are not allowed. 
B.  Metal signs shall be placed along the emergency access lane, by the owner or agent of the RV park stating that parking is prohibited. The sign type, size, height and location shall be approved by the city. 
C.  Adequate street lighting for the RV park shall be approved by the city. 
Sec. 8.303. - Required facilities. 
A.  Each RV park must have an office for the manager of the RV park, and a bathroom and shower facilities, as well as laundry facilities. All facilities used by residents must be well lit inside and out during the night hours. All facilities must meet applicable codes adopted by the city. 
B.  All RV parks shall have at least one recreation area, located as to be free of traffic hazards, easily accessible to all park residents and centrally located where topography permits. Not less than eight percent of the gross park area shall be devoted to recreational facilities. Recreation areas include space for community buildings and community use facilities such as restroom and shower facilities, adult recreation (basketball court or tennis court) and playgrounds for children, and swimming pools, but not including vehicle parking, maintenance and utility areas. 
Sec. 8.304. - Soil and ground cover. 
Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of the RV parks shall be paved, covered with stone, rock, or other similar solid material, or protected with vegetative cover that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust. 
Note. All pavement shall be kept in good repair. 
Sec. 8.305. - Prohibited placement of recreational vehicle. 
No recreational vehicle shall be occupied as a temporary or permanent residential living quarter except as follows. Recreational vehicles can be occupied as temporary dwellings as a temporary accessory use, for no more than ten days in any two-month period, only if there is a permanent dwelling unit as a principal use on the lot, and only if the vehicle is parked in the side or rear yard of the property, outside of any building setback area. No more than one recreational vehicle can be so occupied on the same lot. This shall not apply to recreational vehicles parked in a lawfully permitted RV park as set forth in this division. 
Sec. 8.306. - Area designated for RV parks. 
The area designated for the placement of recreational vehicle parks shall be established on the official City of Emerson zoning map. 
Sec. 8.307. - Drainage. 
The ground surface in all parts of the RV park shall be graded and designed to drain all stormwater, surface water in a safe, efficient manner. Drainage analysis shall be performed by a licensed professional engineer and easements for the conveyance of surface water off-site shall be obtained, if necessary. 
Sec. 8.308. - Water supply. 
Each site within an RV park shall be provided with a connection to the city water supply if available. If city water supply is not available, then a permit shall be obtained to install a well. The city must approve all proposed water facility plans prior to construction. The water distribution system shall be installed as follows: 
1)  The water supply system, fixtures and other equipment must be installed in accordance with applicable codes adopted by the city. 
2)  A master water meter shall be installed to serve the RV park. 
3)  A backflow preventer, as approved by the city, will be required to be placed at the property line on the discharge side of the master meter. In addition, one must be placed at each of the connections for each RV site and located on the left side of the site. 
4)  Water riser service branch lines shall extend at least four inches above ground elevation. The branch line shall be at least three-fourths-inch. 
5)  Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipes. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of utility connections at each site. 
6)  A shut-off valve below the frost line shall be provided near each water riser pipe. 
7)  The owner/operator shall have complete maintenance responsibility for the water system within the RV park. 
8)  The city has no maintenance responsibility for service lines within the RV park. The responsibility of the city stops at the property line. 
Sec. 8.309. - Wastewater facilities. 
Each site within the RV park shall be provided with a connection for wastewater if available. If city wastewater is not available, then a permit shall be obtained prior to placement of an on-site sewage facility. All proposed wastewater service lines shall be connected to the city wastewater system if available. 
On-site sewage facilities may be permitted if city utilities are not available. The city must approve all proposed wastewater facility plans prior to construction. The wastewater distribution system shall be installed as follows: 
1)  The wastewater system and materials must be installed in accordance with applicable codes adopted by the city. 
2)  Each site shall be provided with a four-inch diameter wastewater riser and shall extend above grade four to six inches. The wastewater riser pipe shall be so located on each stand so that the wastewater connection to the RV drain outlet will approximate a vertical position. Each inlet shall be provided with a gastight seal when connected to a recreational vehicle or have a gastight seal plug when not in service. The plug shall be that of a spring-loaded device. 
3)  The wastewater connection to each site shall consist of a single four-inch service line without any branch lines, fittings, or connections. All joints shall be watertight. 
4)  Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least four to six inches above the ground elevation. 
5)  Each collection wastewater line shall provide a vent extending a minimum of ten feet in height. 
6)  The owner/operator shall have complete maintenance responsibility for the wastewater system within the RV park. The responsibility of the city stops at the property line. 
7)  Each RV park shall be required to install at the property line, where connection to the city sewer is made, a sample well site as defined herein. The sample well site shall be installed according to city Code. 
8)  All chemicals entering the city sewer shall be biodegradable. 
Sec. 8.310. - Electrical service. 
Each site within the RV park shall be provided with electrical service. All electrical service shall be underground and installed in accordance with the City of Emerson building code. The electrical service shall be installed as follows: 
1)  A master electric meter shall be installed to serve the RV park. 
2)  The city has no maintenance responsibility for service lines within the RV park. 
3)  The location of all underground lines shall be clearly marked by surface signs at approved intervals. 
4)  Power supply to each site shall be a minimum of one 20-amp and one 50-amp power supply. 
5)  Outlets (receptacles or pressure connectors) shall be housed in an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., approved weather proof outlet box. 
6)  A watertight seal shall be provided for underground conduit in floodplain installations and a riser extending a minimum of two feet above the floodplain elevation shall be provided. 
Sec. 8.311. - Sanitary facilities. 
A.  Each RV park shall provide the following sanitary facilities as listed below: 
1)  One toilet or stool for the female sex for every 20 sites or fraction thereof (minimum of one is required) for the first 120 sites, and one per 40 sites thereafter. 
2)  One toilet or stool and one urinal stall for the male sex for every 20 sites or fraction thereof (minimum of one is required) for the first 120 sites, and one per 40 sites thereafter. 
3)  One washbasin shall be provided within the toilet room for every two toilets or fraction thereof (a minimum of one is required). 
4)  One shower shall be provided for each sex for each 20 sites or fraction thereof (minimum of one is required for each sex) for the first 120 sites, and one per forty sites thereafter. 
5)  All toilets and shower facilities shall be placed in properly constructed buildings and located not more than 200 feet from any recreational vehicle site. 
6)  Buildings shall be well lit at all times, day or night, well ventilated with screened openings, and constructed of moisture proof material to permit rapid and satisfactory cleaning, scouring and washing. 
7)  The floors shall be of concrete or other impervious material, elevated not less than four inches above grade, and each room shall be provided with floor drains. 
8)  A slop sink or basin with water supply shall be in each restroom (male and female) and at least one in the laundry facility, and shall be constructed in accordance with design, size and materials approved by the city. 
B.  Toilet and bathing facilities shall be in separate rooms or partitioned apart in any manner as to provide privacy and promote cleanliness. Each toilet provided in a community toilet house shall be partitioned apart from any other toilet in the same room. The floor surface around the commode shall not drain into the shower floor. 
C.  Toilet floors and walls shall be of impervious material, painted white or a light color, and kept clean at all times. Shower stalls shall be of tile, plaster, cement or some other impervious material and shall be kept clean at all times. If a shower stall is of some impervious material other than tile, cement or plaster, it shall be white or some light color and kept clean at all times. The floor of any bathroom, other than the shower stall, shall be of some impervious material, and the walls of the bathroom, other than the shower stall, shall be papered with canvas and wallpaper, or an equivalent washable surface kept clean at all times. 
Sec. 8.312. - Storage, collection and disposal of refuse and garbage. 
Each RV park shall be provided with safe and adequate facilities for the collection and removal of waste and garbage. Storage, collection, and handling shall be conducted so as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, or fire hazards. Every site shall be located within 200 feet of a refuse facility measured along the RV park internal roadway. Trash dumpsters shall be screened on three sides. 
Sec. 8.313. - Telephone. 
A minimum of one land line telephone shall be provided in an easily accessible location 24 hours a day, seven days a week for emergency use. 
Sec. 8.314. - Accessory structures. 
The individual sites within the RV park are not allowed to have accessory structures as defined herein. 
Sec. 8.315. - Registration of guests. 
Each person renting a site within a RV park shall provide the following information to the owner, manager, operator or person in charge of the RV park: 
1)  Name; 
2)  Full address of permanent residence; 
3)  Automobile and recreational vehicle license plate number and the state in which each is registered; 
4)  Driver's license number of the owner; 
5)  The number or letter of the site being rented; 
6)  Date of arrival and departure. 
Sec. 8.316. - Control of insects, rodents and other pests. 
Grounds, buildings and structures in the RV park shall be maintained free of the accumulation of high grass and weeds and debris so as to prevent rodent and snake harborage or the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other pests. 
The RV park owner or manager shall be responsible for maintaining the entire area of the park free of dry brush, leaves, limbs and weeds. 
Sec. 8.317. - Fire safety standards; fire hydrants. 
A.  Open fires shall be allowed only in a manner and within a container approved by the Bartow County fire chief. 
B.  A fire hydrant(s) must be placed such that each recreational vehicle site is at least 600 feet from one. 
C.  If a RV park is to be placed in an area where city water is not available, the RV park owner must have a pond located on the property filled at all time with a minimum capacity of 20,000 gallons with a dry hydrant installed. A container capable of holding a minimum of 20,000 gallons with a dry hydrant installed shall also be allowed and/or substituted for a pond. The dry hydrant outlet shall be of standard size or four inches. 
Sec. 8.318. - Permanent occupancy prohibited. 
No RV park or recreational vehicle therein shall be used as a permanent residence for any period of time, notwithstanding section 8.305, except for permanent full-time employees of the RV park. No more than one space shall be allowed for use as a permanent residence for full time employees. Occupancy or parking of a recreational vehicle within the RV park extending beyond six consecutive months in any 12-month period shall be presumed permanent occupancy and is hereby prohibited. 
A recreational vehicle may not return for a period of 60 days following six months consecutively. 
Secs. 8.319—8.799. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SIGN REGULATION 

Sec. 8.800. - Purpose and intent. 
A.  Purpose of sign regulation. Regulation of the location, size, placement, and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services, and facilities in the city without difficulty and confusion, to improve the general attractiveness of the city, to take advantage of the beauty of the city's natural environment, and to protect property values therein. Such regulation is also necessary to facilitate and aid in the identification and location of businesses in the city in the event of police, fire, or other emergencies and to avoid confusion and delay in response to such emergencies. Accordingly, it is the intention of the city to establish regulations governing the display of signs that will: 
(1)  Promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Provide for the expression of commercial and noncommercial speech by citizens and businesses in the city. 
(3)  Enhance the economy of the city and the success of business and industry by promoting the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs. 
(4)  Restrict signs and lights that increase clutter or which increase the probability of traffic accidents by obstructing or confusing the vision of drivers, bicyclists, or pedestrians. 
(5)  Promote signs that are aesthetically compatible with their surroundings. 
(6)  Ensure proper maintenance, for safety and structural soundness, as well as the appearance and functionality of signs. 
The purpose of this ordinance, therefore, is to support the economic vitality of the city through adequate identification of occupants, services, and events; to safe-guard life through traffic safety; to protect the use of property, property values, and the public welfare; and to afford adequate opportunity for self-expression through free speech. These purposes are realized by regulating and controlling the number, location, size, sign type, and type of illumination of signs and sign structures so that all person have ample opportunity to be equally heard and the public health, safety, and general welfare are adequately secured. 
B.  Regulation of signs all signs hereafter erected on any property, building or other structure within the City of Emerson shall comply with the physical requirements of this ordinance. 
C.  Intent of sign regulations. Notwithstanding any other restrictions in this sign ordinance, any sign authorized under this ordinance can contain any commercial or noncommercial message, other than messages containing obscenity as defined herein, or other than a sign that advertises an activity that is illegal under Georgia or federal laws. 
Sec. 8.801. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases have specific meanings as used in this ordinance: 
Awning: A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway, or window from the elements. Awnings are often made of fabric or flexible plastic supported by a rigid frame, and may be retracted into the face of the building. 
Awning sign: See "Building sign." 
Banner: A sign other than an official or personal flag, made of paper, cloth, thin plastic, or similar lightweight material, and usually containing a message or logo. 
Building sign: A sign that in any manner is fastened to, projects from, or is placed or painted upon the exterior wall, window, door, or roof of a building. The term "building sign" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1)  Awning sign: A sign imposed, mounted or painted upon an awning. 
2)  Mansard sign: A sign imposed, mounted or painted upon a mansard and not extending above the top of the mansard. 
3)  Marquee sign: Any sign attached flat against the marquee or permanent sidewalk canopy of a building and not extending above the top of the marquee. 
4)  Parapet sign: A sign imposed, mounted or painted on a parapet and not extending above the top of the parapet. 
5)  Projecting sign: A sign affixed to a wall and extending more than eight inches from the surface of such wall, usually perpendicular to the wall surface. 
6)  Roof sign: A sign that is mounted on, applied to, structurally supported by the roof of a building or erected in such a manner as to appear above the roof line. 
7)  Under-canopy sign: A display attached to the underside of a marquee or canopy and protruding over private sidewalks. 
8)  Wall (or façade) sign: a sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior wall of a building, with the sign face parallel to the wall, and extending from the surface of the wall no more than eight inches. 
9)  Window sign: A sign that is placed on or behind a windowpane or glass door and intended to be viewed from outside of the building. 

Canopy: A permanent roof-like structure projecting from a building and open on at least one side for the purpose of shielding a pedestrian walkway from the elements, or a freestanding roof-like structure supported by columns intended to shield a vehicular driveway or service area from the elements. 
Changeable copy sign: 
1)  Automatic changeable copy sign: A sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or through mechanical means. 
2)  Manual changeable copy sign: A sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, e.g., reader boards with changeable letters. Copy shall mean words and numbers. 
Double-faced sign: A sign structure with two sign faces that are parallel (back-to-back) or that form an angle to one another, where each sign face is designed to be seen from a different direction and the two sign faces are separated from each other at their farthest point by no more than three feet. 
Freestanding sign: A sign permanently attached to the ground and this is wholly independent of any building or other structure. The term "freestanding sign" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1)  Pole sign: A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole, columns, or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face or lowest sign module is not in contact with the ground. 
2)  Ground sign: A freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the sign face or structure is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous back-ground for the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign. Also referred to as a "monument sign." 
Illuminated signs: 
1)  Internally illuminated sign: Any sign that is illuminated by an artificial light source from within the sign structure over any or all of its sign face. 
2)  Externally illuminated sign: Any sign that is partially or completely illuminated at any time by an artificial light source that directly or indirectly illuminates the face of the sign from outside the sign structure. 
Incidental sign: A small sign, emblem, or decal no larger than two square feet. Such signs are normally located on doors, windows, and gas pumps, and are generally not readily visible or legible from public rights-of-way. 
Interstate sign: Sometimes referred to as billboard and/or project identity sign. A freestanding sign with a sign area greater than 600 square feet. Additionally, they may include LED/LCD signs. 
LED/LCD sign: Any sign or portion thereof that uses light emitting diode technology or other similar semiconductor technology to produce an illuminated image, picture or message, of any kind whether the image, picture, or message is moving or stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses LED/LCD technology of any kind, whether conventional (using discrete LED/LCDs), surface mounted (otherwise known as individually mounted LED/LCDs), transmissive, organic light-emitting diodes (OLED), light-emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL), or any other similar technology. For purposes of this ordinance a LED/LCD sign is not considered a form of a changeable copy sign. 
Mansard: A steeply sloped, roof-like facade architecturally similar to a building wall. 
Marquee: A permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building. 
Marquee sign: See under "Building sign." 
Minimum front setback: The minimum distance required by the zoning on a property between an adjoining street and the facade of a principal building on the property. 
Monument sign: See "Ground sign" under "Freestanding sign." 
Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric or similar material designed to move in the wind; pennants are often suspended from a rope, wire, or string in series. The term "pennant" shall not include a "banner" or an "official or personal flag" as regulated in this ordinance. 
Planned center: A single office, commercial, or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two or more principal businesses that are separately owned and have no corporate relationship. 
Principal freestanding sign: The main or largest freestanding sign or signs on a property. 
Project entrance sign: A permanent freestanding sign located at a discernible entrance into a multifamily development, or into a development containing multiple lots, such as, but not limited to, a particular residential or commercial subdivision, business center, office park or industrial park. Additionally, they may include LED/LCD signs. 
Project identity sign: A permanent free standing sign permissible for a MU or MU-2 development, which meets the standards for a billboard and/or interstate sign, with exception to the uniform size requirement (Sec. 5.68 Para. B,4). Additionally, they may include LED/LCD signs. All such signs may not exceed 672 square feet. 
Projecting sign: See under "Building sign." 
Roadway controlled access: A state or federal highway (usually median divided) that, by design, may only be accessed from: 
1)  Public streets where such access is provided by grade separated interchanges consisting of bridge(s) and ramps so that traffic entering and exiting said highway can safely merge into and exit from the highway at the posted speed limit; or 
2)  Public streets where such access is provided at grade level intersections which are designed and permitted by the Georgia DOT as part of the highway construction project; or 
3)  Right in/right out only private drives without median cuts and where such private drives are permitted by the Georgia DOT due to extenuating circumstances such as no other means of access. 
Controlled access roadways are distinguished from other state and federal roads in that the private driveway access is the exception to the rule rather than the norm. This definition does not include "limited access roadways." 
Roadway, limited access: A median divided state or federal highway which, by design, may only be accessed from public streets and where such access is provided by grade separated interchanges consisting of bridge(s) and ramps so that traffic entering and exiting said highway can safely merge into and exit from the highway at the posted speed limit (an example would be an interstate highway). This definition does not include "controlled access roadways." 
Roof sign: See under "Building sign." 
Sign: Any structure, display, or device that is used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to a business, institution, organization, person, idea, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design characteristics, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement, or illumination. 
Sign face: That portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by open space or by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
Sign module: Each portion or unit of a sign face that is clearly separable from other such units by virtue of the expression of a complete thought, message, logo, or idea. 
Sign structure: All elements of a freestanding sign, including the sign face, background, or decorative elements related to the presentation or support of the sign's message, and the structural supports. 
Standard informational sign: A sign with an area not greater than 4½ square feet, with a sign face for short-term use, containing no reflective elements, flags or projections, and which, when erected, stands at a height not greater than 2½ feet, and is mounted on a wooden stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than 1½ inches. 
Temporary event: An activity having a specific duration or the end of which is related to a specific action, usually lasting for only a few days or months at a time. Temporary events include but are not limited to such activities as: 
1)  The offering of a property or premises for sale or rent; 
2)  Special business promotions, such as but not limited to "grand openings," "close-out sales," carnivals and seasonal sales events; 
3)  A yard sale; 
4)  The construction of a building or development project, or the rehabilitation, remodeling, or renovation of a building; or 
5)  A special event by a nonprofit organization, such as a community fair or religious assembly. 
Tenant: A natural person, business or other entity that occupies land or buildings by title, under a lease, or through payment of rent; an occupant, inhabitant, or dweller of a place. 
Tri-vision sign: A sign designed with a series of triangular slats that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show three different sign messages in rotation. For purposes of this ordinance, a tri-vision sign is not a changeable copy sign. 
Under-canopy sign: See under "Building sign." 
Vehicular sign: Any sign placed, mounted, painted on or affixed to a motor vehicle, freight, flatbed or storage trailer or other conveyance when same are placed or parked in such a manner as to be viewed or intended to be viewed from the public rights-of-way except that this definition shall not apply when: 
1)  Such conveyances are actively being used to transport persons, goods or services in the normal course of business; 
2)  When such conveyances are parked in an inconspicuous area; or 
3)  When such conveyances are actively being used for storage of construction materials for, and on the same lot with a bona fide construction project for which building and other applicable permits have been issued and where construction is underway and provided said conveyances are located within designated storage areas. 
Wall sign: See under "Building sign." 
Window sign: See under "Building sign." 
Sec. 8.802. - Applicability. 
A.  Signs that are regulated. The regulations and requirements of this ordinance apply to all signs that are or are intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way or adjacent property, or that are intended to be viewed from outdoor areas of public property. 
B.  Exemptions; general. Each of the following types of signs are allowed on any property and are exempt from the restrictions imposed by this ordinance: 
1)  Official signs. Signs placed by or at the direction of a governmental body, governmental agency or public authority. 
2)  Property address signs. Property addresses are not signs when displayed on a building or mailbox. 
3)  Holiday decorations. Holiday decorations and displays erected on a seasonal basis that are not intended to be permanent in nature. 
4)  Incidental signs. Small signs and postings as defined in this ordinance of no more than two square feet. 
Sec. 8.803. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited: 
1)  Animated and flashing signs. Signs other than automatic changeable copy signs that flash, blink, rotate, revolve, or have moving parts or visible bulbs. Signs containing reflective elements that sparkle in the sunlight or otherwise simulate illumination during daylight hours are not allowed. 
2)  Attached and painted signs. Signs that are painted on or attached to trees, fence posts, utility poles, or rocks or other natural features, are not allowed, with the exception that signs posted on fence posts or utility poles by the owners of those structures are allowed to the extent they otherwise meet the standards of this ordinance. 
3)  Banners. Banners are not allowed except as provided for temporary signage under this ordinance. When allowed as temporary signage, a banner shall be allowed only as wall or window signage and shall be placed flush upon the wall or window to which it is attached. Banners shall not be hung as under-canopy signs, flown as flags, or used as any other form of sign. 
4)  Dilapidated signs. Signs that are dilapidated or in such condition as to create a hazard, nuisance or to be unsafe or fail to comply with any provision of the building code of the city are not allowed. 
5)  Festoons. Strings of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pennants, streamers, pinwheels, or other devices or long narrow strips of fabric, plastic, or other pliable material designed to move in the wind, are not allowed, except as provided for temporary signage under this ordinance. 
6)  Inflatable signs. A sign that is intended to be expanded by air or other gas for its proper display or support is not allowed. 
7)  Obscene signs. Obscene signs, as defined by the State of Georgia at O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80(b), are not allowed. 
8)  Obstructions. No sign shall obstruct any fire escape, window, door, or opening usable for fire prevention or suppression, or prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. No sign shall extend above a parapet wall, be affixed to a fire escape, or interfere with any opening required for ventilation. 
9)  Portable signs. A sign designed to be transported or easily relocated and not attached to the ground, such as, but not limited to, the following, is not allowed (except as provided for temporary signage under this ordinance): 
a)  A sign designed to be temporarily placed upon the ground and not otherwise affixed to it; 
b)  A sign mounted on a trailer, with or without wheels; 
c)  An A-frame or sandwich board sign; or 
d)  A vehicular sign. 
10)  Private signs placed on public property. Any sign posted or erected on utility poles, governmental signs, public rights-of-way or any other public property is not allowed, except those placed by agencies of the federal, state, or local government. 
11)  Roof signs. Roof signs, including signs painted or adhered on roofs, are not allowed. This prohibition does not apply to the fascia portion of a mansard roof, or to the face of a parapet wall, provided that the sign must not extend above the top of the mansard roof or parapet wall. 
12)  Signs imitating public warning or traffic devices. Any sign that displays intermittent lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles, and any sign that uses the words "stop," "danger," or other message or content in a manner that might mislead or confuse a driver, is not allowed. No red, green, or yellow illuminated sign shall be permitted within 300 feet of any traffic light. 
13)  Sound or smoke emitting signs. A sign that emits or utilizes in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing, or a sign that emits smoke, vapor or odors, is not allowed. 
14)  Signs advertising illegal activity. Signs that advertise an activity illegal under Georgia or federal law are not allowed. 
Sec. 8.804. - General requirements applying to all signs. 
A.  Conformance to building codes. 
1)  In addition to any sign permit required under this ordinance, a building permit shall be obtained from the city prior to installation or placement of any freestanding sign having a sign structure area greater than 15 square feet or any building sign having a sign face area greater than six square feet. All signs for which a building permit is required shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with all building code and electrical code requirements. 
2)  Plans required for issuance of a building permit for a sign shall be certified as to conformance with all structural and wind load resistive standards of the building code by a qualified structural engineer, or be prepared using standard drawings prepared by a structural engineer or other qualified professional meeting or exceeding all requirements of the building code. 
3)  All signs involving internal lights or other electrical devices or circuits shall display a label certifying it as being approved by the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. 
4)  All electrical service to a sign shall be in compliance with the electrical code. 
5)  Clearance from all electrical power lines shall be in conformance with the requirements of the electrical code. 
B.  Conformance to state law. The following applies to any sign located or to be located within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of an interstate, U.S. or state-numbered highway (or any other road designated as a "primary highway" by the State of Georgia and approved by the U.S. Department of Transportation), or located or to be located beyond 660 feet of such highway but visible and intended to be read from such highway: 
1)  Such sign shall comply with all requirements of the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Act, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 et seq. 
2)  Such sign shall comply with all requirements of this ordinance. Between the Georgia and the Emerson city regulations, such sign must comply with the most restrictive requirements with respect to each and every item of regulation. 
C.  Sign maintenance. 
1)  All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in good repair and, unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, shall be given a protective coating as necessary to maintain a clean appearance and safe condition. 
2)  All signs shall be maintained in accordance with all city regulations, including any regulations concerning nuisances and vegetation. 
D.  Minimum sign setback. No sign or sign structure of any kind is authorized to extend into or above, or be anchored or placed in any portion of a public right-of-way (except official signs). Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all signs on a property are subject to the setback requirements for accessory uses under the property's zoning classification, but in no case may any portion of a sign be located less than five feet from a public right-of-way. 
E.  Principal freestanding signs; distance between. 
1)  Signs 100 square feet in area or less. Each principal freestanding sign having an area of 100 square feet or less shall be located at least 50 feet from any other principal freestanding sign on the same side of the street. The city may reduce this distance if it cannot be met due to the location of existing signs on separate but adjoining lots. Such reduction shall be the minimum required in order to maintain the greatest separation possible from such existing signs. 
2)  Signs greater than 100 square feet in area. Each principal freestanding sign having an area greater than 100 square feet shall be located at least 500 feet from any other freestanding sign having an area greater than 100 square feet, and at least 200 feet from a property where signs having an area of at least 100 square feet are not allowed. Distance measurements are to be made horizontally in all directions from the nearest edge of the sign structure. 
3)  Principal freestanding signs shall be located at least 25 feet from a side lot line, or one-half the width of the lot frontage, whichever is less. In no case may the sign be located more closely to a side lot line than the minimum required by the zoning district. 
F.  Ground clearance under signs. 
1)  Projecting signs shall not project more than three feet beyond the face of the building. Projecting signs shall provide a minimum of eight feet of clearance from ground level to the bottom of the sign. 
2)  Under-canopy signs of greater than four square feet shall be rigidly mounted, and there shall be eight feet of clearance below the base of any rigidly mounted under-canopy sign. There shall be a minimum clearance of eight feet below the base of any non-rigidly mounted under-canopy sign. 
3)  Awning, mansard and marquee signs shall be no less than eight feet above the ground when erected over pedestrian walkways at the lowest extremity of the sign. 
G.  Visibility clearance area. 
1)  No portion of a sign face, and no portion of a sign structure wider than 12 inches, between the heights of 21/2 feet and 12 feet shall be located within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets, roads, highways or railroads, or within 20 feet of the intersection of a street right-of-way and either edge of a driveway. 
2)  No sign shall be erected or maintained where, by reason of its position, design, appearance, illumination, size, shape or color, it may obstruct the view of oncoming vehicles or impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device. 
H.  Illuminated signs. 
1)  Where restricted. Signs are allowed to be externally or internally illuminated, except as follows: 
a)  External illumination must be installed so that it illuminates only the sign face and does not shine onto public rights-of-way or neighboring properties. 
b)  A sign located on single- or two-family residential property may not be illuminated. 
2)  Traffic control. No sign illumination device shall resemble an official traffic control or warning sign, nor shall it hide from view or distract from any traffic or street sign or signal. 
3)  Hazards. Illumination devices shall be placed, filtered, and shielded so direct rays will not be cast into the eyes of drivers or pedestrians. 
4)  Light pollution. Sign illumination shall not cast light directly upon adjacent properties or roadways. No illuminated signs are allowed within 100 feet of any residential zoning district or property occupied by a dwelling. 
5)  Neon tubes. No sign that has exposed neon tubes or other exposed tubes containing luminescent gas shall be used outside a building. 
6)  Exposed wires. No sign may have exposed electrical wires. 
7)  Strings of bulbs. Strings of bulbs are not permitted, except as part of a holiday celebration. 
8)  Types of illumination. 
a)  Externally-illuminated sign. An externally-illuminated sign, when permitted, shall have concealed wiring and controls, and shall have shielded and screened external light sources. 
b)  Internally-illuminated sign. Internally-illuminated signs, where permitted, must completely shield the source of light from direct view. Internally channeled or reverse-channeled letters are permitted only in instances of wall signs affixed to buildings with a front setback of more than 100 feet. 
Sec. 8.805. - Measurement of sign area and height. 
A.  Computation of sign area. In order to determine compliance with the maximum allowable sign areas permitted under this ordinance, the following shall establish how sign areas are measured. The terms "sign area" and "sign face area" are interchangeable and have the same meaning for the purpose of regulating maximum sign sizes. 
2)  Sign face area. 

a)  The area of a sign face shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of a sign face, or the combination of the areas of all such rectangles delimiting each sign module, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
b)  For signs that have no identifiable frame or border, the smallest rectangle that includes all of the sign's words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements intended to convey the sign's message shall establish the area of the sign's face. 

c)  The computation of the area of a sign face shall include the entire structure upon which the sign face is placed. 
d)  Manual changeable copy signs. 
For any sign on which any of the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are routinely changed or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements may be placed, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 

2)  Sign structure area. 
a)  The area of a sign structure shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of the surface of a sign whereon the sign face or sign modules may be placed, including all portions of a sign structure that provide a background for the sign face but are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
b)  Project entrance signs. For project entrance signs or other signs that are imposed, mounted or painted on a wall or other decorative structure, the sign structure area shall be computed as that portion of such wall or other decorative structure that is discernibly devoted to the support of the sign or, by its design or architectural treatment, intended to provide a background or frame for the sign. 
3)  Treatment of open spaces. Any open space contained within the limits of the rectangle delimiting the sign face, sign module, or sign structure shall be included in the computation of the area of such sign face, sign module, or sign structure. 
4)  Double-faced signs. For double-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel (back-to-back), or where the smallest angle formed between the two faces is 60 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For double-faced signs where the interior angle formed by the faces is more than 60 degrees, the area of the sign shall be the total area of all sides. 
B.  Measurement of sign height. The height of a sign shall be equal to the vertical distance from the average grade at the base of the sign, or from the crown of the roadway of the nearest street within 50 feet of any portion of the sign, to the highest point of any portion of the sign, whichever results in the greater sign height. Any earthen berms and elevated foundations supporting signs, signposts or other sign supports shall be included in the height of the sign. 
Sec. 8.806. - Permanent signs allowed, by land use category. 
The following tables A and B present the maximum number, size, height, and other restrictions relating to specific signage that are permitted by right in each land use category. Additional signage is permitted under this ordinance. 
A.  Principal freestanding sign—One use on property. "Principal freestanding sign—One use on property" on Table 5.1 applies to a lot where there is only one use being made of the property, such as but not limited to one single-family or two-family dwelling, one multifamily development, one public or community institution, or one business occupant. Properties that are vacant but zoned or offered for sale or lease for a particular land use also fall under this category. 
B.  Principal freestanding sign—Planned center. "Principal freestanding sign—Planned center" on Table A applies to a single commercial or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two or more principal businesses. A planned center may consist of several businesses in a single building or individual businesses in several buildings on the property. 
C.  Project entrance signs. Project entrance signs are signs located at an entrance into a residential subdivision, into a multifamily development, or into an office, commercial or industrial park consisting of two or more lots. Each project entrance sign shall not exceed the number, area or height limitations shown on Table A. 
D.  Building signs. For building signs permitted on Table B, the following shall apply: 
1)  For single-occupant buildings, the maximum allowed area for a building sign on a wall shall be calculated on the basis of the percentage of the entire area of said wall, including all windows and doors. 
2)  For multi-tenant buildings, the maximum allowed area for each building sign for each tenant shall be calculated on the basis of the percentage of the area of the wall, including all windows and doors, of that portion of the structure occupied by the tenant. 
3)  Projecting and under-canopy signs shall be limited to no more than one per tenant on a property, and each tenant shall have no more than one projecting sign or under-canopy sign, for each street that the tenant faces. 
E.  Automatic changeable copy signs. Automatic changeable copy signs are only allowed on commercial and industrial properties. 
Table A: Permitted Freestanding Signs—By Land Use Category 

 
Table B: Permitted Building Signage—By Land Use Category 

 
Sec. 8.807. - Other permanent signs allowed. 
A.  Miscellaneous freestanding signs. Freestanding signs in addition to those shown on Table A are allowed as accessory uses on a property occupied by any multifamily, commercial, industrial, or public or community use if each sign complies with all of the following: 
1)  Within the area between a street and the minimum front yard setback for principal buildings required for the zoning district, additional signs may be located within three feet of driveways that provide access into or from the property. There shall be no more than two such signs per driveway and each such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet. 
2)  Miscellaneous signs located farther from the street than the minimum required front yard setback shall be allowed as follows: 
a)  One miscellaneous sign not to exceed 64 square feet in area nor more than eight feet in height may be located on the property for each principal building on the lot. 
b)  Other miscellaneous freestanding signs are allowed beyond the minimum front yard setback on a property developed for multifamily, commercial, industrial, or public or community use, provided that such signs shall have no more than four square feet in sign face area nor more than three feet in height (except signs that are required by law to be higher than three feet high, such as those marking a handicapped parking space). 
B.  Interstate signs. Freestanding signs in addition to those shown on Table 5.1 are allowed along the interstate highway under the following provisions: 
1)  Location of interstate signs. 
a)  Interstate signs shall be located on parcels adjacent to and sharing a right-of-way boundary with I-75. 
b)  Interstate signs shall be located within an area zoned under the commercial (C-2), mixed-use (MU or MU-2) or industrial districts as specified in state law. 
2)  Number of signs per interchange. Three interstate signs are allowed per quadrant of any interchange adjacent to the interstate highway. 
3)  Height requirements. Shall not exceed 70 feet in height. All heights shall be measured from the grade level of the adjacent street to which the property on which the Interstate sign is located has access. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide for additional sign height. 
4)  Uniform size. The outside measurements of all such signs shall be 14 feet in height and 48 feet in length, with or without trim. 
5)  Illumination. All externally illuminated signs shall use base mounted, LED, fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting including but not limited to neon, animation and running lights is prohibited. 
6)  Height above interstate grade All signs shall be a minimum of ten feet above adjacent interstate pavement measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. 
7)  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face to the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
8)  Number of signs per location. No more than two sign faces may be visible from the same direction on any sign structure along I-75. Double faced, back to back and V type constructed signs shall, for the purpose of determining compliance with size and spacing limitations, be considered as one sign. 
9)  Spacing and setbacks. 
a)  Sign locations shall be no less than 500 feet apart measuring from the two closest points. 
b)  Sign structures shall be no less than ten feet nor more than 150 feet from any property or right-of-way line and shall be designated in such a manner as to fall within a clearance zone free and clear of all structures in the event of sign defect or destruction. 
c)  No interstate sign shall be located within 500 feet of a residential zoned parcel. 
d)  No interstate sign shall be located within 500 feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area or cemetery; provided, however, that such a sign may be located within 500 feet of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area or cemetery when the sign is separated by buildings or other obstructions so that the sign located in the 500 feet zone is not visible from the public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area or cemetery. 
e)  No interstate sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of another interstate sign. 
10)  Historic area locations and marsh land areas prohibited. No sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of an area of designated historic interest or marsh land area. 
Sec. 8.808. - Temporary signs. 
The following temporary signs are allowed under the provisions of this ordinance. 
A.  Official or personal flag. Any cloth, paper, thin plastic, or similar material that is displayed by hanging or flying, representing in whole the officially adopted symbol or emblem of a government, political subdivision, institution, organization, or corporation; or, a flag adopted or flown by a person as a symbol or statement, is allowed as an accessory use on any property that is used in any land use category if it complies with all of the following: 
1)  Number of flags. 
a)  No more than five official or personal flags may be displayed on a lot occupied by a single-family or two-family residential use, or a multifamily residential use. 
b)  No more than five official and personal flags may be displayed on a lot occupied by a commercial use, an industrial use, or a public or community use. 
c)  Official and personal flags shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, nor be located on flagpoles that exceed the building height limitation of the zoning district for the property where the flag is displayed. 
d)  The official flag of the United States of America shall be flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the United States for the Stars and Stripes. 
B.  Standard informational signs. 
1)  Location. Such signs are allowed on properties in all land use categories. Such signs shall be erected and maintained only with the written permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. No such sign can be placed within 50 feet of an intersection, nor shall any sign be closer than ten feet to the pavement of a driveway. 
2)  Setback. All signs on a property are subject to the setback requirements for accessory uses under the property's zoning classification, but in no case may any portion of a sign be located less than five feet from a public right-of-way. 
3)  Size. Sign area shall not exceed 4½ square feet. Height shall not be more than 2½ feet. 
4)  Number and duration. 
a)  Maximum of four for any location in which the sign provides direction. 
b)  Each sign must be legibly marked with the owner's name and telephone number. 
c)  Must be removed within ten days after the event; in the case of general advertising the sign must be moved every 14 days. 
5)  Permanence. 
a)  Nonpermanent but water-resistant construction materials may be used, such as, but not limited to, poster board, foam core board or illustration board. 
b)  The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that convey the sign's message shall be permanently applied to the sign's face; automatic or manual changeable copy shall not be allowed. 
6)  Lighting. Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
7)  Political signs. During the period of time commencing with opening of qualifications for elections and concluding with the final determination of all contests and issues resolved by that election, an unlimited number of standard informational signs may be erected. 
C.  Portable signs, banners, streamers and flags. Portable signs, banners, streamers and flags are allowed as standard informational signs on a property developed for commercial or industrial uses, subject to all provisions that pertain to standard informational signs and the following additional restrictions. 
1)  The primary purpose of this subsection is to allow additional temporary signage during special events. 
2)  Portable signs. One portable sign per developed lot or business is allowed under the following conditions and requirements: 
a)  The maximum size allowance for these devices and signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. The square footage of said portable sign, when combined with other signs on the same lot, shall not exceed the total square footage authorized for freestanding signs in the land use category. Said sign shall not have arrows, directional arrows, or flashing lights. 
b)  No portable sign shall be placed on a lot that is used for residential purposes. 
c)  The sign must be placed on the site in such a manner as to be at least five feet from the right-of-way and to not be an obstruction for traffic or visibility. 
d)  To prevent wind damage to the sign or other property, the sign must be securely anchored. 
e)  All electrical connections to the sign must be in compliance with the electrical codes as adopted by the city. 
3)  Banners, streamers and flags. 
a)  Banners, streamers and flags shall be counted towards the total square foot sign area for freestanding signs permitted for the lot on which they are placed, and when added to the area of all other signs on said lot shall not exceed the total sign area permitted for the lot. 
b)  No part of any such sign shall be located in, on or within five feet of a public right-of-way. 
D.  Weekend signs. Weekend signs are allowed as temporary signs under the following provisions. 
1)  Location. 
a)  Such signs are allowed on properties in all land use categories. 
b)  Such signs shall be erected and maintained only with the written permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. 
2)  Setback. All signs on a property are subject to the setback requirements for accessory uses under the property's zoning classification, but in no case may any portion of a sign be located less than five feet from a public right-of-way. 
3)  Size. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area nor be more than three feet in height. 
4)  Duration. Weekend signs shall be allowed only between Friday starting at 5:00 p.m. and Sunday ending at 8:00 p.m. 
5)  Permanence. 
a)  Nonpermanent but water-resistant construction materials may be used, such as, but not limited to, poster board, foam core board or illustration board. 
b)  The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that convey the sign's message shall be permanently applied to the sign's face; automatic or manual changeable copy shall not be allowed. 
6)  Lighting. Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
Sec. 8.809. - Sign permits. 
A.  Sign permits; when required. In addition to a building permit as may be required under the building code, a sign permit shall be obtained from the city prior to installation, relocation, expansion, construction or structural alteration of any permanent sign regulated under this ordinance. 
B.  Multi-tenant nonresidential projects. 
1)  A uniform sign plan is required for any multi-tenant nonresidential development, such as a shopping center, before any signs for the development or the development's tenants may be erected on the property. 
2)  The uniform sign plan shall govern the placement and design of all signs within the development as to their location, number, materials, size, letter style, and color. 
3)  A uniform sign plan shall be submitted and approved as follows: 
a)  The uniform sign plan shall consist of such drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all and every sign to be placed as freestanding and building signs within the development. 
b)  The uniform sign plan is to be submitted to the city. The uniform sign plan shall be approved within 30 days of submittal of a complete plan. Upon a finding by the city that: 
(i)  The plan provides that signs of a similar type and function within the development shall have a consistency of size, lettering style, color scheme, and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. 
(ii)  The signs proposed in the uniform sign plan shall comply with the requirements of the sign regulations ordinance in all respects. 
4)  The requirements of the approved uniform sign plan shall be recorded by the owner in the office of the clerk of superior court prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or connection to permanent power for the development, and shall be included in any sale, lease, or other transfer of right of occupancy affecting any part of the development. 
5)  All tenants of the development, whether an owner, lessee, subtenant, purchaser, or other occupant, shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. 
D.  Issuance of a sign permit. 
1)  Sign review required. For any sign requiring issuance of a sign permit under the provisions of this ordinance, sign review shall be required prior to installation, relocation, renovation, expansion, construction or reconstruction of the sign. The sign application shall be submitted to the city with the non-refundable application fee as established by the city council. 
2)  Sign permit application. 
a)  Application for signs. The application for a sign permit must include the following: 
(i)  An itemized list and a keyed site plan at a suitable scale showing the location of all existing signs and sign structures currently on the property. 
(ii)  An itemized list and a keyed site plan at a suitable scale showing the location of all proposed signs to be located on the property and all existing signs proposed to be removed. 
(iii)  A scaled drawing with dimensions and specifications, specifying materials, illumination, character sizes, colors, and support systems for each proposed sign. 
(iv)  The estimated cost of construction for each proposed sign. 
(v)  An agreement wherein the applicant shall indemnify the city against all damages, demands, or expenses of any kind caused by the sign or sign structure. 
(vi)  Any other information as may be reasonably required by the city to determine compliance with all provisions of this ordinance. 
3)  Approval of sign permit. 
a)  Once a complete application for a sign permit has been received, within 30 days the city shall review the application and either: 
(i)  Issue the permit; or 
(ii)  Inform the applicant of the reasons why the permit cannot be issued. 
b)  Upon determination that the application fully complies with the provisions of this ordinance, the building code, and all other applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances, the sign permit shall be issued by the City of Emerson. 
c)  If the city fails to act on a complete application within 30 days of receipt, it shall be deemed approved, subject to the requirements and provisions of this ordinance. 
4)  Denial and revocation. 
a)  Procedure. The city shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this ordinance, are incomplete, or contain any false material statements. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this ordinance, the city shall provide notice of revocation. Should the city deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and hand delivered or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. 
b)  Appeal. An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the city to the city council provided that the applicant files written notice of an appeal with the city clerk within ten business days of the city's decision. 
5)  Permit identification to be placed on the sign. Every sign for which a permit is issued shall be plainly marked with the name of the permittee and shall have the number of the sign permit affixed on the framework in the lower right hand area of the sign or on the sign face using a durable material so that it is easily seen and weatherproof. 
6)  Expiration of sign permit for uncompleted construction. A sign permit shall expire if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been substantially completed (to the extent of at least 60 percent completion based on the estimated cost of construction from the permit application) within six months of issuance. One six-month extension may be approved by the city for circumstances beyond the sign owner's control. 
7)  Fee schedule. The city council may from time to time, establish a schedule of fees for sign permits or modify said fee schedule as necessary to include, but not necessarily be limited to, the cost of issuing permits, making inspections and other administrative matters related to this ordinance. 
Sec. 8.810. - Variances. 
A.  Authority. 
(1)  Modifications to the restrictions on signage for a specific property or development may be requested for administrative approval. 
(2)  Such requests shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. 
B.  Application. 
A request for variance must include the following: 
(1)  A completed application for sign permit. 
(2)  A letter addressed to the planning commission requesting variance to include: 
a)  The specific section from this ordinance from which the applicant wishes to vary. 
b)  An explanation of why the variance should be granted. 
c)  How the request for variance meets to guidelines for approval as described in this ordinance. 
C.  Denial. 
If the planning commission or their designee denies the requested modification, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council provided that the applicant files written notice of an appeal with the city clerk within ten business days of the city's decision. 
D.  Approval of variance. 
Where a literal application of the terms of this ordinance, due to special circumstances, would result in an unusual hardship in an individual case, a variance may be granted where all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Exceptional conditions pertain to the property where the sign is to be located as a result of its size, shape, or topography, which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area. 
(2)  The applicant would be deprived of rights that are commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated. 
(3)  Granting the variance would not confer on the applicant any significant privileges that are denied to others similarly situated. 
(4)  The exceptional circumstances are not the result of action by the applicant. 
(5)  The requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to allow the applicant to enjoy the rights commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated. 
(6)  Granting of the variance would not violate more than one standard of this ordinance. 
(7)  Granting the variance would not result in allowing a sign that interferes with road or highway visibility or obstructs or otherwise interferes with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(8)  Where an applicant for a billboard seeks a height variance, no variance shall be permitted that results in a height in excess of 100 feet or results in visibility of the billboard in, by or to an established residential area. 
Sec. 8.811. - Nonconforming signs. 
Nonconforming signs which met all legal requirements when erected may stay in place. Nonconforming signs shall be allowed until one of the following conditions occurs: 
A.  Requirements for nonconforming signs. 
(1)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or unsightly. 
(2)  The sign has been damaged to the extent that more than minor repairs are required to restore the sign; provided that if the sign is damaged or destroyed by act of God, repairs to the sign shall be allowed. 
(3)  The property or business for which the sign was originally permitted for is sold or changes owners. 
B.  Changes to nonconforming signs. 
(1)  No changes in shape, size or design shall be allowed except to make a nonconforming sign comply with all requirements of this ordinance. 
(2)  A nonconforming sign may not be replaced by another non-conforming sign, except where changed conditions beyond control of the owner render the sign non-conforming or warrant the sign's repair. 
Sec. 8.812. - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Inspection. All signs shall be maintained in good condition as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The city shall inspect signs at regular intervals to ensure their compliance with this ordinance and safe condition. The city may, after due notice, issue a citation to any permittee for any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated, unsecure or unsafe. Such due notice shall be in writing, shall specify the sign and location, and shall state that the sign has not been properly maintained. The city shall give the permittee ten days to rectify the condition or remove the dilapidated or unsafe sign before issuing a citation. The city may cause any sign which is an immediate hazard to life or property to be removed without notice. Costs of sign removal shall be charged against the sign owner if known or a fi. fa. issued against the property on which the sign is erected. 
B.  Citation. The city may issue a citation for violation of this ordinance by any sign erected, altered, converted, or used in violation of this ordinance. 
C.  Violations, penalties, termination. Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. Violation of any provision of this ordinance will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. 
Secs. 8.813—8.899. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - (RESERVED) 

Secs. 8.900—8.999. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - (RESERVED) 

Secs. 8.1000—8.1099. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - (RESERVED) 

Secs. 8.1100—8.1199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - (RESERVED) 

Secs. 8.1200—8.1299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - (RESERVED) 

Secs. 8.1300—8.1999. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PROCEDURES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8.2000. - Administration authority. 
A.  The administrator shall administer and enforce this ordinance. If the administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for the violation or the property owner, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. 
B.  The administrator shall order discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures including illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
C.  The administrator, upon receiving any application, petition, proposal or request pertaining to this ordinance, shall determine whether such application complies with legal and procedural requirements. If it does not comply with the requirements of this ordinance, the administrator shall notify in writing the persons presenting the application, stating wherein the application is deficient. If it is determined that the application does comply with this ordinance, the administrator shall proceed to act on the application. 
Sec. 8.2001. - Schedule of fees, charges and expenses. 
The mayor and city council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for applications, permits and other matters pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk of Emerson. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
Sec. 8.2002. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements may, upon conviction thereof, be fined for each violation and/or imprisoned, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in each separate offense as set by the municipal court judge. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Emerson from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
Secs. 8.2003—8.2009. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ZONING DECISIONS 

Sec. 8.2010. - Generally. 
The text of this ordinance or the official zoning map may be amended by the mayor and city council on its own motion, or on recommendation of the planning commission, or on recommendation of a third party applicant; however, before enacting any such amendment, the mayor and city council shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon. 
Sec. 8.2011. - Application for text amendment. 
Applications to amend the text of this ordinance may be in the form of a proposal letter addressed to the administrator. Each proposal shall include such information as required by the administrator. 
Sec. 8.2012. - Application for conditional use permit or map amendment. 
Each application for a conditional use permit or to amend the official zoning map shall be filed with the administrator. Each application shall include such information as the administrator may require including, but not limited to, a plat drawn to scale showing the following: 
1.  A legal description of the tract(s) proposed to be rezoned or included in a conditional use permit; 
2.  A plat showing the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract(s) prepared by a state registered architect, engineer, or land surveyor; such plat shall also contain the present zoning classifications of all surrounding properties; 
3.  The present zoning classification tract(s) and the proposed zoning classification for the tract(s) requested to be rezoned; 
4.  The name(s) and address(es) of the owners of the land and their agents, if any; 
5.  A copy of the recorded warranty deed (or other instrument of title) which vested title to the property in the applicant; 
6.  A copy of the paid in full tax bill or a letter from the Bartow County Tax Department stating that all taxes have been paid; 
7.  All applications must be submitted by the property owner (as determined by controlling at least a 51 percent interest in the property) or the authorized agent of such property, unless initiated by the mayor and city council or planning commission. 
Sec. 8.2013. - Application for annexation. 
Each application for annexation shall be filed with the administrator. Each application shall include such information as the administrator may require. 
1.  Within five business days of accepting an application for annexation, the administrator shall give written notice to Bartow County, by certified mail- return receipt requested, along with a copy of the application for annexation received. 
2.  The city shall make plans for the extension of services to the area proposed to be annexed and shall prepare a report to be made available to the public at least 14 days prior to the public hearing. 
3.  All annexation proposals must be accompanied by an application for map amendment submitted to the administrator even if the applicant desires the city zoning district most similar to that district previously designated by Bartow County. 
Sec. 8.2014. - Standards for considering text amendments, map amendments and conditional use permits. 
A.  The City of Emerson shall consider the following when considering all zoning decisions: 
1.  The existing land uses and zoning classification of nearby property; 
2.  The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes; 
3.  The extent to which the property values of the subject property are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions; 
4.  The extent to which the destruction of property values of the subject property promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
5.  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; 
6.  Whether the subject property has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
7.  The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property; 
8.  Whether the proposed zoning will be a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
9.  Whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent and nearby property; 
B.  The City of Emerson shall also consider the following standards when considering all zoning decisions except annexations: 
1.  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policies and intent of the future land use map and comprehensive plan; 
2.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
3.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property, which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
Sec. 8.2015. - Public hearings before the planning commission of the City of Emerson. 
The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with the following procedures on each application for a zoning decision. Testimony solicited from the applicant and those interested citizens shall be considered with each application. It shall be the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof that the proposed application promotes the public health, morality and general welfare of the city. 
1.  All persons who wish to address the planning commission at a hearing on the proposed zoning application under consideration by the planning commission shall first sign up on a form to be provided by the city prior to the commencement of the hearing. 
2.  The public hearing shall be called to order by the chairperson of the planning commission. The chairperson shall explain the procedure to be followed in the public hearing. 
3.  The chairperson will read the proposed zoning application under consideration and any departmental reviews pertaining thereto prior to receiving public input on said proposed zoning decision. Proposed zoning applications shall be called in the order in which they were filed. 
4.  The chairperson shall then call each person who has signed up to speak on the zoning application before the planning commission in the order in which the persons have signed up to speak, except the applicant, who will always speak first. Prior to speaking, the speaker will identify him or herself and state his or her current address. Only those persons who signed up to speak prior to the commencement of the hearing shall be entitled to speak, unless a majority vote of the members of the planning commission allow the person to speak to the zoning application, notwithstanding the failure of the person to sign up prior to the hearing. 
5.  Each speaker shall be allowed ten minutes to address the planning commission concerning the zoning application then under consideration, unless the planning commission by majority vote of the members present, prior to or at the time of the reading of the proposed zoning application, vote to allow additional time in which to address the commission on said proposed zoning application. The speaker may initially use all of the time allotted to him to speak or he may speak and reserve a portion of his allotted time for rebuttal. The secretary of the planning commission shall be designated as the timekeeper to record the time expended by each speaker. 
6.  Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning application under consideration and shall address his remarks only to the members of the planning commission. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning application under consideration. The chairperson may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. 
7.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the chairperson from conducting the hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to ensure that the public hearing on a proposed zoning application is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
Sec. 8.2016. - Public hearings before the city council of the City of Emerson. 
The mayor and city council shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with the following procedures on each application for a zoning decision. Prior to such hearing the mayor and city council shall review the recommendation by planning commission. Testimony solicited from the applicant and those interested citizens shall be considered with each application. It shall be the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof that the proposed application promotes the public health, morality and general welfare of the city. 
1.  All persons who wish to address the city council at a hearing concerning a proposed zoning decision or application under consideration by the city council shall first sign up on a form to be provided by the city prior to the commencement of the hearing. 
2.  The mayor or his designee will read the proposed zoning decision or application under consideration and any department reviews pertaining thereto prior to receiving public input on said proposed zoning decision or application. Proposed zoning decision or applications shall be called in the order in which they were filed. 
3.  The public hearing shall be called to order by the mayor or his designee. The mayor or his designee shall explain the procedure to be followed in the public hearing. 
4.  The mayor or his designee shall then call each person who has signed up to speak on the zoning decision or application in the order in which the persons have signed up to speak, except the applicant who will always speak first. Prior to speaking, the speaker will identify himself or herself and state his or her current address. Only those persons who signed up to speak prior to the commencement of the hearing shall be entitled to speak, unless the council, in its discretion, allows the persons to speak to the zoning decision or application, notwithstanding the failure of the person to sign up prior to the hearing. 
5.  Each speaker shall be allowed ten minutes to address the council concerning the zoning decision or application then under consideration, unless the council, prior to or at the time of the reading of the proposed zoning decision or application, allows additional time in which to address the council on said proposed zoning decision or application. The speaker may initially use all of the time allotted to him to speak or he may speak and reserve a portion of his allotted time for rebuttal. The city clerk shall be designated as the timekeeper to record the time expended by each speaker. 
6.  Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning decision or application under consideration and shall address his remarks only to the council. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning decision or application under consideration. The council may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. 
7.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the council from conducting the hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to assure that the public hearing on a proposed zoning decision or application is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
Sec. 8.2017. - Planning commission actions. 
As to each application for zoning decision, the planning commission shall prepare and submit a written recommendation to approve, approve with conditions or deny the application to the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 8.2018. - Mayor and city council actions. 
So that the purpose of this article will be served and the health, public safety and general welfare secured, as to each application for zoning decision, the mayor and city council may approve, approve with conditions, deny or change the zoning classification requested, with or without prejudice, at the discretion of the mayor and city council. 
Secs. 8.2019—8.2029. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 8.2030. - Application for variance permit. 
Applications for a hearing and decision on requests for variance permits shall be filed with the administrator on forms he shall provide. Each application shall contain such information as the administrator may require to enable the planning commission to make its decision including, but not limited to, a plat drawn to scale showing the following: 
1.  All property lines; 
2.  A legal description of the tract involved; 
3.  Location of buildings and other structures, creeks, and easements referenced to the property; 
4.  North arrow, land district and land lot number; and 
5.  Location of setback lines or other requirements from which the variance is sought. 
Sec. 8.2031. - Authority. 
The planning commission shall have the powers to: 
1.  Grant variances from zoning regulations of this article in cases where strict application of such regulations would result in unnecessary hardship; but only in harmony with the spirit and intent of these regulations and is the minimum necessary to grant relief without injury to the public interest. 
2.  Every such judgment of the planning commission granting a variance shall be accompanied by a finding of fact specifying the reasons thereof. In approving variances, the planning commission shall consider all the evidence and upon its findings, supported by the testimony or by documentary testimony that such variance shall be required by one of the following causes: 
a)  Because of the existence in good faith of a nonconforming use at a time prior to the adoption of the zoning ordinance of the City of Emerson, or amendments thereto, requires the continuance of such nonconforming use. 
b)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions creating a substantial hardship to the applicant which pertain to the particular piece of property or building in question because of its size, shape or topography. 
c)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of the ordinance. 
3.  In granting any variance under the provisions of this section, the planning commission may designate such conditions in connection therewith as will, in its opinion, secure substantially the objectives of these regulations and may designate conditions to be performed or met by the user or property owner, out of regard for the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the community, including safeguards for, with respect to light, air, areas of occupancy, density of population and conformity to any master or through traffic plan, the future development of the city. 
Sec. 8.2032. - Variance permits. 
1.  Approved variance permits must be implemented within a period of 12 months. After 12 months, approval must be obtained again before building or development may begin. 
2.  Variance permits may not be granted conditioned upon the approval of an application to amend this article or to amend the official zoning map. 
3.  Variance permits shall only remain in effect as long as the property to which it applies remains in the same zoning classification such property was in at the time the variance was granted. 
Sec. 8.2033. - Appeals. 
A.  The mayor and city council shall have the powers to hear and decide appeals from the decision of the planning commission regarding an application for a variance permit where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination. 
B.  In granting any appeal under the provisions of this section, the mayor and city council are thereby granting a variance permit and all such regulations regarding variance permits must be adhered to as outlined in this article. 
C.  In granting any appeal under the provisions of this section, the mayor and city council may designate such conditions in connection therewith as will, in its opinion, secure substantially the objectives of these regulations and may designate conditions to be performed or met by the user or property owner, out of regard for the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the community, including safeguards for, with respect to light, air, areas of occupancy, density of population and conformity to any master or through traffic plan, the future development of the city. 
D.  No appeal requesting the same relief in regard to the decision shall be received or heard for a period of 12 months following the date of said hearing, except that this limitation shall not affect the right of the mayor and city council to grant rehearing. 
E.  An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator certifies to the mayor and city council, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. 
Sec. 8.2034. - Appeal procedures. 
A.  An appeal to the mayor and city council may be taken by any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved or by any governmental officer, department, board or agency affected by any decision of the planning commission with respect to this ordinance. 
B.  Such appeal shall be made within ten days following notification of the decision appealed from, by filing with the administrator a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof on forms he shall provide. 
C.  The administrator shall forthwith transmit to the mayor and city council all documents constituting the record upon which the action was taken. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances in this Code. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 