THE CODE OF BRANTLEY COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2003 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted: October 15, 2006 
Republished 2013 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
OF 
BRANTLEY COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION\ 
____________ 
Harry Riggins 
Chairman 
____________ 
Danny Roberson 
Bobby Rowell 
Darlene Jones 
David Knox 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
W. Vincent Settle, III 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Dale J. Halligan 
County Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
OF 
BRANTLEY COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Chris Harris 
Chairman 
____________ 
Brian Hendrix 
Vice Chairman 
____________ 
Jesse Mobley 
Randy Davison 
Ray Griffin 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
C. Deen Strickland 
County Attorney 
____________ 
René T. Herrin 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Brantley County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
This 2013 republication includes all amendatory legislation through Ord. of 12-13-2011, and was accomplished under the supervision of Dennis Sinnett, Vice President Supplement Department, and Katrina Hansen, Editor, Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The 2003 publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Senior Code Attorney, and Brenda C. Harrison, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Dale J. Halligan, County Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this 2013 republication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Brantley County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Brantley County, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Brantley County, Georgia, 2013. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. ____________ 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR BRANTLEY COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Brantley County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 82, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 3, 2002, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another forfeiture is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than sixty days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The forfeiture provided by this section, unless another forfeiture is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such forfeiture is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the county to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 3, 2002, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall [become] effective October 14, 2003. 
Ordained and adopted by the Board of Commissioners this 15 day of October, 2003. 

By: 

ATTEST: 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County, Georgia, held on the 14 day of October, 2003. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances, resolutions and amendments have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances, resolutions, and amendments that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances, resolutions, and amendments that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Provided herein is 1927 Ga. Laws, page 500 which created a board of commissioners of the county. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used including the addition of catchlines where needed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Creation. 
There is hereby created a five-member Board of Commissioners of Brantley County who shall administer the affairs of the county. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 2258; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 4262) 
Sec. 2. - Numbering positions; qualifying of candidates. 
For the purpose of electing members of the board, the respective positions on the board shall be numbered Post 1, Post 2, Post 3, Post 4, and Post 5. A candidate elected to Post 1 shall serve as the chairman of the board of commissioners for Brantley County during his respective term on the board. At the time of qualifying as a candidate for election to the board, a candidate shall designate the post for which he offers for election; and a candidate may not offer for more than one post. Candidates offering for election to the board may reside anywhere within the county. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 2258; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 4262) 
Sec. 3. - Staggered appointments. 
The members of the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County serving on the effective date of this Act, or any successors appointed to fill vacancies created by such members, shall serve for a term of office expiring December 31, 1980. At the general election in 1980, the members of the board of commissioners elected to Post 1, Post 2, and Post 3 in accordance with the provisions of Section 2 shall be elected to take office on January 1, 1981, for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. At said general election in 1980, the members elected to Post 4 and Post 5 shall be elected to take office on January 1, 1981, for terms of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be elected in the general election in the year in which the terms of office expire and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 2258; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 4262) 
Sec. 4. - Chairperson. 
The chairperson of the board of commissioners shall be the chief executive officer of the board. He or she shall not vote on questions coming before the board except to break a tie. The chairperson's salary shall be $8,000.00 per annum, to be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Brantley County. In addition to the compensation otherwise provided in this Act, the chairperson of the board of commissioners shall receive a mileage expense at the rate set by the State of Georgia for its employees per mile traveled pursuant to his or her official duties. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 2258; 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4138; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 4262; 1985 Ga. Laws, page 4283; 1991 Ga. Laws, page 4457; 1999 Ga. Laws, page 4319; Res. of 11-13-2007; Res. of 12-27-2007, adopted 5-12-2008, eff. 1-1-2009) 
Sec. 5. - Consolidation of returns; commission by Governor. 
The managers of elections, held under this Act shall consolidate the return of said election as provided by law for general elections held in said county, and certify the results to the Probate Court of Brantley County, and said commissioners shall be commissioned by the Governor of the State of Georgia as other county officers are commissioned. 
Sec. 6. - Vacancies. 
If a vacancy occurs on the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County and the unexpired term of office exceeds twelve months in duration, not less than thirty days after the occurrence of said vacancy the election superintendent of Brantley County shall issue the call for a special election for the purpose of electing a successor to serve out the unexpired term of office. If a vacancy occurs on said board and the unexpired term of office is less than twelve months in duration, the judge of the Superior Court of Brantley County with the longest term of service as judge of said court shall appoint a successor to serve out the unexpired term of office; provided, however, that, if the vacancy occurs in Post 1 and the unexpired term of office is less than twelve months in duration, the person appointed by the judge of the superior court shall not serve as chairman. The duties of the chairman in such a case shall be performed by the vice chairman or, if not the vice chairman for any reason, then by the commissioner elected by the members of the board to carry out such duties. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, page 4262) 
Sec. 7. - Oath. 
Said commissioners shall each, before entering upon their duties, be commissioned by the Governor and take and subscribe to an oath before the judge of the probate court of said county, to faithfully discharge his duties and to carry out the provisions of this Act to the best of his skill and knowledge, and to the best interest of the entire County of Brantley. 
Sec. 8. - Meetings; salaries; compensation for travel. 
The board of commissioners shall hold at least one regularly scheduled monthly meeting which shall be on the second Tuesday in each month until changed by the board. The board shall establish the salary of the members of the board in an amount not less than $200.00 per month and not more than the salary paid to the commissioners of any county adjacent to Brantley County having a population comparable to Brantley County, which shall mean having a population of 15,000 or less, according to the 1990 decennial census, as such salaries were calculated on January 1, 1999. If any member of the board shall miss more than two regularly scheduled meetings of the board during any calendar year for any cause other than providential, he or she shall not be entitled to receive compensation provided for in this Act for the remainder of that calendar year. The base monthly salary of the members of the board of commissioners shall cover the regular monthly meeting and two called meetings. The members of the board of commissioners, other than the chairperson, shall also receive the sum of $50.00 for each called meeting in excess of two called meetings per month. In addition to compensation provided in this Act, members of the board of commissioners shall receive mileage expense at the rate set by the State of Georgia for its employees per mile traveled pursuant to their official duties and going to and from meetings of the board. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 3309; 1968 Ga. Laws, page 2258; 1978 Ga. Laws, page 4138; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 4262; 1985 Ga. Laws, page 4283; 1991 Ga. Laws, page 4457; 1999 Ga. Laws, page 4319) 
Sec. 9. - Meetings to try road defaulters. 
Said board shall have the right, and is hereby empowered, to call a meeting at any other time or place than the county site, for the purpose of trying road defaulters. 
Sec. 10. - Employment of clerk of commissioners. 
Said board shall employ a clerk, whose duty it shall be to keep an accurate and minute record of all proceedings of the board, all contracts made, all bills paid; and any and all actings and doings of the board shall be kept in a well-bound book which shall be open for the inspection of any taxpayer of the county on the first Tuesday in each month during the hours of the regular meeting of the board of said commissioners. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 411) 
Sec. 11. - Clerk. 
The clerk of the board shall receive such compensation for his services as such as shall be fixed by the board not to exceed the sum of $250.00 per month. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 411; 1968 Ga. Laws, page 2258) 
Sec. 12. - Jurisdiction and powers. 
Said Board of Commissioners shall have original and exclusive jurisdiction over the following subject-matters to wit: In directing and controlling all county property of said County of Brantley, as they may deem expedient according to law, including the county jail and courthouse; in levying a general tax for general purposes and a special tax for special purposes, according to law; and over all roads, as aforesaid; in establishing and changing election precincts and militia districts; in examining and allowing, according to law, all claims that may arise against the county; in examining and auditing or the hiring of an examiner or auditor of the accounts and records of all officers having the care, management, keeping, collecting, or disbursing of monies belonging to the county or appropriated for its benefit or use, and bringing them to a settlement; in making rules and regulations, according to law, for the support of the poor of the county, and for the promotion of health as is granted by law. Also to do all and singular other acts devolving upon the office of commissioners having full and complete charge of county affairs, and to exercise all power over roads and revenues under the laws of this State, as given probate court judges in counties where there are no commissioners. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1968 Ga. Laws, page 3488 which created the Brantley County Development Authority. An amendment to the state constitution authorizing the creation of such development authority is set forth in 1968 Ga. Laws, page 1731. The amendment was continued in force and effect pursuant to 1987 Ga. Laws, page 5103. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act may be cited as the "Brantley County Development Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Created, members. 
There is created a body corporate and politic to be known as the 'Brantley County Development Authority' which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The authority shall consist of eight members who shall be residents of Brantley County and not less than 21 years of age at the time of appointment. In making the nominations and appointments of members of the authority not more than one member should be selected from any one family, partnership, or other business organization. The members shall be selected in the following manner: Immediately after the approval of this Act the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County shall appoint eight members of the authority. For the first appointment the county commission shall appoint two persons for one year, two for two years, two for three years, and two for four years. Thereafter all terms and appointments, except in case of a vacancy, shall be for four years. If a member of the authority fails to attend three consecutive meetings of the authority, it shall be the duty of the remaining members of the authority to notify the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County of such fact. The Board of Commissioners of Brantley County shall inquire into the reasons for such absences, and if, in the sole discretion of the board of commissioners, the board determines that such member is unable to perform his or her duties or is unwilling to do so, the board of commissioners may declare that a vacancy exists on the authority. In the event any vacancy occurs the board of county commissioners shall fill, by appointment, such vacancy, for the unexpired term. A member shall be eligible for reappointment. The authority shall elect a chairman, a vice-chairman, and a secretary-treasurer or a secretary and a treasurer. Neither the secretary nor the treasurer shall be required to be a member of the authority. One county commissioner selected by the county commissioners shall be ex officio member of the authority. The members of this authority shall be entitled to no compensation. However, all members shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, page 3942) 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(a)  The word "Authority" shall mean the "Brantley County Development Authority" created by this Act and by and under Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph V of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition of lands, properties and improvements for development, expansion and promotion of industry, commerce, agriculture, natural resources and vocational training; the construction of buildings and plants for the purpose of selling, leasing or renting such structures to private persons, firms or corporations. 
(c)  The term "cost of project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, easements, rights and franchises acquired, the cost of machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural and legal expenses, and plans and specifications and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and placing the same in operation. 
Sec. 4. - Contracts. 
The County of Brantley is expressly authorized to enter into contracts with the Authority as a public corporation. 
Sec. 5. - Quorum. 
Any five members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the ordinary business of the Authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the Authority must be approved by not less than five affirmative votes. 
Sec. 6. - Powers. 
The Authority shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
(b)  To acquire, hold and dispose of personal property, including the stock of other corporations, for its corporate purposes. 
(c)  To enter into contracts with the County of Brantley. 
(d)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions, and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or liens or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or disposal of same in any manner the Authority deems to its best advantage. If the Authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall then be in the County of Brantley, the governing authorities of Brantley County are authorized in their discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, to the Authority. 
(e)  To appoint and select officers, agents, and employees including engineers, architects, builders and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. 
(f)  To make contracts, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for projects, or contracts with respect to the use of projects, which it erects or acquires. The County of Brantley is hereby expressly authorized and empowered to enter into agreements with the Authority for use by the Authority of funds collected by special tax levies by the county for development purposes. 
(g)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, self-liquidating or otherwise, located on property owned or leased by the Authority, and to pay the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue-anticipation certificates of the Authority or from any grant from the County of Brantley, or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms, or corporations all of which the Authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
(h)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds and such other instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing. 
(i)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public or private corporations, performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(j)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this Act. 
(k)  To adopt, alter or repeal its own by-laws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the power granted to it may be enjoyed, as the Authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
(l)  To issue revenue-anticipation certificates for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the Authority. Such revenue-anticipation certificates shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Act of the General Assembly of 1937 (1937 Ga. Laws, pages 761—774), and as subsequently amended, providing for the issuance of revenue-anticipation certificates. 
Sec. 7. - Taxes. 
All lands and improvements and personal property the title to which is vested in the Authority, and all debentures, notes, bonds and revenue-anticipation certificates issued by the Authority shall be exempt from State and local taxation. The tax exemption herein provided shall not include an exemption from sales and use taxes on property purchased by the Authority or for the use of the Authority. 
Sec. 8. - Debts. 
The Authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt as against the State of Georgia or the County of Brantley. 
Sec. 9. - Audits. 
The books and records of the Authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the Authority, by a competent auditor. The Authority shall furnish copies of said audit to the County of Brantley. 
Sec. 10. - Intent. 
This Act being for the purpose of developing and promoting the public good and the welfare of the County of Brantley and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
Sec. 11. - Severability. 
The provisions of this Act are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
Sec. 12. - Effective date. 
The provisions of this Act shall not become effective unless and until a proposed amendment to the Constitution authorizing the creation of the Brantley County Development Authority shall be ratified in the general election conducted in 1968. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws in the Related Laws. 

 
This table is a numerical listing of all ordinances and resolutions affecting the Related Laws of Brantley County, Georgia. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Brantley County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following definitions and rules of construction shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners: 
Board of commissioners, board of county commissioners and board. The terms "board of commissioners," "board of county commissioners" and "board" mean the board of county commissioners of Brantley County, Georgia. 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed to the bond, they shall be bound by the bond. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Brantley County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County, the county, and this county. Whenever the terms "county," "the county" and "this county" are used, such terms refer to Brantley County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the county, whether it shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the county to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Magistrate court. The term "magistrate court" means the magistrate court of Brantley County, Georgia. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of Brantley County" were added to such name or title. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in the trade or with reference to the subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number each includes the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination, as well as to natural persons. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the county, which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined by the board of commissioners, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the county clerk, where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons. 
State, the state, and this state. Whenever the terms "state," "the state" and "this state" are used, such terms refer to the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" includes streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the county unless otherwise provided. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory of this Code, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance unless expressly so provided. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present or past tense includes the future. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(3); construction of statutory definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; general statutory definition, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; computation of time under Civil Practice Act and court rules, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations of this Code and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections, history notes and editor's notes. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(10)  Any rezoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
(16)  Any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes. 
(17)  Any ordinance regulating subdivisions. 
(18)  Any zoning rules and regulations. 
(b)  No such ordinance in subsection (a) of this section shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this Code; and all such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected by the repeal. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of Brantley County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That The Code of Brantley County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Liability for violations by corporations or other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by the corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where the violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In every case in which any court of this county imposes a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state or any ordinance of the county, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(d)  At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this state or ordinance of the county, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In every case in which any court of this county shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bond shall be collected. 
(e)  The additional penalty set forth in subsection (c) of this section shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the peace officers annuity and benefit fund or by O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 to be paid into the judges of the probate courts retirement fund of the state. 
(f)  The additional penalties as prescribed in this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds, and paid over to the office of the county commission by the tenth day of the month following the month in which said sums are collected. 
(g)  All such funds collected and paid over to the county commission shall be deposited into a special account which shall be known as the "county jail fund." 
(h)  All monies collected pursuant to this resolution and placed in the "county jail fund" shall be expended solely and exclusively for constructing, operating and/or staffing the jail of the county, or for such other purposes as specified by O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95. 
(i)  No additional penalties as provided for by this resolution shall be imposed or collected in any municipal court operated by any municipality located in the county, unless there exists an intergovernmental contract between the county and the municipality as prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 15-21-92. 
(j)  The imposing of the additional penalties as herein provided shall be effective as of January 1, 1990. 
(Res. of 11-14-1989) 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(a); display of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; alternative punishments for traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(d); payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; penalty for county ordinance violations, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any contract or obligation assumed by the county saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(3); the administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(13); civic and cultural affairs, ch. 30; civil emergencies, ch. 34; administration of flood regulations, § 42-31 et seq.; planning, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Records management. 
The county clerk is responsible for records management activities and that she is to act for and in behalf of the county board of commissioners in directing and coordinating all records management matters; and records shall be maintained in accordance with approved retention schedules. 
(Res. of 12-13-1983) 
Secs. 2-2—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— At the editor's discretion, div. 1 has been added. 

Sec. 2-31. - Meetings. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall hold regular meetings on the second Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. unless otherwise ordered by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Special meetings may be held upon call by the chairman or any three members of the board. Due notice of such meetings shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
(c)  Meetings shall be held in the courtroom of the county courthouse, 117 Brantley Street, Nahunta, Georgia. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall and do by the provisions of this section schedule a standing work session of the board of commissioners on the fourth Thursday of each month starting at 2:00 p.m., beginning in the month of August, 2006. This meeting shall be fore the purpose of considering any and all matters which are legally appropriate for the board's consideration and review, and to generally set the agenda for its regular meeting in the following month, the said work session meeting to be held in compliance with the State of Georgia's Open Meeting Laws. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1982; Res. of 10-6-1994; Res. of 4-20-1995; Res. of 5-10-2005; Res. of 7-27-2006) 
Sec. 2-32. - Agenda. 
(a)  The agenda for matters which shall come before the board of commissioners for consideration during its regular monthly meeting shall be closed out at the end of the business day on the Friday before the first Tuesday in each month. 
(b)  The chairman and/or the clerk of the board shall cause the agenda for the regular monthly meeting with all accompanying material, information, minutes of the previous meeting to be approved, etc., to be mailed to each commissioner on Monday of the week preceding the regularly scheduled monthly meeting. 
(c)  No items of business requiring a vote/decision of the board of commissioners not on the printed agenda delivered to the commissioners as provided in this section shall be brought before the board for a decision or in any manner acted upon by the board, without the unanimous consent of the board granted and voted upon during the regular meeting. 
(Res. of 6-9-1997; Res. of 8-18-1992) 
Sec. 2-33. - Parliamentary procedures. 
The proceedings of the board of commissioners shall be generally governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, so far as applicable and not inconsistent with the special rules of the county and this Code. 
Secs. 2-34—2-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF CONDUCT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted May 13, 2008, §§ 1—3, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as div. 2, §§ 2-41—2-43. 

Sec. 2-41. - Commissioner's conduct during meetings. 
During the public portions of public meetings and public hearings, members of the Brantley County Board of Commissioners shall not: 
(1)  Speak without first being recognized by the chair; 
(2)  Interrupt anyone who has the floor; 
(3)  Use profanity during the public portion of any meeting; 
(4)  Refuse to yield the floor, or argue with the chair, if he is ruled out of order by the chair; 
(5)  Make disparaging remarks about any person's character during the public portion of any meeting. By way of example, it would be permissible to say "I don't believe that" or "I cannot accept that," but it is improper to say "He's a liar," or "He can't be trusted." Remarks should be limited to the subject under discussion, and shall not address the character of the person involved. Nothing herein shall limit or restrict the free and open debate of these matters in executive or closed session. 
(6)  Confront anyone about a prior statement in an accusatory manner during the public portion of any meeting. By way of example, it would be permissible to ask someone if something different had been said on a prior occasion, and the question should be phrased "Did you tell me ____________ ?" or "Do you remember telling me ____________ " It is impermissible to say "Didn't you tell me ____________ ?" or "Why did you tell me ____________ before the meeting?" The purpose of the public portion of a commissioner's meeting is to allow each commissioner, county representative and members of the public to state their positions in an orderly fashion; it is not a trial where persons are to be cross examined, interrogated, belittled or held out for public ridicule or embarrassment. Nothing herein shall limit or restrict the free and open debate of these matters in executive or closed session. 
(7)  State during the public portion of any meeting that a county employee has not done his or her job, or has not done his or her job properly. By way of example, it would be permissible to ask if a county employee did or did not do a specific task, but the question must be phrased in such a way that a simple "yes" or "no" answer is all that is requested. It would also be permissible to state or comment that a job was not done, or that it was not done correctly, so long as the person responsible is not singled-out for blame; remarks concerning the subject or job performance are proper but negative references to the person responsible are not. It is not proper to accuse county employees of not doing their jobs, or doing them improperly, during the public portion of the meetings. County employees shall not be placed in the position of responding to accusations of wrongdoing by a commissioner during the public portion of a meeting (unless the meeting has been called as a hearing for the express purpose of determining disciplinary action), nor shall their integrity or competency be challenged by a commissioner during the public portion of any meeting. Nothing herein shall limit or restrict the free and open debate or these matters in executive closed session. 
(8)  Represent their personal position or beliefs as being the position or beliefs of the board as a whole. By way of example, unless and until a majority vote has been obtained on a specific issue, a commissioner shall not state that the board will or will not do something, nor shall a commissioner state what the board's vote will be on an issue. No single commissioner can speak on behalf of the board unless specifically authorized by majority vote to do so. 
(9)  Refuse to recognize the validity of action approved by a majority vote of the board. By way of example, a commissioner is free to state that he does not agree with the majority vote, or that he would like to see the majority reconsider its action and vote a different way. However, a commissioner shall not refuse to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract or other legal document because he did not vote for the action taken. The minutes shall reflect his opposition to the majority's decision, but he shall not be authorized to withhold his signature on the basis that he did not vote for the action taken. 
(10)  Divulge the subject matter of any confidential information, legal advice or strategy discussions revealed during an executive session called for the purpose of discussing actual or potential litigation against the county or any county employee. There may be occasions when a commissioner will be asked to make specific commitment to this rule in connection with a particular case. If a commissioner is unwilling to pledge his commitment to the other members of the board, he shall be excluded from participating in that portion of the executive session. 
(Res. of 5-13-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 2-42. - Commissioner's conduct outside of meetings. 
A member of the Brantley County Board of Commissioners shall not: 
(1)  Direct any department head or county employee to do a job or perform a task. All such requests shall be made to the county manager. Once such a request is made, the commissioners shall follow-up with the county manager regarding the performance of the work, not with the department head or county employee whom the commissioner expects to do the job. If the job is not performed to the commissioner's satisfaction, this shall be taken up with the county manager first; if the commissioner is still not satisfied, the matter shall next be discussed with all members of the board of commissioners in executive session, under the exemption to the Open Meetings Act for discussion of employee performance. There shall be no criticism or disparaging remarks made about any county employee in a public meeting unless and until all of these steps have been exhausted. 
(2)  Publicly state that he intends to fire or discipline any county employee. No single commissioner has the authority to hire or fire county personnel. 
(3)  Reprimand any county employee. If a commissioner believes a county employee should be reprimanded, he shall so inform the county manager. If a commissioner believes the county manager should be reprimanded, he shall notify the other members of the board of commissioners. No single commissioner has the authority to discipline county personnel. 
(4)  Use profanity, insulting or demeaning words about a county employee in the presence of that employee, or in the presence of any other county employee. 
(5)  Call into question the qualifications or competency of a county employee in the presence of that employee, or in the presence of any other county employee. Concern of this nature shall be addressed in the stages outlined in subsection (1) of this section. 
(6)  Demand that the county manager or any department head stop what he or she is doing and immediately attend to the commissioner's business. If the county manager or a department head requests that the commissioner schedule a time to discuss a matter that is mutually convenient to all concerned, the commissioner shall honor that request. 
(7)  Promise on behalf of the county or the board of commissioners to undertake any act or to pass any ordinance, resolution, contract or agreement. A single commissioner has no authority to bind the board of commissioners. 
(8)  Agree to buy or sell anything of value on behalf of the county without advance approval by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
(9)  Attempt to negotiate county business with any private party or a representative of another governmental unit without the advance approval of a majority of the board of commissioners. By way of example, it is permissible for a commissioner to discuss county business in general terms with private parties and representatives of other governmental units (unless there is actual or threatened litigation against Brantley County by the parties involved). However, a commissioner shall not make any written offers, draft any agreements, edit or revise any proposed agreements or plans or suggest or propose (whether orally or in writing) any specific terms concerning money or services to be provided or received by the county unless that commissioner has received expressed authorization in advance by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. Should commissioners be elected by districts, the fact that the subject matter involves property or persons in a commissioner's district is of no consequence, as a commissioner has no additional legal authority over a matter simply because it is in his district. 
(10)  Speak to any representatives of the news media on behalf of the county or the board of commissioners without advance approval by majority vote of the board of commissioners. By way of example, a commissioner is free to express his personal views or opinions to anyone. However, a commissioner shall not make a statement in the name of the board of commissioners or in the name of Brantley County unless he has been authorized in advance to do so by majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 5-13-2008, § 2) 
Sec. 2-43. - Penalties for commissioner violating code of conduct. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall have the responsibility to police itself and to enforce this code of conduct. Any commissioner shall have the right to bring a suspected violation of this code of conduct to the attention of the full board. Any such accusation may be deliberated upon in executive session, but a vote upon any penalty to be imposed must be taken in open, public session, with all members of the board present. If the board determines by majority vote that a violation of this code of conduct has occurred, the board shall have the authority to impose one or more of the following penalties upon the offending commissioner: 
(1)  A verbal censure that shall be noted in the minutes without further elaboration; 
(2)  A written censure, to be made a part of the minutes, specifically outlining the facts underlying the violation; 
(3)  Removal of the commissioner from membership on any committee, association or group in which the offending commissioner is involved in his capacity as a Brantley County commissioner; removal shall take place by the delivery of a letter, signed by the board of commissioners, to the head of such committee, association or group, stating that the offending commissioner is no longer authorized to represent Brantley County. The sanction shall last for a period of up to one year from the date of the offense. 
(4)  A fine, not to exceed $500.00 per offense, which shall be paid by the offending commissioner to the general fund of Brantley County, Georgia, within ten days of the board's vote establishing a violation; if the offending commissioner fails to make this payment within the time specified herein, the amount of the penalty shall be withheld from the offending commissioner's compensation as a commissioner. 
(b)  The decision of the Brantley County Board of Commissioners on any question concerning a violation of this code of conduct or the penalty imposed, shall be final, it being the express intent of all the commissioners to govern themselves, and not to abdicate this responsibility to any other person or entity. 
(Res. of 5-13-2008, § 3) 
Secs. 2-44—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Animal control board, § 14-33; airport advisory committee, § 18-31 et seq.; library board of trustees, § 30-31 et seq.; E-911 system advisory board, § 38-31; recreation advisory committee, § 58-31 et seq.; planning commission, § 62-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-61. - Joint development authority. 
(a)  Creation of joint authority. There is a need for a joint development authority to be created and to operate in Glynn, Camden, McIntosh, Charlton, Brantley and Wayne Counties. Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1, a joint development authority is hereby created and activated to operate in Glynn, Camden, McIntosh, Charlton, Brantley and Wayne Counties, which counties are herein called participating counties. It shall be known as the "Southeast Georgia Joint Development Authority" (the "authority"). The authority shall transact business pursuant to, and exercise the powers provided by the provisions of, the Development Authorities Law, codified as O.C.G.A., title 36, chapter 62, as the same now exists and as it may be hereafter amended. 
(b)  Members. 
(1)  The number of members of the authority shall be 12. Two members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of each participating county and each such member shall be a resident and taxpayer of such county. The members appointed by the board of commissioners of each participating county shall be the chairman of the board of directors of the development authority of each participating county or his nominee and the executive director of the development authority for each participating county. 
(2)  The chairman of the board of directors of the development authority of each participating county or his nominee who is appointed as a member as set forth above shall serve a term co-extensive with the term of office of the chairman of the board of the development authority of the county from which the member is appointed. The executive director of the development authority of each participating county shall serve a term co-extensive with his or her term as executive director. 
(3)  If, at the end of any term of any member, a successor to such member has not been appointed, the member whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until his successor is appointed. 
(4)  The members of the authority shall constitute its board of directors. A majority of the members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, but no action may be taken by the authority without the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the authority. 
(5)  The members shall receive no compensation for their services as members or directors of the authority, but shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Res. of 6-14-2005, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— Resolution of June 14, 2005, §§ 1, 2, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 2-61 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-62—2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TAX ASSESSORS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 74. 

Sec. 2-81. - Members. 
The county board of tax assessors shall consist of five members who shall be qualified, perform the duties and hold the office of tax assessor as prescribed by the laws of the state. 
(Res. of 8-8-1989) 
Secs. 2-82—2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— The county has adopted additional administrative regulations in the form of personnel rules and policies. Official copies of such documentation are on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(4); dog control officer, § 14-34; office of the county emergency management director, § 34-32; administrator of floods, § 42-31. 
State Law reference— Expenditure of county funds for insurance and employment benefits authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11.1; employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11; civil service system for county employees authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21(a); Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Public Employee Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-101. - Coverage of volunteer firefighters. 
Volunteer firefighters of the county shall be covered under the association of county commissioners of the state group self-insured worker's compensation fund and while performing their duties shall be covered under the worker's compensation laws of the state. 
(Res. of 2-13-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 2-102. - Deferred compensation program. 
(a)  The board of commissioners adopts the national association of counties deferred compensation program and hereby establishes the county deferred compensation plan for the voluntary participation of all eligible county employees, elected officials and independent contractors. 
(b)  The county clerk is hereby authorized to execute for the county individual participation agreements with each employee requesting such agreement, and to act as the administrator of the plan representing the county, and to execute such agreements and contracts as are necessary to implement the program. It is implicitly understood that, other than the incidental expenses of collecting and disbursing of the employees' deferrals and other minor administrative matters, there is to be no cost to the county for the program. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992) 
Sec. 2-103. - Exclusion of election officials from retirement plan. 
(a)  The board of commissioners desires to exclude the services performed by election officials or election workers for each calendar year prior to the year 2000 in which the remuneration paid for such services is less than $1,000.00, and for each year after 1999 in which the remuneration paid is less than the adjusted amount, as described in subsection (b) of this section, beginning with services performed in the year that this modification was mailed or delivered by other means to the commissioner. 
(b)  The $1,000.00 limit on the excludable amount of remuneration paid in a calendar year for the services specified in this modification will be subject to adjustment for calendar years after 1999 to reflect changes in wages in the economy without any further modification of the agreement, with respect to such services performed during such calendar years, in accordance with section 218(c)(8)(B) of the Social Security Act. 
(Res. of 10-15-1996) 
Sec. 2-104. - Drug-free workplace policy. 
(a)  The drug-free workplace policy and a drug testing and awareness program are as set forth in Exhibit A which is incorporated by reference. 
(b)  All county employees shall receive a copy of the drug-free workplace policy and the drug testing and awareness program and shall be instructed of the dangers and consequences of drug and alcohol use and abuse. 
(Res. of 7-10-1991) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A has been omitted from this codification. An official copy is on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Sec. 2-105. - County manager. 
(a)  The office of county manager shall be filled by appointment of a majority vote of the board of commissioners of Brantley County, and the person appointed to said office shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners, which may be set forth in an employment contract. Provided, however, no such contract shall have a term of greater than two years. 
(b)  Before a person can be appointed to the office of county manager he or she must possess the following minimum knowledge and qualifications, to-wit: 
(1)  Knowledge required: 
a.  The principles and practices of public administration. 
b.  Of the county Code of Ordinances and other regulations, policies and procedures. 
c.  Of budget preparation and public financial management. 
d.  Of the functions, organization and operations of all county departments. 
e.  Of the demographic and economic profile of the county, including its industrial base. 
f.  Of the principles and practices of effective public relations. 
g.  Of state and federal laws in all areas applicable to county government, including unemployment, wages and hours, EEOC, taxes, workers' compensation, pensions, and others. 
h.  Skills in written and oral communication. 
(2)  Academic and/or job training background: 
a.  A level of competency commonly associated with the completion of a baccalaureate degree in a course of study related to the occupational field. 
b.  Experience sufficient to thoroughly understand the diverse objectives and functions of the subunits in the division/department in order to direct and coordinate work within the division/department, usually interpreted to require three to five years of related experience. 
(d)  The person appointed to the office of county manager shall have the following duties, powers and responsibilities: 
(1)  This position shall be responsible for assisting the board of commissioners with the overall management of the county government, including overseeing the personnel, budgeting, purchasing and grants functions of the government. The county manager shall be responsible for carrying out the policies as established by the board of commissioners and within said policies for the general administration of the county government in all areas that are not within the province of a county elected official. 
The major duties of the county manager shall include: 
a.  To assists the commissioners by managing the daily operations of the county government. 
b.  To act as liaison between the commissioners and the public by responding to inquiries and resolving conflicts. 
c.  To aid and assist in the development of materials for commission meetings. 
d.  To serve as personnel director for the county by performing duties such as advertising openings, assuring that payrolls are processed on time, administering employee benefits programs, processing complaints or grievances, and overseeing the hiring, disciplining and firing of all county employees, including department heads, but not within the office of an elected county officer. 
e.  To serve as liaison between the commissioners and department heads; oversees the work of the department heads and office personnel. 
f.  To assist with the preparation of the county budget by consulting with department heads and commissioners, making and implementing recommendations, and controlling expenditures. 
g.  To prepare and monitor the use of economic development grant applications; monitors the execution of grants. 
h.  To oversee the purchasing function of the county government. 
i.  To assist in maintaining county records and the preparation of all required reports. 
j.  To assist the board of commissioners in the development and implementation of operating policies and procedures for the county. 
k.  To assist in the drafting of correspondence, memoranda, speeches, resolutions, ordinances and agreements for the commissioners. 
l.  To provide reports and information to the media as requested. 
m.  To perform such other related duties as may from time to time be assigned by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  The initial compensation for the office of county manager shall be fixed at: $60,000.00, plus all other benefits as the county provides all of its other employees. 
(Res. of 10-23-2007; Res. of 5-13-2008) 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Oct. 23, 2007, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-105 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-106. - Citations. 
Under the provisions of O.C.G.A. §15-10-63(c) the following employees of the county are designated as agent of the county for the purpose of issuing and serving a citation for a violation of county's ordinances relating to offenses and miscellaneous provisions, business licenses, timber permits, junkyards, health and sanitation, nuisances, building codes, mobile home tax and code violations, land use, litter control, solid waste collection and road culverts, to wit: those staff members acting in the capacity and whose duties include code enforcement. 
(Res. of 7-7-2016) 
Secs. 2-107—2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM 

Sec. 2-121. - Adopted. 
(a)  A civil service system of employment is adopted by the board of commissioners for the employees of the county. 
(b)  The newly developed personnel policies are adopted as the new personnel policies of the civil service system of employment of the county. 
(c)  All constitutional officers, county agencies, and county commissions will be invited to admit their nonpolicy making permanent positions to the coverage of the civil service system policies. 
(d)  Upon the written application by the constitutional officers, county agencies, and county commissions, the board of commissioners will admit to coverage, by resolution, those appropriate positions submitted. 
(e)  After admission to coverage by the civil service system policies, no position can be removed from coverage without the required due process. 
(f)  The board of commissioners can modify and update the policies in the future, as needed, after conferring with all participating officers. 
(g)  For all covered employees and for all participating offices, agencies, and commissions, the civil service system personnel policies will have the force and effect of law in the county. 
(Res. of 1-12-1998) 
Sec. 2-122. - Employees covered. 
The following positions are hereby covered under the civil service system of the county, as per this sections: 
(1)  County clerk 
(2)  Library clerk 
(3)  Bookkeeper 
(4)  Personal property appraiser 
(5)  Chief appraiser 
(6)  Magistrate clerk 
(7)  Chief clerk—tax assessor's office 
(8)  Clerk—tax assessor's office 
(9)  Librarian 
(10)  Recreation director 
(11)  Custodian 
(12)  Emergency medical service director 
(13)  Advanced emergency medical technician 
(14)  Cardiac technician 
(15)  Basic emergency medical technician 
(16)  Road foreman 
(17)  Gas & diesel mechanic II 
(18)  Gas & diesel mechanic I 
(19)  Mechanic's helper 
(20)  Heavy equipment operator 
(21)  Truck driver 
(22)  Laborer 
(23)  Landfill maintenance 
(24)  Chief deputy/investigator jailers 
(25)  Deputy sheriff 
(26)  Secretary—sheriff's department 
(27)  Dispatcher/jailer 
(28)  Dispatcher 
(29)  Chief clerk—probate court 
(30)  Deputy clerk 
(31)  Clerk of superior court 
(32)  Tag/tax clerk 
(Res. of 1-12-1988; Res. of 3-8-1988) 
Sec. 2-123. - Classification plan, pay schedule and pay plan adopted. 
(a)  A classification plan, pay schedule and pay plan shall be adopted so that each position is compensated according to the pay plan and that no positions shall receive a reduction in salary because of the results of job evaluation, upon implementation of the plan. 
(b)  The positions in the offices of the constitutional officers shall be included in the plan; all positions listed in the classification plan shall be covered by the county civil service system and the plan shall be reviewed yearly by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  All positions shall receive the same percent increase voted by the board of commissioners if an across-the-board increase is voted on in any given year. 
(Res. of 7-7-1988) 
Secs. 2-124—2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(2); taxation, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; local government finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(a); appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance or budget resolution, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; designation of depository, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-14; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 

Sec. 2-141. - Fiscal year. 
The county's fiscal year shall commence on January 1 and conclude on December 31. 
Sec. 2-142. - Disposal of county-owned equipment. 
The following is adopted by the board of commissioners to be adhered to by any and all responsible parties for the disposal of county-owned equipment: 
(1)  Any county property that is deemed as surplus will be brought before the board of commissioners for a determination as to what will be done with the property. If the property is cumbersome to move, its location will be provided to the county board of commissioners so it may view the property before making a decision of its disposal. 
(2)  When it has been determined that a piece of county property or equipment is to be sold by the board of commissioners, a minimum price that will be accepted shall be established prior to sale date. 
(3)  A county equipment/property sale date will be determined by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Once equipment/property is deemed surplus by the county board of commissioners and a public sale date has been established, the sale shall be advertised in the official organ of the county once a week for two consecutive weeks immediately prior to the sale. 
(5)  Subsections (1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section will independently and jointly require a majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 6-9-1987, §§ 1—4; Res. of 9-12-1989) 
Sec. 2-143. - Drug abuse treatment and education fund. 
(a)  A special bank account shall be established at the county's deposit bank by the chair and clerk to be known as the county drug abuse treatment and education fund; 
(b)  All funds paid over to the board of commissioners by the courts or other officers charged with collecting fines and forfeited bond which has been collected, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100, shall be deposited into the special account known as the county drug abuse treatment and education fund; and 
(c)  The monies deposited into the county drug abuse treatment and education fund shall only be appropriated and disbursed by the board of commissioners for drug abuse treatment of citizens of the county and/or for education programs, relating to controlled substances and marijuana, which benefit the citizens of the county. 
(Res. of 9-10-1991, §§ a—c) 
Sec. 2-144. - Crime victims assistance fund. 
(a)  A special bank account shall be established at the county's deposit bank by the chair and clerk to be known as the county crime victims assistance fund; 
(b)  All funds paid over to the board of commissioners by the courts or other officers charged with collecting fines and forfeited bond which has been collected, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-21-131, shall be deposited into the special account known as the county crime victims assistance fund; and 
(c)  The monies deposited into the county crime victims assistance fund shall only be appropriated and disbursed by the board of commissioners as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 15-21-132(a). 
(Res. of 9-12-1995, §§ a—c) 
Secs. 2-145—2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COUNTY ISSUED PURCHASING AND/OR CREDIT CARDS 

Sec. 2-151. - Intent and scope. 
This article is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of county issued government purchasing cards and credit cards and to include county employees in the policy requirements established in O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24. 
(Res. and Ord. of 12-3-2015; Res. and Amd. of 1-7-2016) 
Sec. 2-152. - Definitions. 
Authorized elected official means an elected official designated by public vote of the board of commissioners to use a county issued government purchasing card or credit card. 
Card Administrator means the purchasing card and credit card administrator designated by the county board of commissioners. 
County means Brantley County and/or the board of commissioners. 
County purchase card , county p-card or county credit card means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a county official to purchase goods, services and other things of value on behalf of the county. 
Employee means a person that works for the county for wages or a salary. 
Financial transaction card means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
User agreement means the required agreement between the board of commissioners and the authorized elected officials which restricts the use of a county purchasing card or credit card. 
(Res. and Ord. of 12-3-2015; Res. and Amd. of 1-7-2016) 
Sec. 2-153. - Designated elected officials. 
The county board of commissioners ("county"), in its discretion, may authorize specific county elected officials and employees to use a county purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
No authorized elected official or employee may use a county purchasing card or credit card until and unless he or she has executed the county's purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
The county will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official or employee to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this ordinance or for any purchases that are not authorized by this ordinance. 
(Res. and Ord. of 12-3-2015; Res. and Amd. of 1-7-2016) 
Sec. 2-154. - Card administrator 
The board of commissioners shall designate a county purchasing card and credit card administrator. The responsibilities of the card administrator include: 
(1)  Manage county issued purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(2)  Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing card and credit card issues. 
(3)  Serve as liaison to the elected officials and employees authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card or credit card. 
(4)  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials and employees authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card. 
(5)  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
(6)  Assist authorized elected officials and employees to dispute transactions when necessary. 
(7)  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this ordinance, county procurement ordinances and policies, county purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(8)  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
(9)  Audit and reconcile transactions monthly. 
(10)  Maintain records for at least seven years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. 
(Res. and Ord. of 12-3-2015; Res. and Amd. of 1-7-2016) 
Sec. 2-155. - Use of cards. 
(a)  Authorized purchases. County purchase cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this ordinance, the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, purchasing card restrictions, county procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
Only authorized elected officials and employees may use a county purchase card or credit card for purchases or payments. The authorized elected official and employee shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
Unless otherwise approved by the governing authority or established in the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, the transaction limits are as follows: 
Per Transaction ..... $5,000.00 
Per Month: ..... 5,500.00 
(b)  Unauthorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official and employee. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the county's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the county's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, or to make purchases not in compliance with the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement. Purchases for personal goods or services are strictly prohibited. 
(c)  Receipts and documentation. Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county purchasing card or credit card shall be obtained and submitted to the board of commissioners office within five business days of a purchase. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official county duties. 
(c)  Public records. All receipt and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(Res. and Ord. of 12-3-2015; Res. and Amd. of 1-7-2016) 
Sec. 2-156. - Review of purchases and audit. 
Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection to misuse or abuse of county issued purchase cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials and employees that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the county. 
(1)  Review of purchases. All purchases shall be reviewed according to the following procedure: All purchase receipts shall be submitted to the board of commissioners office within five business days of a purchase. Shipping tickets (if any) shall be submitted to the board of commissioners office within three business days of receipt of goods. The county's card administrator, the county's financial coordinator, shall review purchase receipts with itemized statements provided by credit card companies. Any discrepancies shall be brought to the attention of the elected official or employee and if reconciliation is not made, then to the attention of the county manager. Any disputes unresolved shall be brought to the attention of the board of commissioners at a regular meeting of the board. 
(2)  Audits. The card administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials and employees shall cooperate with such review. 
(Res. and Ord. of 12-3-2015; Res. and Amd. of 1-7-2016) 
State Law reference— A process for auditing and review must be developed. O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c)(7). 
Sec. 2-157. - Violations. 
(a)  An elected official shall reimburse the county for any purchases made with a county issued purchase card or credit card in violation of this article or the user agreement. 
(b)  In the discretion of the county governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this ordinance may result in: 
(1)  A warning; 
(2)  Suspension of the elected official's or employee's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card; or 
(3)  Revocation of the elected official's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card or if an employee fails to comply possible termination. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall preclude the county governing authority from referring misuse of a purchase card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
(Res. and Ord. of 12-3-2015; Res. and Amd. of 1-7-2016) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverages, distilled spirits, malt beverages, wine, retailer, retail dealer, wholesaler and wholesale dealer mean the same as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, as amended. 
Sheriff means the sheriff or any deputy sheriff of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. I, §§ 1, 3) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Applicant criteria. 
An individual applicant must be the person who will own or manage the premises (business) where the sales of alcoholic beverages will occur. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. II, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3. - Application for license. 
All applications for licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made in person at the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and shall be accompanied by a completed form or forms furnished for this purpose by the clerk, which application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Full name, address and telephone number of the applicant; if the owner of the subject business is a partnership or corporation, the name and addresses of each partner or the name and address of each principle stockholder must be shown; 
(2)  Location or address of the place of business at which the applicant will engage in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages if and when permission to do so is granted by the board of commissioners and a license is issued; 
(3)  All applicants shall list in their application the name, home address, home telephone number and present place of employment of the person who will be employed to be the manager of the place of business for which the license is requested, if other than the applicant. No one shall be allowed to serve in a supervisory and/or managerial position who has, within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application, entered a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, or shall have suffered any conviction of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude or involving alcohol control laws of the state or the United States; or of any other state. Thereafter, if any person other than the person listed in the application as manager shall be employed as manager, the name, address, and telephone number of the new manager shall be furnished to the clerk of the board of commissioners within five days from the date of employment of the new manager; and 
(4)  Such other information as the clerk of the board of commissioners, under the direction of the board of commissioners, may from time to time require. 
The applicant shall set forth in detail, under oath, such information as may be required. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. II, § 2-A) 
Sec. 6-4. - Prerequisite to issuance of license; fingerprinting. 
(a)  Issuance to individuals. At the time any application for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages under this chapter is filed at the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and as a prerequisite to the issuance of any license hereunder, the applicant shall have a complete set of his fingerprints made by the sheriff or his designee, which shall be forwarded to the state crime information center who shall search his files for a period of five years immediately preceding the date of such application for any instance of criminal activity, and the state crime information center shall submit the results of such search to the county board of commissioners. 
(b)  Issuance to firm or corporation. If the license is to be issued to a firm or corporation, fingerprints shall be made by the sheriff or his designee and forward for investigation as set forth in subsection (a) of this section for all persons who will serve in a supervisory and/or managerial position with respect to the sale of malt beverages. If the firm or corporation changes the person in such supervisory and/or managerial positions during any year, and designate such functions to a person who has not previously been responsible for such functions referred to as new person, then such firm or corporation shall notify the clerk of the board of commissioners, in writing, of the change in such supervisory and/or managerial personnel, giving the name, address of the new person, his address, the effective date of the change and shall furnish the clerk with the fingerprints of the new person. The notification and furnishing of the fingerprints shall be within five regular business days of the office of the board of commissioners. Should the fingerprints or investigation of the new person reveal that he is objectionable, the clerk of the board of commissioners shall notify the licensee immediately, upon the receipt of such notice, the new person shall not serve in such capacity with the licensee until authorized by the commissioners. The licensee may appeal such objections to the commissioners within three days of the receipt of notice, by delivering written notice of the appeal of the clerk of the board of commissioners. As soon as possible, the commissioners will hear evidence on the appeal, but the new person shall not serve in such capacity until and unless authorized by the commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. II, § 2-B) 
Sec. 6-5. - Publication of notice. 
The applicant for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall cause a notice to appear in the official organ of the county, for two weeks, once each week, that an application for a license has been made. The notice shall contain the name of the applicant, the address, location, of the premises from where sale will occur, and the date and time when the application will be considered by the board of commissioners. The clerk of the board of commissioners shall prepare the notice for the publication; the applicant shall bear all cost of publication. The notice shall not be required for the renewal of any existing license. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. II, § 3) 
Sec. 6-6. - Moral character of applicants. 
All applicants for licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be of good moral character or such persons' applications shall not be considered; and in no event shall any license be granted to any person where any of the individuals, or any of the corporate officers, directors or majority stockholder, have, within five years immediately prior to the filing of the applications, entered a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, or shall have suffered any conviction of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude or involving alcohol control laws of the state, or the United States; or any other state. Should any licensee, partner, officer, director or a majority stockholder of a licensed corporation, after a license has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to felony or to a crime involving moral turpitude or to a violation of any laws of the United States or of the state relating to alcohol, the licenses issued to such licensee shall stand revoked and canceled. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. II, § 4) 
Sec. 6-7. - Considerations of extenuating circumstances. 
The board of commissioners shall consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application, or the proposed location of the business. If, in the board's judgment, circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. In considering an application, the commissioners shall consider the following factors before making any decision on an application: 
(1)  Is there any statutory prohibition of the law of the state against the issuance of such a license to such person at such location? 
(2)  Is the proposed location primarily a residential neighborhood or business neighborhood? 
(3)  Are there schools, churches and numerous dwelling houses in the immediate vicinity of the proposed license site? 
(4)  Are there other alcoholic beverages retail sales licensed premises in the immediate neighborhood of the proposed site? 
(5)  Would the issuance of such a license be compatible to the neighborhood as it is now constituted? 
(6)  Would the issuance of such a license in such location tend to diminish the property values of the adjoining lands? 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. II, § 5) 
Sec. 6-8. - Proposed location; prohibitions. 
(a)  Sales near churches and schools prohibited. No application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be approved where the proposed location is within 1,000 feet of a church, school or college campus, or school grounds teaching subjects commonly taught in the public schools of the state. In determining compliance with this section, the distance shall be determined by measuring in the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure from which beverage alcohol is sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street road or highway by the nearest route; 
(4)  To the front door of the building, or to the nearest portion of the grounds, whichever is applicable under the appropriate statute. 
(b)  Consumption on premises of sale prohibited. No application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages which may be consumed on the premises of the sale shall be approved where the proposed location is within 600 feet of any house which is occupied or regularly occupied. 
(c)  Sales near existing retail package liquor stores prohibited. No application for a license for a new retail package liquor store, application for a license for the sale of distilled spirits, or the relocation of an existing retail package liquor store shall be approved if there is located within 500 yards of the proposed new location of an existing licensed retail package liquor store (licensed dealer of distilled spirits). 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. II, §§ 6-A—6-C; Ord. of 1-7-2016) 
Sec. 6-9. - Licenses and duties of licensees. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages may be sold in the county except under a license issued in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  Licenses for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall be of the following types: 
(1)  For the sale of malt beverages and wine only; or 
(2)  For the sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine. 
(c)  No license for the sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine shall be transferable, and in the event a licensed business is sold or closed, the licensee must immediately surrender his license to the sheriff. All licenses shall be issued to specific persons and shall be applicable to and valid with respect only to the business location referred to in such license. 
(d)  All licenses shall expire upon and be of no validity after December 31 next after their issuance. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. III, §§ 1—4) 
Sec. 6-10. - Authorization of approved licenses. 
(a)  All licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages approved, authorized and issued under this chapter shall authorize the retail sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wines either for off-premises consumption only or for on-premises consumption, provided, however, there shall be no license issued for the sale of on-premises consumption of distilled spirits. 
(b)  All licenses approved, authorized and issued on and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be plainly and conspicuously marked either for off-premises consumption only, or for on-premises consumption. 
(c)  All licenses approved, authorized and issued on and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived for retail supermarkets, grocery stores, quick food outlets or other similar retail stores and for a package/liquor store shall be plainly and conspicuously marked for off-premises consumption only. 
(d)  All licenses approved, authorized and issued on and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived for beer parlors, lounges or other similar establishments shall be plainly and conspicuously marked for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. III, §§ 5—8) 
Sec. 6-11. - Intention of licensing authority. 
It is the intention of the licensing authority in the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of any retail outlet under the authority of any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages held under subsection 6-10(c) and to permit the consumption of any malt beverages or wines on the premises of any retail outlet under the authority of any license held under subsection 6-10(d). 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. III, § 9) 
Sec. 6-12. - Compliance of licensee with rules and regulations. 
(a)  Each licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages under this chapter shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and statutes of the state, and shall in addition thereto or in furtherance thereof: 
(1)  Prohibit the sale, serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages in automobiles or other vehicles, or anywhere outside the main building or accessory thereto in which the business of such licensee is operated, except drive-in windows; and 
(2)  Strictly adhere to the laws of the state, respecting the sale of alcoholic beverages to persons under the age of 21 years, intoxicated persons or habitual abusers of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  A licensee for on-premises consumption shall not permit a minor, a person under the legal age of majority as defined by the general assembly of the state, presently being the age of 18 years, to be on or about the licensed premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for alcoholic beverages; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age, who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, or drugstores, from selling or handling malt beverages or wine which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. III, § 10) 
Sec. 6-13. - License fees. 
(a)  For the license year commencing January 1, 1998, and ending December 31, 1998, and for each license year thereafter until changed by action of the board of commissioners, there is hereby levied and imposed a special privilege and license fee, and an excise tax in the amount equal to the total of sections 6-14—6-15. 
(b)  The license fees provided for in sections 6-13—6-15 shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of any license authorized by this chapter. 
(c)  No license shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall have fully paid all license fees and ad valorem taxes due the county. 
(d)  All licenses granted shall expire on December 31 each year. All licenses granted shall be for the calendar year and a full license fee shall be paid for any license issued. There shall be no proration of any license fee. There shall be no refund made upon the revocation or suspension of any license. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. III, §§ 11, 14, 19, 20) 
Sec. 6-14. - Annual license fee upon each retail distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine dealer. 
(a)  License fee upon each retail malt beverages and wine dealer for on-premises consumption of $270.00 payable at the time the license is issued. 
(b)  License fee upon each retail malt beverage and wine dealer for off-premises consumption only of $270.00 payable at the time the license is issued. 
(c)  License fee upon each retail dealer of distilled spirits for off-premises consumption only of $1,470.00 payable at the time the license is issued. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. III, § 11 ) 
Sec. 6-15. - License fee and tax upon each wholesale dealer. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a license fee of $100.00 for any wholesale dealer with a place of business located in the county, and an excise tax in the following amounts: 
(1)  For malt beverages, an amount as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80, or as such section may be from time to time amended by the general assembly of the state. 
(2)  For distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine, and/or wine by the package, an amount of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
All wholesalers and distributors of distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine wholesaling and/or distributing such commodity in the county shall add the amount of tax to be collected thereon, computed as provided in this section, to the invoice of sale to any and all retailers in the county, outside any municipality located therein, and remit the amount of such tax so computed to be due to the county directly to the office of the board of commissioners, less the sum of five percent of such tax which is hereby allowed for the collection of such tax. Such wholesalers and/or distributors shall furnish the clerk of the board of commissioners copies of all such invoices together with the amount of tax so collected at the time of payment of such taxes which shall be made and filed with the clerk on or before the tenth day of each and every month. The records of wholesalers and/or distributors shall be made available periodically to a duly authorized agent of the county for inspection and confirmation of the taxes collected as provided in this section. 
(b)  No wholesale dealer of distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine shall sell, ship or deliver any distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine to a retail dealer in the county out of the corporate limits of any municipality located therein without having first complied with all procedures, acts and doings as prescribed and required by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. III, § 13) 
Sec. 6-16. - Sales outside corporate limits prohibited. 
It shall be a violation of this section for any retail dealer or any wholesale dealer of distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine to own, hold, possess, sell or distribute any distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine in the county out of the corporate limits of any municipality located therein, without being in compliance with all the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. III, § 15) 
Sec. 6-17. - Engage in business. 
The privilege to engage in the business of a retail dealer or wholesale dealer of distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine shall, in no event, be granted to any person except by the issuance of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages as provided in this chapter and such privilege shall be held and enjoyed by the licensee only so long as such licensee shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and promptly pay all fees and/or taxes which are provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. III, § 16) 
Sec. 6-18. - Violations. 
Any violation of this chapter by a retail or wholesale distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine dealer shall be deemed as sufficient grounds for the revocation of the license issued for sale of alcoholic beverage to the violator by the board of commissioners and for the refusal thereafter to issue again any license to such violator under this section. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. III, § 17) 
Sec. 6-19. - False statements; revocation of license. 
The making of any statement on an application for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages required by this chapter which shall be later found to be false shall constitute grounds for revocation of such license. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. III, § 18) 
Sec. 6-20. - Prohibition of sales. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday night until the hour of 6:00 a.m. on Monday morning. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day by a holder of a for on-premises consumption license. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold on Christmas day. 
(d)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold at any time not specifically prohibited in this section. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. IV, §§ 1—4) 
Sec. 6-21. - Inspections and licensee's responsibility. 
(a)  Inspection of premises. The business premises of a holder of a license for the sale of any alcoholic beverages, including outbuildings, shall be opened to inspection at any and all times by the sheriff. 
(b)  Retail dealer responsible for on-premises consumption. No retail dealer for the sale of malt beverages and/or wines shall allow such malt beverages and/or wines to be consumed on his premises unless such dealer has a license for on-premises consumption. Any retail dealer with a license for off-premises consumption only shall be held responsible for such consumption by his customers or other parties. 
(c)  Copy of ordinance on premises. All holders of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall keep a copy of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived on his premises and instruct any person working there with respect to the terms in this chapter and each licensee and person selling such beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms of such ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. V, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 6-22. - Revocations and suspensions. 
(a)  The performance of any act prohibited in this chapter or the failure to perform any act required hereby, as well as the violation of any law, state or federal, relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages shall constitute grounds for revocation of a license. 
(b)  A license for the sale of malt beverages and wine may be temporarily suspended, and the place of business closed if it has a for on-premises consumption license, upon receipt of evidence by the commissioners from the sheriff of any violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The sheriff or his lawful deputies shall be authorized, if at any time, the licensee shall be found in violation of this chapter in violation of any of the state and federal laws or regulations, to pick up the license and present to the clerk of the board of commissioners with a written report stating the violation. 
(1)  The licensee shall have the right to call for a hearing within ten days or such other time as the commissioners shall designate. Should a hearing be so called for, the hearing must be held within 72 hours of requesting it, exclusive of Sundays. If a hearing is not held within such time, then the license shall be returned until further action by the commissioners. 
(2)  The owner or employees shall cease to sell malt beverages and /or wine until the matter is concluded. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. VI, §§ 1—2-B) 
Sec. 6-23. - Length of suspension. 
Any license for the sale of any alcoholic beverages may be suspended for a definite length of time. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. VI, § 3) 
Sec. 6-24. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  Notice of revocation. No license shall be revoked unless the licensee has been given at least three days written notice, in person or by registered mail, of the intention of the board of commissioners to take such action. Such notice shall specify the time, place and purposes of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which the commissioners propose to take action. At such hearings conducted by the commissioners, the licensee shall have the right to appear in person and with an attorney, and the sheriff, county attorney or the commissioners, as well as the licensee shall have the right to present evidence relating to the question as to whether or not a violation, as set forth in section 6-18, has occurred, as well as evidence relating to any extenuating or mitigating circumstances. 
(b)  Consideration of evidence. After consideration of such evidence, the board of commissioners shall, by a majority, determine whether the license shall be revoked; or whether the license shall be suspended for a definite length of time not to exceed one-half of the remaining license year. 
(c)  Hearing. If the licensee does not desire a hearing before the board of commissioners or fails to appear, the sheriff shall be authorized to then permit the owner to dispose of the merchandise within a ten-day period under the supervision of the sheriff. The merchandise may not be sold in bulk only. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. VI, §§ 4—6) 
Sec. 6-25. - Signs. 
(a)  Display of notice. The holder of a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine shall post in a conspicuous place in his place of business a notice with letters not less than four inches in height which shall be clearly visible to all customers entering the establishment as follows: "Sale of Alcoholic Beverages to Persons under the age of 21 is Strictly Prohibited". 
(b)  Advertising by use of signs. Retail dealers of alcoholic beverages may advertise the sell of such beverages by use of signs only under the following conditions: 
(1)  There shall be only one sign at a business establishment, which sign may be doubled-faced; 
(2)  The maximum dimensions for any sign shall be four feet in height and six feet in width; 
(3)  A sign may be lighted; 
(4)  All signs advertising alcoholic beverages must be located on premises of the establishment selling such beverages; and 
(5)  No sign or display or advertisement or information regarding the prices of any alcoholic beverages may be located in any window or other place visible from outside the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. VII, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 6-26. - Violations prosecuted in the magistrate court. 
Any person who shall violate any of the sections of this chapter or who shall assist another in evading or avoiding payment of the fees and/or taxes imposed by this chapter shall be cited for evading or avoiding payment and tried in the magistrate court of the county in accordance with the provisions of state law for violations of county ordinances. Upon conviction, a sentence may be imposed by the magistrate of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or incarceration in the county jail of not more than 60 days. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. VII, § 5) 
Sec. 6-27. - Grandfathering in of certain premises. 
No application for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages or for renewal shall be denied by reason of closeness to a church, school, residence or other business licensed to sell packaged liquor at retail as required under subsection 6-8(a), if a license for the subject business premises had been granted prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in reliance on the prior alcoholic beverages licensing ordinance of the county, and the subject premises remained licensed without interruption. Further, no application for a license or for renewal shall be denied by reason that a house, school or church has been erected within the prohibited distance after the licensed establishment was opened, and it continued in operation without interruption. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. VII, § 5) 
Sec. 6-28. - Display of license. 
Each person holding a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages issued pursuant to this chapter shall display the license prominently at all times on the premises for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. VII, § 6) 
Sec. 6-29. - Denial of renewal for adverse conditions. 
Should a licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages engage in acts or conduct or permit such acts or conduct to occur on his business that creates a continuing public disturbance, traffic congestion and/or obnoxious loud noise, from or on his business premises, then the board of commissioners shall give special attention to any renewal application and make a careful review of any complaints relating to the operation of the business. Should the board of commissioners find there has been just and substantial complaints made with or by the sheriff, the licensee shall be warned and informed to eliminate the adverse conditions existing on, at or around the licensed premises. After receiving a warning, should the licensee fail to eliminate the adverse conditions, the board of commissioners shall be authorized to refuse to renew a license to such licensee or to such licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, pt. VII, § 7) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e); Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-15-50 et seq.; authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2; state licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Giving of massages in place used for lewdness, prostitution or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42; restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 

Sec. 10-31. - Findings. 
(a)  The board of commissioners, based on common knowledge, investigation, and experience derived from other local government jurisdictions, believes that adult entertainment establishments as defined in section 10-33, if unregulated, will likely lead to an increase in illegal sexual activities, drug and alcohol offenses, disorderly conduct, and other criminal activity. 
(b)  Adult entertainment establishments sometimes are fronts for or operated by persons associated with criminal activities and the need to scrutinize such establishments is thereby enhanced in order to prevent the use of adult entertainment establishments for unlawful purposes. 
(c)  The law enforcement resources available for responding to problems associated with or created by adult entertainment establishments are limited and are best conserved by regulating and licensing adult entertainment establishments and those associated with them. 
(d)  The public health, safety, welfare and convenience require that adult entertainment establishments and their locations, operations, and employees be regulated and licensed in order to reduce the potential for harm, and preserve the quality of urban life in residential and business areas of the community. 
(e)  It has been shown that the location of adult entertainment establishments in close proximity to each other adversely affects property values, causes an increase in crime and encourage residents and businesses therein to move elsewhere. 
(f)  It is the duty of the board of commissioners to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the county, its residents, and the character of its neighborhoods and developments. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997) 
Sec. 10-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse effect on property values and on the public health, safety, and welfare of the county, and on its citizens and property, and on the character of its neighborhoods and development will be curtailed. This article is intended to represent a balancing or competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment, or activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1) 
Sec. 10-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult entertainment establishment means the premises on which defined establishments operate or defined activities occur shall constitute adult entertainment establishments: 
(1)  Adult business means: 
a.  Any business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat either by law or by the operators of such business or establishment; 
b.  Any business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
c.  Any other business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Lingerie modeling studio means a business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted and of which the primary business activity consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Chairman means the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
Church means a place where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
Conviction means adjudication of guilty, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the state First Offender Act (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq.). 
Distance and measurement means the measurement in lineal feet from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of an adult entertainment establishment, or if not on ground level, then the beginning point for measuring the distance shall be the point of ground level determined by measuring from the center of any door of customer entry perpendicular to the ground level, to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence, or hospital. A radius shall be measured from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence or hospital. 
Employee means any person engaged to provide or in fact providing services for an adult entertainment establishment to patrons on a regular basis whether for legal consideration or otherwise. Independent contractors, such as entertainers, shall be considered an employee for the purpose of this article. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if such person has not been convicted of a felony, any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, or a drug-related, alcohol-related, or sex-related crime in the past ten years. 
Minor, for the purposes of this article, means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Park means any lands or facility owned, operated, controlled or managed by a county, city, state or federal government or any governmental entity or agency in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Residence means a house, apartment, mobile home, boardinghouse or roominghouse, duplex, or other multifamily housing for human dwelling, or any properties owned therefor. 
School means state, county, city, church or other schools, public or private, that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges, post high school learning centers, kindergartens and day care centers for persons of all ages. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, or anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any and all of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: sodomy, cunnilingus, fellation, lesbianism, or homosexuality; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of the partner; 
(5)  Sexually oriented torture; or 
(6)  Fondling or other sexual contact with an animal so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a partner. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-34. - Regulations. 
The following regulations apply to all adult entertainment establishments as described in this article and located within the unincorporated areas of the county: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to employ, admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult entertainment establishment. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) of this section, an adult entertainment establishment operating in an unincorporated area of the county on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be required to meet the distance requirements set forth in this section as the distance requirement pertains to such location for so long as the licensee holds a legally recognized and perfected property right to use and possess such location as of the date of filing of an application for adult entertainment license or renewal thereof, but only if such legal right as to such location was vested at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and such vested legal right has continued without the necessity of act or consent to renew, continue or extend such applicant's property right by applicant or other party holding a superior legal property right in such location. 
(4)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within the following distances as defined and measured: 
a.  Within 1,000 feet of any single-family or multifamily residence or within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for single-family or multifamily uses or purposes; 
b.  Within 1,000 feet of a church, school, governmentally owned or operated building, library, civic center, public park, hospital, nursing home or community club; 
c.  Within 1,000 feet of another adult entertainment establishment; 
d.  Within 1,000 feet of an establishment selling alcoholic beverages. 
(5)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with any person to provide services or perform in the establishment who is a person not permitted for employment pursuant to this article. 
(6)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, dates of birth and social security numbers of all employees. 
(7)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be closed between 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, on Sunday, and on Christmas Day. 
(8)  No booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any adult entertainment establishment so as to prevent a clear view throughout the premises, except for separate offices, kitchens, restrooms, or the areas not frequented by patrons. 
(9)  No premises for an adult entertainment establishment shall have any interior connections or doors with any other place of business. 
(10)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be operated such that the activity on the interior of the premises is visible from the exterior of the premises. 
(11)  No licensee shall permit the use of alcoholic beverages of any kind to be sold, possessed or consumed in or on the premises. 
(12)  No licensee shall permit the use of illegal drugs or illegally controlled substances of any kind to be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted in or on the premises. 
(13)  No licensee shall permit an employee to expose for public view his or her specified anatomical areas in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 3) 
Sec. 10-35. - Additional regulations applicable to adult dancing establishments, erotic entertainment/dance establishments and lingerie modeling studios. 
The following additional regulations apply to adult dancing establishments, erotic entertainment/dance establishments and lingerie modeling studios (referred to in this section as adult dance establishments): 
(1)  All live dancing and entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the next highest level of the remainder of the floor. 
(2)  No live dancing or entertaining shall occur closer than ten feet from any patron. 
(3)  No dancer, entertainer or employee shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer, entertainer or employee, so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron. 
(4)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(5)  No dancer or entertainer shall solicit or accept any pay or gratuity directly from any patron nor shall any patron pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(6)  All areas of the licensed premises shall be fully lighted at all times when open for business, which shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(7)  No licensee shall permit any employee to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this section. 
(8)  No licensee shall permit an employee to insert an object into her vagina or her or his anal orifice, except for personal hygiene or necessity. 
(9)  No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation. 
(10)  No licensee shall permit a male employee to exhibit an unclothed erect penis. 
(11)  No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in or simulate bestiality. 
(12)  No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in actual or simulated sexual activity with any other person. 
(13)  No licensee shall permit an employee to sit upon or straddle the leg, lap or body of any patron, therein or to engage in or simulate sexual activity while touching or being touched by any patron. 
(14)  No licensee shall permit or allow a patron to participate in any act or activity upon the licensed premises which an employee is prohibited from performing. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4) 
Sec. 10-36. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the unincorporated area of the county any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article, without a license to do so. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if such activity is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 5) 
Sec. 10-37. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 6) 
Sec. 10-38. - Application for license. 
(a)  Application fee. Any person or legal entity desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the board of commissioners. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the county, shall be paid to the clerk of the county to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. Such fee is hereby established in the amount of $250.00. 
(b)  Application does not authorize certain conduct. The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  Terms and conditions. All licenses shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws, applicable sections of this article and other ordinances and resolutions of the county relating to such business. 
(d)  Front of license. All licenses shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and revoked under the provisions of the Ordinances of Brantley County." 
(e)  Separate license for each location. A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(f)  License issuance. Where the applicant: 
(1)  Is a corporation, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either: 
a.  The majority shareholder; or 
b.  A person employed full time in a managing capacity by the corporation. 
(2)  Is a partnership, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either: 
a.  The managing general partner; or 
b.  A person employed full time in a managing capacity by the partnership. 
(3)  Is a sole proprietor, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he is working full time in a managing capacity on the premises, and, if not, then to the sole proprietor and a person employed full time in a managing capacity by the sole proprietor. 
For purposes of this subsection, the term "managing capacity" means the president or chief executive officer or managing or general partner of a corporation or partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations at the location to be licensed and who is a full-time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietor, or other ownership entity. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 7) 
Sec. 10-39. - Application contents; supporting documents. 
(a)  Application and forms. Application for license shall be written and on forms supplied by the office of the board of commissioners. Such application shall state the name, address, social security number and date of birth of the applicant, and the nature and character of the business to be carried on. 
(b)  If applicant is a corporation. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation, the social security numbers of each of its current officers and directors as well as all stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, whether general or limited, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address, dates of birth and social security numbers of the partners. If one or more or the partners is a corporation, this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. 
(c)  Address. Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(d)  Name of owner; lease information. The name of the owner of the premises and, if leased, a copy of the lease agreement. 
(e)  Filing of plat of premises. A plat, filed in triplicate, by a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with section 10-34(4) which provide that no adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any residential premises, parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single-family use or purposes; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; within 1,000 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined in this article is located; or within 1,000 feet of any establishment selling alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  Information of parties with financial interest. The name, address, social security number and date of birth of any and all persons who have a financial interest of any type in the entity which is applying for the license. 
(g)  Other information required. Any other information reasonably required by the codes department of the county in verifying the right of the applicant to obtain a license. 
(h)  Multiple individuals; agent. Should the requirements of this article dictate that more than one individual and/or entity apply for a license issue to such applicants, then all such applicants shall, on such application, designate the name, address and telephone number of an individual resident of the county, to act as an agent for all applicants/licensees for the purpose of receiving communications and notices under this article. Proof of delivery to the agent shall be conclusive proof of receipt by the licensees of such notice, process or information. 
(i)  Completeness of application. Each application must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the county for filing and processing. 
(j)  Renovations and improvements of premises. All applicants for licenses as to any premises which is to be subsequently renovated or improved shall furnish in triplicate plans and renderings of the premises as it is to exist at the time of opening. Any premises to be constructed or renovated prior to opening shall be constructed, renovated or built so as to be equal to and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood or better. The premises shall comply with all building, health and similar county codes. 
(k)  Verification of application. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(1)  The individual, if the applicant is an individual; 
(2)  The manager or general partner, if a partnership; 
(3)  The president of the corporation, if a corporation; 
(4)  The chief administrative official, if any other organization or association. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 8) 
Sec. 10-40. - Notice of intent to engage in business. 
(a)  Publication of advertisement. All applicants for adult entertainment establishment licenses shall give notice that application has been filed and of the purpose of making such application by publication of an advertisement once a week for four consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration of the application by the board of commissioners in the newspaper in which legal advertisements are published. The first advertisement shall not appear more than 40 days prior to the date of such consideration. 
(b)  Size of advertisement. The advertisement shall be of type not smaller than ten point capital and lower case and shall be at least a two-inch column. The advertisement shall appear on the same days as legal advertisements are regularly published, but not among the generally published legal ads. 
(c)  Information in notice. The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business, the name of the applicant, the date, time and place of hearing, and a statement that any legal objections to the issuance must be made at or prior to the time of hearing, and, if prior to the time of hearing, must be in writing and received by the office of the board of commissioners on or before the date and time of hearing. 
(d)  Proof of notice. Applicants shall provide proof of such notice by providing the board of commissioners, at the time of the hearing on license issuance, the affidavit of the publisher of the newspaper in which such notice was published, which affidavit shall reflect the content of the notice and the dates of publishing. 
(e)  Sign upon location of business. The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign stating the following: "Brantley County Adult Entertainment License Applied for. A hearing before the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County shall be held on the _______day of __________. All interested persons take notice." The sign shall be at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks or other public property which adjoins the location so as to be clearly visible by persons using such public area. The sign shall be posed on the property from the date of the first publication of the legal advertisement through the date of consideration by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 9) 
Sec. 10-41. - Application; investigation; issuance. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners or his designee shall have a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days to investigate the application for an adult entertainment establishment and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation and after holding a public hearing, the board of commissioners shall issue the license if it is determined that: 
(1)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in this application. 
(3)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(4)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors or shareholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation, or any partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime involving sexual assault, sexual battery, prostitution, rape, sexual offenses against children, unnatural sex acts, public indecency, or any other sex act, whether attempted or consummated, prohibited by law for which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors or shareholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not, during the past ten years, had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked in this county or any other local governmental jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(6)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable distance provisions of this article and would qualify to receive a certificate of occupancy. 
(7)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(8)  On the date the business for which a license is required commences and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(9)  Notwithstanding subsections (1)—(8) of this section, no license shall be issued to an applicant if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of an application one or more of the following shall have occurred: 
a.  The same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of this article applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection for reasons related to the location itself. 
b.  The location has been rejected for any applicant. 
c.  The applicant has withdrawn, without providential cause, an application at any time within seven days immediately preceding the time and date set for the hearing before the board of commissioners unless at least one year shall have expired from such withdrawal. 
d.  The one year waiting period will not apply where the applicant shall apply for a new location which has not been rejected within the preceding 12 months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding 12 months because of lack of qualifications of the applicant. 
(10)  Notwithstanding subsections (1)—(9) of this section, no license shall be issued until an annual license fee, established by resolution of the county and prorated on a calendar year basis, is paid to the county clerk. The annual license fee is hereby resolved to be $3,000.00. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 10) 
Sec. 10-42. - License renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments shall be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the licensee continues to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be established by resolution of the board of commissioners. The renewal fee is hereby resolved to be $3,000.00. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15 of each year prior to January 1 of the year for which such license is requested. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 11) 
Sec. 10-43. - License nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepted, however, that if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or shareholder without affecting a surrender or termination of such license and in such case, the licensee shall immediately notify the office of the board of commissioners. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license pursuant to this article is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 12) 
Sec. 10-44. - Change of location. 
No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall change the location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 13) 
Sec. 10-45. - Change of name. 
No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 14) 
Sec. 10-46. - Modification of licensed premises. 
After issuance of any adult entertainment establishment license, no change in the location of the building within the premises, customer entry locations, or other changes shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance or other requirement of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 15) 
Sec. 10-47. - License; refusal. 
If the chairman or his designee, following investigation of the applicant for an adult entertainment establishment license, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, he shall so notify the applicant of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Any such decision shall be final unless appeal is filed to the board of commissioners by any aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of the decision. A hearing by the board of commissioners of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing at a regular or special meeting of the board. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 16) 
Sec. 10-48. - Suspension of license. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners may suspend an adult entertainment establishment license for a period of 180 days if he determines that the licensee or an employee has violated any section of this article. If the chairman deems a license suspension appropriate, he shall so notify the licensee of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Such suspension shall take effect ten days following the licensee's notification unless an appeal is filed with and to the board of commissioners by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision. A hearing by the board of commissioners of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing in a regular or special meeting of the board. Enforcement of the suspension shall be stayed pending the board's ruling on the licensee's appeal. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 17) 
Sec. 10-49. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chairman of the board of commissions may revoke a license for an adult entertainment establishment if a cause for suspension occurs and the license has been suspended within the past 12 months. 
(b)  The chairman may also revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process. 
(2)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended. 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly, allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, or copulation, masturbation, or other illegal sexual conduct to occur in or on the licensed premises. 
(4)  The owner or operator of the licensed establishment knowingly allowed a person under 18 years of age to enter the establishment. 
(c)  If the chairman deems a license revocation appropriate, he shall so notify the licensee of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Such revocation shall take effect ten days following the chairman's serving of his written decision upon the licensee unless an appeal is filed with and to the board of commissioners by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision of the chairman. A hearing by the board of commissioners on the decision shall occur within 30 days of its filing in a regular or special meeting of the board. Revocation shall continue for a one-year period from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 17(a), (b)) 
Sec. 10-50. - Appeal procedure. 
An applicant for an adult entertainment establishment license or licensee who has timely filed an appeal with the board of commissioners as allowed by this section shall be entitled to a hearing before the board of commissioners. At the time set for the hearing, the board of commissioners shall receive all relevant testimony in evidence from county staff or interested parties, and from the licensee or employee. In all hearings pursuant to this article, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The chairman of the board of commissioners shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications against the charged party. He shall then read or cause to be read any response filed by the charged party. 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specifications as filed against the charged party and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows: The county representative shall present his evidence in support of the charges; the charged party shall then present his evidence. Evidence of each party may be supported by submission of pertinent documents. Each party shall be allowed to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)  The charged party and county may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross examine witnesses. Additionally, the board of commissioners may interrogate all parties and witnesses to obtain necessary information. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 17(c)) 
Sec. 10-51. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(b)  Should any license be revoked or suspended, all signs indicating such businesses conducted on the premises shall be removed from the premises during the period of revocation or suspension. 
(c)  The violation of provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such action may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 17(d)) 
Sec. 10-52. - Service of notice. 
(a)  Any notice required to be given under this article to any applicant for an adult entertainment establishment license, licensee or employee may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States Postal Service postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for license/permit, or such updated address which may have subsequently been provided in writing to the county clerk. Notices mailed as described in this section shall be deemed given on the second day subsequent to their deposit in the United States Postal Service. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each applicant, licensee and employee to furnish notice to the county clerk in writing of any change of mailing address. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 17(e)) 
Sec. 10-53. - Employment. 
(a)  Approval for employment. 
(1)  A permit to work in or be employed by an adult entertainment establishment shall be required for all employees. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors whose main purpose is to provide entertainment or other services to patrons, including but not limited to dancers and waitresses, employed or hired by an adult entertainment establishment shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(2)  No person requiring a permit may be employed by or work in an establishment until such person has filed an application, paid the fee for and obtained a work permit from the county clerk. The county clerk shall immediately issue such permit upon the filing of an application and payment of the fee, which permit shall be conditional and subject to revocation upon the determination by the county clerk following investigation of the applicant that the applicant is not qualified to be an employee under this article. Upon such determination, the county clerk shall notify the applicant of such decision. Such decision shall be final unless an appeal is filed to the board of commissioners by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of the decision of the county clerk. A hearing by the board of commissioners of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing at a regular or special meeting of the board. 
(b)  Application forms. Application for permit shall be written and on forms supplied by the office of the county clerk. Such application shall state the name, address, social security number and date of birth of the applicant, the name and address of the employer, the name and address of the place of employment and any other information reasonably required by the county clerk in verifying the right of the applicant to obtain a permit. 
(c)  Issuance of permit; expiration. Any permit for employment issued under this section shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance unless earlier revoked. A nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the county, shall be paid to the clerk of the county to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. Such fee is hereby established in the amount of $50.00. 
(d)  Conviction. No person who has been convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime involving use, possession or sale of any drug or controlled substance; or prostitution, sexual battery, rape, sexual assault, public indecency or any other sex act, whether consummated or attempted, unless five years have elapsed since the date of conviction, or date of release which is the later date, shall be issued a work permit. 
(e)  Five-year time period. No person who is convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the crimes specified in this article while employed in an adult entertainment establishment shall thereafter work on any premises requiring a license under this article for the applicable time period described in subsection (d) of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 18) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Art. II has been superseded by House Bill No. 685, passed by the Georgia Legislature in its 2012 legislative session and signed into law by the Governor on May 3, 2012, effective July 1, 2012, regarding vicious and dangerous dogs. Former art. II, §§ 14-31—14-39 derived from an ordinance adopted June 22, 1989. An amendment dated February 7, 2013, states that, "Now therefore, be it ordained by the board of commissioners, that the Ordinance previously adopted on the 22 nd day of June, 1989, and known as the Brantley County Dog Control Ordinance is hereby amended so as to strike such definitions and provisions contained in said Ordinance that are in conflict with those definitions and provisions as have been made the general law of the State of Georgia pursuant to the language of House Bill 685 and to retain such definitions and provisions that are not otherwise in conflict with the said general law." 

Secs. 14-31—14-39. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Aviation, O.C.G.A. § 6-1-1 et seq.; authority to acquire, construct and maintain airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq.; general powers of counties and municipalities as to airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-25; authority to enforce police regulations in airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-27. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT ADVISORY COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-61 et seq. 

Sec. 18-31. - Establishment of an airport advisory committee. 
(a)  There is established and created for the county a committee to be known as the county airport advisory committee (referred to in this article as the committee). 
(b)  The committee shall consist of five members, Posts 1 through 5, who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners from citizens of the county who have knowledge and interest in aviation, and/or property maintenance and/or development. 
(c)  The term for a member of the committee shall be for a period of three years, except for the initial term, which shall be as follows: Posts 1 and 2 shall be for periods of one year; Posts 3 and 4 shall be for periods of two years; and Post 5 shall be for a period of three years. Any member may be reappointed for an unlimited number of successive terms. 
(d)  The committee shall organize itself at its initial meeting by the election of a chairman, vice chairman and secretary. The committee shall meet in a facility provided for it by the county, at times as set by the members of the committee, or upon the call of the chair; the committee shall hold it meetings in compliance with the state Open Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). The committee shall hold its first meeting within 15 days of the final appointment of all of its initial members. 
(e)  Any issue coming before the committee for a vote must receive the votes of three members to pass, with the chair having the authority to vote on all matters. Three members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. The committee shall function under the Robert's Rules of Order. 
(f)  The members of the committee shall serve without compensation, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses that may be incurred in carrying out his duties as a member of the committee. Such expenses shall be paid from the general funds of the county on the filing of a claim for such expenses in the manner as required by county policy, and upon approval of the board of commissioners. 
(g)  Neither the committee nor any member thereof shall have the authority or power to make any purchases or otherwise bind the county to any financial obligation or undertaking, such authority being hereby expressly prohibited and reserved unto the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 11-13-2001, § I) 
Sec. 18-32. - Powers, duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The members of the committee may adopt bylaws for the committee. 
(b)  The committee shall investigate, review, consider and recommend to the board of commissioners any use, operation, maintenance, development, regulations, plans and/or other matters directly relating to, concerning or affecting the county airport. 
(c)  The committee shall recommend an annual budget to the board of commissioners relating to the county's airport. 
(d)  The committee may do such other things as are necessary and proper to effectuate the purpose of this article and is not expressly prohibited herein. 
(Res. of 11-13-2001, § II) 
Secs. 18-33—18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CROP DUSTING 

Sec. 18-61. - Permit required for certain uses of county airport. 
No person may use any of the facilities, runway or any other part or portion of the county airport for any crop duster services, to include the landing, takeoff, fueling, refueling, or the loading or unloading of any materials used in crop dusting or other aerial fertilizer application, without first obtaining a permit for any of the activities specified in this section in accordance with the provisions of this article. A permit shall not be issued for a period of time greater than 14 days. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 18-62. - Bond required for certain uses of county airport. 
No person may be granted a permit to use any of the facilities, runway or any other part or portion of the county airport for any crop duster services, to include the landing, takeoff, fueling, refueling, or the loading or unloading of any materials used in crop dusting or other aerial fertilizer application, without first posting a bond in the amount of $500.00 to cover any required cleanup or repairs of the airport as a result of the use of the county's airport for any of the uses set forth in this section or in section 18-61. The bond must be in a form approved by the county attorney, and secured by the deposit of cash or a bank's cashier's check payable to the county in the amount of $500.00. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 18-63. - Permit application, application fee and issuance of permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit for any of the activities specified in sections 18-61 and 18-62 in accordance with the provisions of this article shall make application to the board of commissioners in the form as established by the clerk of the board and pay a permit fee of $15.00. 
(b)  The application shall contain, at a minimum, the name, address and telephone number of the applicant; an identification of the aircraft to be used, including the FAA's (Federal Aviation Administration) identification number; the name and address of the owner of the aircraft to be used in the aerial application service; the name and address of the owner of the property upon which an aerial application of any material is to be applied; an identification of the product to be applied by aerial application; and the date and time the airport will be used under the permit. 
(c)  The application shall be reviewed by the chairman of the board of commissioners, or the clerk of the board if the chairman is unavailable to consider and respond to the application within 48 hours, who shall, if the application is complete and the bond has been given and secured as required, issue the permit listing thereon the effective date of the permit. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2002, § 3) 
Sec. 18-64. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating this article, or any provision hereof, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00, and/or a sentence of one to 60 days in the county jail. The magistrate court shall have authority to permit the sentenced party to perform community service in lieu of payment of that portion of a fine imposed above $250.00 at the rate of $6.00 per hour; however, this would not include any statutory imposed fine add-ons. The performance of such community service shall be in compliance with such conditions as the magistrate may order. 
(b)  No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any person who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post bond for his future appearance. 
(c)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations which shall be issued to an alleged violator of any provisions of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the representative of the county who completes and serves it. The citation may be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(d)  Citations issued under this article may be tried without a prosecuting attorney; however, if the prosecuting attorney is needed, the county attorney shall serve as the prosecuting attorney. 
(e)  Violations of this chapter shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county, and shall be tried in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the board of commissioners from bringing any civil action for injunction, or other proceedings to abate any violation of this article or other state or federal law. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed in this section shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanction, penalty or remedy provided by law. 
(g)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2002, § 4) 
Secs. 18-65—18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AIRPORT RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 18-91. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The rules and regulations governing the county airport as adopted November 7, 1972, and amended by resolution on May 9, 1995, are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes, ch. 50; planning, ch. 62; roads and bridges, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.; water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.; authority to adopt codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 22-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 2-12-1991, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-32. - Residential buildings; restrictions on construction; water usage. 
On or after April 1, 1992, no construction may be initiated within the unincorporated areas of the county for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. of 2-12-1991, § 2; Ord. of 7-9-1991, § 1) 
Sec. 22-33. - Commercial buildings; restrictions on construction, water usage. 
On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated with the unincorporated areas of the county for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of section 22-32(2)—(5). 
(Ord. of 2-12-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 22-34. - Applicability of requirements. 
The requirements of section 22-32 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after April 1, 1992, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacements of toilets or showers, or both. 
(Ord. of 2-12-1991, § 4; Ord. of 7-9-1991, § 2) 
Sec. 22-35. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 22-32—22-34 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsections (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the county commission. A fee of no more than $25.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. The fee rate shall be determined from time to time by the chairman of the board of commissioners based on actual cost and maintained for public inspection in the county commission office. 
(Ord. of 2-12-1991, § 5) 
Sec. 22-36. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the chairman of the board of commissioners or his designee, or any law enforcement officer. Citations for violations shall be issued as provided for by law for the enforcement of county ordinances. 
(b)  Any person or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the magistrate court of the county under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. 
(Ord. of 2-12-1991, § 6) 
Secs. 22-37—22-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 13, 2009, §§ 101—406, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as art. III, divs. 1—4, §§ 22-61—22-73, 22-81—22-88, 22-101—22-115, and 22-126—22-130, were at the discretion of the editor.  Subsequently, an amendment enacted Oct. 13, 2009, effective Oct. 1, 2009, repealed the former div. 4, mobile homes/manufactured homes, §§ 22-126—22-139, and enacted a new div. 4, §§ 22-126—22-130.  Subsequently, an ordinance adopted June 8, 2010, repealed former div. 4, §§ 22-126—22-139, and adopted new similar provisions as set out in ch. 50, Manufactured Homes/Mobile Homes. 

DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

Sec. 22-61. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes. Hereinafter all of the codes shall be referred to as the "technical codes". 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 101) 
Sec. 22-62. - Code remedial. 
(a)  General. These technical codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof - which are public safety, health, and general welfare - through structural, strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the technical code except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of the technical code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the county nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 102) 
Sec. 22-63. - Scope—Applicability. 
(a)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Building. The provisions of the Standard Building Code, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(c)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(d)  Gas. The provisions of the Standard Gas Code, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories. 
(e)  Mechanical. The provisions of the Standard Mechanical Code, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems. 
(f)  Plumbing. The provisions of the Standard Plumbing Code, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewage system. 
(g)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use, and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(h)  Energy. The provisions of the Model Energy Code, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(i)  CABO one- and two-family dwelling. The provisions of the One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- and two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such dwelling. 
(j)  The associated codes and standards. The following codes, the latest editions as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they are copied fully herein: Unsafe Building Abatement Code; International Residential Code (Appendix G, "Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs"); Standard Housing Code; Standard Amusement Device Code; Standard Excavation and Grading Code; and the Standard Existing Building Code. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 103) 
Sec. 22-64. - Federal and state authority. 
The provisions of these codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, or any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of these codes or of any remedy the existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its rights as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 104) 
Sec. 22-65. - Appendices. 
Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 105) 
Sec. 22-66. - Referenced standards. 
Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard; the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 106) 
Sec. 22-67. - Maintenance. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 107) 
Sec. 22-68. - Department of planning and building. 
The department of planning and building ("department") is hereby established and shall be composed of a director and sufficient staff to perform the purpose as previously stated. The expenditures of this department, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for this purpose by the Brantley County Board of Commissioners. The director, hereafter known as the building official, shall be appointed by the Brantley County Board of Commissioners in conformance with qualifications and procedures specified by the county personnel policy. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 108) 
Sec. 22-69. - Restrictions on employees. 
An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this Code, shall not have financial interest in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflicts with the interests of the department. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 109) 
Sec. 22-70. - Records. 
The department of planning and building shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 110) 
Sec. 22-71. - Liability. 
Any officer or employee, or member of the department charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not hereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by the county until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 111) 
Sec. 22-72. - Reports. 
The department of planning and building shall file a report annually covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. Said report may incorporate a summary of the decisions of the board of appeals during said year. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 112) 
Sec. 22-73. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, mechanical, gas or plumbing system without requiring the entire structure, building, electrical, mechanical, gas or plumbing system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes, provided that the new alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing systems shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed (i.e. from residential to commercial or from single-family to multifamily), the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state as historic buildings, when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
Secs. 22-74—22-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 22-81. - General. 
The building official or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building official or his designee is further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 201) 
Sec. 22-82. - Right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises, at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these technical codes, provided that, if such building or premises is occupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 202) 
Sec. 22-83. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, or placed in a conspicuous location on the property and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to issuing a stop work order. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 203) 
Sec. 22-84. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this Code, in any case where there has been a false statement or misrepresentation of the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violations of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the Code. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 204) 
Sec. 22-85. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 205) 
Sec. 22-86. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirement necessary for the strength, stability or proper operations of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 206) 
Sec. 22-87. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate, including, but not limited to certification by a structural engineer registered by the State of Georgia as a P.E., (Professional Engineer). 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 207) 
Sec. 22-88. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent found to be violating a provision of the technical codes, or failing to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of this Code is committed or continued, shall be considered a separate violation, for which a citation or other such penalty as allowed under state law, shall issue. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 208) 
Secs. 22-89—22-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 22-101. - Permit application. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(1)  Building size requirements. 
a.  A building permit shall be required for all buildings of greater than 120 square feet. 
b.  Buildings under 120 square feet are exempted from the requirement of a building permit unless they are attached to a permanent foundation in which case a building permit will be required. 
(2)  Additional permits that may be issued include: 
a.  Dock permits. 
b.  Electrical permits. 
c.  Plumbing permits. 
d.  Mechanical permits. 
e.  Pool permits. 
f.  Culvert permit. 
g.  Sign permit. 
h.  Demolition permit. 
(b)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(c)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(d)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(e)  Application time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless the department has already issued a permit. The building official may allow up to two extensions for a period of not more than 90 days each, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 301) 
Sec. 22-102. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the permit application. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, specifying the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data, where the building official requires such data to be prepared by an architect or engineer, shall be affixed with the official seal of the architect or engineer. 
(c)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where there is a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and will also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(d)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(e)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage area must be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantity per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. The building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits for rated assemblies with their hourly rating location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 302) 
Sec. 22-103. - Engineered/manufactured metal buildings. 
(a)  Permanent structures. All permanent metal buildings shall be engineered to comply with the standard building code for wind load requirements in Brantley County. Plans submitted for review shall be accompanied by an engineered foundation plan. 
(b)  Portable structures. All portable metal buildings shall be tied down/anchored sufficiently to meet the Brantley County Wind Load Requirements. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 303) 
Sec. 22-104. - Examination of documents. 
(a)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws regarding egress, construction and general arrangement and, shall be accompanied by the drawings showing the structural design and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes, regarding strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided that the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the particular system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building officials relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 304) 
Sec. 22-105. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contact documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. The building official shall have three business days to approve/deny all residential permits and ten business days to approve/deny all commercial permits. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws and ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal, when the applicant requests, shall be in writing and shall contain the reasons for refusal. 
(c)  Public right-of-way. The building official shall not issue a permit for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the application for building permit has been reviewed by the planning and building department for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 305) 
Sec. 22-106. - Contractors responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state and local rules and regulations concerning them. Where the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before the contract is permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with a copy of his state and local license and a signed certification of intent to perform the work. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 306) 
Sec. 22-107. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. 
(b)  Time limitations on permits. A permit shall be valid for one year. Two extensions of time, for periods not more than six months each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension(s) shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. The building official shall document in writing the approval of such extension(s). If a written request for an extension is not made in writing within 30 days after the expiration date, the permit becomes void. Every permit shall become void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 12 months after its issuance, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of more than 12 months. No permit shall be valid for more than two years. 
(c)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations to supervise such work. In addition, the architect or engineer shall be responsible for complying with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and, upon completion, making and filing with the building official a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are approved by the building official. 
(d)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance". The building official shall retain one set of drawings so reviewed and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 307) 
Sec. 22-108. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the Brantley County Board of Commissioners have been paid. Likewise, an amendment to a permit shall not be released until any additional fee relating to the amendments have been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permittee in addition to the required permittees. 
(c)  Accounting. The department of planning and building shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing an application, in accordance with the fee schedule as set by the governing body in Appendix A. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 308) 
Sec. 22-109. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (f). He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy is issued by the building official. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official, upon 24-hour advance notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 

 
(g)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. The building official shall provide written release only after an inspection has been made of successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, gas, fire protection or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, gas, electrical, fire protection work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(i)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(j)  Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the technical codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted there under, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 309) 
Sec. 22-110. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection, etc. systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, etc. Systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specification, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
(3)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 310) 
Sec. 22-111. - Service utilities. 
(a)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(b)  [Temporary service.] Temporary service will be allowed for the following purposes only: 
(1)  The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems. 
(2)  Temporary electrical power and lighting installations (building saws) shall be permitted during the period of construction, remodeling, maintenance, repair, or demolition of buildings, structures, equipment, or similar activities. 
(3)  Temporary electrical power and lighting installations shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 90 days for holiday decorative lighting, carnivals, and similar purposes. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. In the case of temporary services, temporary wiring shall be removed immediately upon completion of construction or purpose for which the wiring was installed. 
(d)  Sanitation provisions. Adequate sanitation will be required for each job site. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 311) 
Sec. 22-112. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the planning and building department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the owner of the building is responsible for conspicuously posting on each story of the structure, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official in the plan. The safe floor loads shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. The owner of the building shall be responsible for maintaining such plates, and shall promptly replace the plates if they are lost or defaced. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 312) 
Sec. 22-113. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 313) 
Sec. 22-114. - Construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
The Brantley County Board of Commissioners may create a construction board of adjustment and appeals. If and when such board is created, it shall adhere to the provisions set forth by the standard building code for such board. In the absence of such board, the board of commissioners shall perform this function. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 314) 
Sec. 22-115. - Automatic update of building codes. 
At the time the State of Georgia adopts a new code or a supplement, revision or amendment to an existing code, the Brantley County Building Code Ordinance shall be deemed automatically amended to include the latest provision of such code. It being the intent of the board to require compliance with the latest code editions as amended from time to time, no formal amendment process shall be required. Nothing herein shall be construed to require construction, for which a permit has already been issued, to comply with such supplements or amendments unless such supplement or amendment specifically states that it is intended to apply to construction in progress. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § 315) 
Secs. 22-116—22-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 8, 2010, §§ 1—10, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as art. IV, §§ 22-151—22-160 was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 22-151. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Brantley County Nuisance Abatement Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 22-152. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of Brantley County that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the county to enforce any provisions of any local act, ordinance, or regulation, nor to prevent punishment of violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 2) 
Sec. 22-153. - Findings. 
(a)  The board of commissioners declares and finds that, within the unincorporated areas of Brantley County, there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use, and which are not in compliance with the applicable state or minimum standard codes as adopted by local ordinance or operation of law, or any building, fire, life safety or other codes relating to the safe use of real property and real property improvements, adopted by local ordinance or general nuisance law, and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of Brantley County, Georgia, and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  The board of commissioners further finds that, within the unincorporated areas of Brantley County, there are in existence conditions or uses of real estate which render adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, that such uses are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of Brantley County, and that a public necessity exists for the repair of such conditions or the cessation of such uses which render the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. 
(c)  The board of commissioners further finds that there exist in the county dwellings, buildings, or structures, which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation, which are not in compliance with applicable codes, which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities, which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities, or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous, or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or in which drug crimes are being committed, and that power is conferred upon the county under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq., as amended, to exercise the county's police power to repair, close, or demolish such dwellings, buildings, or structures in the manner provided in this article. 
(d)  The board of commissioners further finds that in unincorporated Brantley County there exist endangerments to the public health, safety, or welfare as a result of unsanitary or unsafe private property. 
(e)  This article shall only be applicable to real property located in the unincorporated area of Brantley County. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 3) 
Sec. 22-154. - Intent and purpose. 
The Brantley County Board of Commissioners hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform summary procedure for use in the abatement of public nuisances in unincorporated Brantley County. The provisions hereof are adopted pursuant to the authority provided by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq., as amended. It is the further purpose and intent of this chapter that the procedures established hereunder shall comply with the minimum provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 4) 
Sec. 22-155. - Definitions. 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance or the minimum standard codes provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A., provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
County means Brantley County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Dwelling, building, or structure means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwelling, building, or structure" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title to property in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 20-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupation tax in relation to the subject property within the previous calendar year to who have purchased business license from the Brantley County; 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the tax commissioner as to the subject property, dwelling, building, or structure for the most recent tax year in which such returns have become due. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department of the government of the county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, et seq. and by this article to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with applicable codes and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the unincorporated area of Brantley County on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 5) 
Sec. 22-156. - Duties of owners; appointment and designation of public officers; nuisance abatement procedure. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within unincorporated area of Brantley County to (1) construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within unincorporated area of Brantley County, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances; and (2) to keep such property reasonably clean and free of any materials or conditions which create a health or safety hazard either on such dwelling, building, structure or property or to surrounding persons or dwellings, buildings, structures, or properties. 
(b)  No owner shall allow any property located within the unincorporated area of Brantley County to be used in the commission of drug crimes. 
(c)  The board of commissioners appoints or designates the building inspector, county fire chief, county sheriff, and their designees as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(d)  Whenever a request is filed with a public officer by a public authority; by at least five residents of unincorporated Brantley County; or upon the recommendation of the county manager (following his determination that a violation continues to exist despite an order(s) to correct said violation and imposition of a fine), by a public officer: 
(1)  Is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use or it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that the dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use; or 
(2)  Is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(3)  Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges with the approval of the chairman of the board of commissioners, file in a court of competent jurisdiction and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure, a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists. The complaint shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain, to be not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner of the parties in interest, state with particularity the factual basis for the action, and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(e)  The parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(f)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the property, dwelling, building, or structure under consideration meets one or more of the standards enumerated in subsection (d) so as to constitute a public nuisance, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order which does one of the following: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into compliance with all applicable codes relevant to the cited violation(s) and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factored in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 43 of the O.C.G.A., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in Brantley County. 
(g)  The order entered under subsection (f) shall further provide that, if the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the times specified in the order of abatement by owner unless extended pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b)(5). The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(1)  If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be removed or demolished; provided, however, that such removal or demolition shall not occur until the board of commissioners, in consultation with the county attorney, has approved such removal or demolition with respect to the particular property or properties in question. 
(h)  Costs of such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such costs shall include but not be limited to the costs of demolition, reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the Brantley County Tax Commissioner, restoration to grade of the real property should it be demolished, and title examination costs. The order should recite the amount of costs incurred by Brantley County as of the date of the order. Upon preparing a final statement of costs, the public officer shall prepare a "lien for costs of abatement" detailing any and all such costs. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition, in the office of the Clerk of Brantley County Superior Court. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Brantley County and enter the lien for costs abatement on the general execution docket. Such lien should cross-reference the order and include the original caption and case number from the nuisance abatement action. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid in full. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the Brantley County Tax Commissioner. 
(i)  It shall be the duty of the Brantley County Tax Commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The Brantley County Tax Commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the board of commissioners. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(1)  The board of commissioners may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with Brantley County agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. Such contract shall include reimbursement to the county of all amounts and costs incurred in attempting to bring the property into compliance. 
(2)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the Superior Court of Brantley County, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the Superior Court of Brantley County under [sic] 
(3)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may (but is not required to) seek to enforce such citation in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(4)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of Brantley County to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 6) 
Sec. 22-157. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances, dwellings, buildings or structures are vacant and sample of conditions or nuisances. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure, of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures, or of other residents of the county. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards, which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by amendment to this article. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 7) 
Sec. 22-158. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate conditions in Brantley County in order to determine which dwellings, building, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises, for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 8) 
Sec. 22-159. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of Brantley County. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of Brantley County; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of Brantley County, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax records or real estate records of the clerk of the superior court and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in Brantley County once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or personal representative of such person shall be served, and, if such guardian or personal representative resides outside Brantley County or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of Brantley County at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this article, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(f)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court in Brantley County at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(g)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 9) 
Sec. 22-160. - Definitions incorporated. 
It is the intent of this article that the definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 are incorporated herein in the event of conflict or amendments to the language of the definition. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 10) 
Chapter 26 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainment, ch. 10; emergency services, ch. 38; taxation, ch. 74; telecommunications, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Flea market vendors' records, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-360; Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-370 et seq.; Fair Business Practices Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.; authority to prohibit, regulate or tax fortunetelling, astrology and palmistry and similar practices, businesses and professions, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-15; authority to regulate peddling and fix the cost of licenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1(a)(9); evidence of state license as prerequisite to local business license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; exemption from taxation of agricultural products and livestock raised in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356; local taxes and fees authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(b). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-31. - Occupation tax required for business dealings. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the county, whether with a location in the unincorporated area of the county, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation; which business tax registration certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, such business tax certificate shall be shown to the clerk of the board of commissioners, or such official's designee or to any law enforcement officer of the county upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 2) 
Sec. 26-32. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The business and occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. Any other applicable business licenses pursuant to pertinent general state law and/or local ordinance are not repealed, included or affected in any manner by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 3) 
Sec. 26-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business tax and occupation tax mean a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Jurisdiction means the unincorporated area of the county. 
Location or office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession and practitioner of occupation mean one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioners of professions and occupations" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 4) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-34. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  Levied. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated area of the county and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
The number of employees of the business or practitioner who work within the county. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule; number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and may be developed and updated from time to time by the board of commissioners: 

 
(c)  Exceptions; exemptions. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(d)  Amount paid. Where a business subject to the tax levied by this article begins operation in the first half of the calendar year, then the full tax shall be paid; if the business begins operation after July 1, then one-half of the tax shall be paid. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 5) 
Sec. 26-35. - Paying occupation tax of business out of state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the county and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 6) 
Sec. 26-36. - Business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the county's jurisdiction shall identify the line of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the county and that line of business being noted by the county government upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 7) 
Sec. 26-37. - Business at more than one location. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 8) 
Sec. 26-38. - Occupation tax classified in O.C.G.A. 
(a)  Practitioners as described in O.C.G.A. Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on the number of employees as set forth in section 22-32. 
(2)  A fee of $25.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 31 of each year. 
(b)  Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 9) 
Sec. 26-39. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. The registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 31 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the county in 1996, or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be due immediately upon beginning business. A ten-percent penalty shall be imposed if the tax levied in this article has not been paid within 90 days of its due date. The tax registration provided for in this article shall be issued by the clerk of the board of commissioners and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall, upon conviction, be punished by fine and/or imprisonment as provided in section 26-52. 
(b)  In addition to the remedies in subsection (a) of this section, the tax may be collected in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. The clerk of the board of commissioners is authorized to issue executions against the delinquent taxpayer as provided O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26(a). 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 10) 
Sec. 26-40. - Businesses operated for charitable purposes. 
No business on which an occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from the registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds from the business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 11) 
Sec. 26-41. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain: 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for the business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such business, the persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this article before commencing such business; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county, any of the kinds of businesses, trades, professions, or occupation without first having so obtained such registration shall be subject to penalties provided in section 26-52. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 12) 
Sec. 26-42. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 13) 
Sec. 26-43. - License duration. 
Each license issued under this article shall be valid for the calendar year in which issued. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 14) 
Sec. 26-44. - Transfers prohibited. 
No tax registration certificate issued under this article shall be transferable; and no registration certificate shall be exchanged for a registration certificate for a different type of business. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 15) 
Sec. 26-45. - Application. 
(a)  Every person subject to the tax levied under this article shall, on or before January 31st of each year, or prior to engaging in said business, file with the Clerk of the Brantley County Commission or her designed representative, an application for a county business and occupation tax registration certificate. 
(b)  Every person subject to the tax shall make application for said registration certificate on forms provided by the county, setting forth, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Name of business/occupation; 
(2)  Location of the business/occupation office; 
(3)  Exact nature of business/occupation for which a registration certificate is requested; and 
(4)  A copy of a picture identification document issued by a state or federal agency, such as a driver's license, identifying the applicant thereon. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 16; Ord. of 12-14-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 26-46. - Veterans. 
Persons who can qualify for a state veterans free license under O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1 must secure such license from the state and present such license to the county clerk, who will honor such license and issue a county business and occupation tax registration certificate without requiring payment of the tax and mark the registration certificate "Exempt from tax." 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 17) 
Sec. 26-47. - Displaying registration certificate. 
All persons having paid the tax required by this article shall exhibit the business and occupation tax registration certificate, or receipt therefor, issued them by the county clerk in a conspicuous place in the office or quarters of such establishment or place of business. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 18) 
Sec. 26-48. - Location of business. 
(a)  Registration certificate location. Registration certificates granted under this article shall not authorize the holder of such certificate to exercise or carry on the trade, business, or profession named therein at any other place than that mentioned in the registration certificate. 
(b)  Change of location. Upon removal of any taxpayer from the premises at which the trade, business, or profession identified on the registration certificate was authorized to be conducted, it may and shall be lawful for the county clerk, by endorsement upon such registration certificate, to authorize the taxpayer, removing to any other location, to carry on the trade, business or profession under such certificate. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, §§ 19, 20) 
Sec. 26-49. - Refund to discontinued business. 
When the tax fixed by this article has been paid during the first half of the calendar year and the person paying such tax discontinues the business during the first half of the calendar year, the county clerk may refund one-half of such year's tax, provided all other license fees and other taxes owed by the taxpayer to the county have been paid, and provided application therefor is made within 30 days after discontinuing the business. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 21) 
Sec. 26-50. - Restrictions. 
No person shall be issued a the county business and occupation tax registration certificate as provided for in this article, who is required to hold a license issued by the state to engage in the business profession or trade for which the person seeks to engage in, or is required to obtain health permits, or any other such regulatory permit or license, unless the person has a valid and current state license, or show evidence that all regulatory requirements have been met and attaches a copy of the application. Any revocation or suspension of a person's state license or permit will cause an immediate termination or suspension of such person's registration certificate issued by the county. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 22) 
Sec. 26-51. - Enforcement. 
The sheriff of the county, the deputies thereto, constables and all other law enforcement officers and the county clerk shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of this article. 
Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall be signed by the officer who completes and services it, and the original shall be filed with the court. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 23) 
Sec. 26-52. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 24) 
Sec. 26-53. - Court proceedings. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citation as described in section 26-51 and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. The county attorney shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county, and shall be tried in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the commissioners of the county from bringing any civil action to present, correct or abate any violation of this article. No penalty or remedy prescribed in this article shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other penalty or remedy by law. 
(d)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 25) 
Sec. 26-54. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes or fees levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance, or failure to comply with any other provisions thereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 26) 
Sec. 26-55. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1996, the board of commissioners shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1995, § 27) 
Secs. 26-56—26-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS; PAWNSHOPS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted April 9, 2015, in effect, repealed art. III, §§ 26-91—26-96 and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. Former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted November 14, 1995. 
State Law reference— Duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., see O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120 et seq.; Junk dealers, see O.C.G.A § 43-22-1 et seq.; Dealers in precious metals and gems, see O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; Dealers in used watches, see O.C.G.A. §43-491 et seq.; Liens - Pawnbrokers, factors, bailees, etc., see O.C.G.A. §44-14-400 et seq.; and Liens - Jewelers, see O.C.G.A. § 44-14-430 et seq. 

Sec. 26-91. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Dealer in precious metals and gems means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, who engages in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or articles containing any precious metal or gem, including coins, from members of the general public for resale to brokers, dealers or melters. 
Electronic reporting system means a computer based system, as specified by the sheriff, which is designed to record and transmit data and information electronically. 
Gems means any precious or semi-precious stone which is cut and polished. 
Goods means every species of tangible personal property. 
Pawnbroker means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this section. 
Pawnshop means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in the section. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or other legal entity however organized. 
Precious metals means, gold, silver or platinum or any metal containing gold, silver or platinum. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Sec. 26-92. - Jurisdiction and penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article as amended shall be punished upon conviction in the Magistrate Court of Brantley County. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Sec. 26-93. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for a buyer of precious metals and gems to engage in such business within the county without first obtaining a license in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Sec. 26-94. - Application for license. 
Applicants for a license pursuant to this chapter shall file with the county clerk a written application under oath, signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the president of the corporation, and showing the following: 
(1)  The name of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on within the county; the local address of such person while engaged in such business; the permanent address of such person; the capacity in which such person will act, that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise; the name and address of the person on whose account the business will be conducted, if any; and, if a corporation, the name of the state in which the corporation is located; 
(2)  The place within the county where it is proposed to conduct the applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that such business will be conducted; 
(3)  Credentials from the person for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as representative; and 
(4)  Such other reasonable information as to the identity and character of the person having the management or supervision of the business and the manner of doing business as the county commissioners may deem proper in order to fulfil the purpose of this chapter in the protection of the public interest. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Sec. 26-95. - Posting of license. 
The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted conspicuously and prominently in the place of business named therein. If the applicant desires to do business in more than one place within the county, separate licenses shall be purchased and issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously and prominently in each place of business. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Sec. 26-96. - License fee. 
License under this chapter shall pay a license fee of $250.00 for each calendar year or portion of a year in which the licensee engages in business within the county. For each business location in addition to one, the licensee shall pay an additional license fee of $250.00 for each calendar year or portion of a year in which the licensee conducts business at such additional location. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Sec. 26-97. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the board of commissioners and its designated hearing officer, the county manager, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license; 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with any purchase transaction; 
(2)  Failure to maintain the daily record as required in this chapter; 
(3)  Any other violation of this chapter; or 
(4)  Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in any unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be served on the licensee by handing the notice personally to the person in charge of the licensee's business, or by mailing the notice, postage prepaid, to the licensee, at his/her last known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Sec. 26-98. - Records and information to be recorded. 
Every person or business engaged as a pawnbroker, pawnshop, or dealer in precious metals and gems within the unincorporated areas of the county shall secure from every personal from whom he or she receives any goods, except used books, whether by purchase or through pledge, trade, pawn or exchange, the following: 
(1)  Government-issued photo identification card, such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card or passport; 
(2)  The name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, date of birth, and a social security or driver's license number; 
(3)  A digital photograph clearly showing a frontal view of the subject's face. Each digital image shall be labeled with the date and time of the transaction and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption. If the same subject makes additional transactions within 30 days of the original transaction; provides the same governmental issued photo identification card as mentioned above; and the subject's appearance has not materially changes, a new digital photograph shall not be required until a transaction is made after 30 days from the original transaction; 
(4)  A complete and accurate description of the goods acquired, and a digital photograph or image of the goods acquired including the following information, if available: 
a.  Brand name; 
b.  Model number; 
c.  Manufacturer's serial number; 
d.  Size; 
e.  Color, as apparent to the untrained eye; 
f.  Precious metal type, weight, and content if known; 
g.  Gemstone description, including the number of stones; 
h.  In the case of firearms, the type of actions, caliber or gauge, number of barrels, barrel length, and finish; 
i.  Any other unique identifying marks, numbers or letters; 
j.  The date and time of transaction. 
(5)  The pawnbroker, pawnshop, and dealer in precious metals and gems shall maintain the above information and digital photographs or images for a period of three years and make the same available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(6)  The pawnbroker, pawnshop, and dealer in precious metals and gems shall require the seller to sign a statement verifying that the seller is the rightful owner of the goods or is entitled to sell, consign, or trade the goods. 
(7)  This section shall not apply to the receipt of used books or pawn transactions commonly known as "title pawn" transactions where the pawnbroker takes possession of a motor vehicle certificate of title, takes a security interest in the motor vehicle certificate of title, and retains physical possession of the vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Sec. 26-99. - Report to sheriff; required format. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker, pawnshop, and dealer in precious metals and gems located within the county shall make a computer-generated daily report, in such format as prescribed by the sheriff, of all transactions that occurred during the 24-hour period ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. A report shall be made each day prior to 11:59 p.m. for each day the operator or dealer transacts business. If an operator or dealer is closed, or does not otherwise engage in any transactions on a particular day, a report indicating "no transactions" shall be filed for that day. Daily reports shall be filed electronically by posting a law enforcement web site designated by the sheriff. When technological problems prevent posting the daily report electronically, a printed, typed or legibly handwritten report shall be delivered to the sheriff's department in lieu thereof. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the receipt of used books or pawn transactions commonly known as "title pawn" transactions where the pawnbroker takes possession of a motor vehicle certificate of title; takes a security interest in the motor vehicle certificate of title, and retains physical possession of the vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Sec. 26-100. - Hold period; sheriff holds. 
(a)  Any pawnbroker, pawnshop, in precious metals and gems, or person operating under a license granted pursuant to this chapter who takes good or pawn or who buys goods, taking full title thereto, shall hold the goods so taken in pawn for at least 30 days before disposing of the goods by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(b)  The county sheriff's department, or any other law enforcement agency, has the authority to place property that is the subject of the sheriff's department or law enforcement investigation on "sheriffs hold". In that event, the county sheriff's department, or other law enforcement agency, shall notify the pawnbroker, pawnshop, or dealer in precious metals and gems of the need for a "sheriff or other law enforcement hold" and identify all property subject to the "said hold". Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker, pawnshop, or dealer in precious metals and gems to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from "sheriff or other law enforcement hold" status or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Sec. 26-101. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for pawnbroker, pawnshop, dealer in precious metals and gems or person operating under a license granted pursuant to this chapter to commit any of the following acts: 
Fail to make an entry of any material matter in the daily record of said business; Make any false: 
(1)  Entry in the daily record of said business; 
(2)  Falsify, obliterate or destroy the daily record of said business or remove the daily record from the place of business; 
(3)  Refusal to allow the county sheriff's department or duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect the daily record of said business or any goods in the possession of said business during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time; 
(4)  Fail to comply with this article as amended in any other material way; or 
(5)  Fail to comply with the ordinance of November 14, 1995, not otherwise amended as herein set out. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Sec. 26-102. - Enforcement. 
The county sheriff, the deputies thereof, constables, and all other law enforcement officers shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provision of this article, as amended. Such citations shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the county magistrate court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, shall be signed by the officer who completes and serves it. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Sec. 26-103. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating this article, as amended or any provision hereof upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: By a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the county jail for up to 60 days, or both. 
(b)  No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any person who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the Magistrate Court of Brantley County and required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Sec. 26-104. - Court proceedings. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citation as described in section 26-102 of this amended article and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. The county attorney shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the Magistrate Court of Brantley County, and shall be tried in accordance with the O.C.G.A., Chapter 15-10. 
(c)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2015; Amd. of 2-4-2016) 
Secs. 26-105—26-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SHOOTING GALLERIES AND FIREARM RANGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; Georgia Firearms and Weapons Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120 et seq. 

Sec. 26-131. - Findings. 
(a)  The board of commissioners, based on common knowledge, investigation, and experience derived from other local government jurisdictions, believes that shooting galleries and firearm range establishments as defined in this article, if unregulated, would likely have an adverse impact upon adjacent property and the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(b)  The county's law enforcement resources available for responding to problems generally associated with unregulated shooting galleries and firearm ranges are limited and are best conserved by regulating such operations. 
(c)  The protection of the public's health, safety, welfare and property interest require that shooting galleries and/or firearm range establishments, their locations and operations be regulated in order to reduce the potential for harm, and preserve the quality of life in residential and business areas of the community. 
(d)  It is the duty of the board of commissioners to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the county, its residents, and the character of its neighborhoods and developments. 
(e)  The laws of the state authorize a county governing authority to adopt rules and regulations for the protection of the health, safety, welfare and property of its citizens, and O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 authorizes a local government to require a regulated business to pay a regulatory fee. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999) 
Sec. 26-132. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses to the end that the adverse effect on the public health, safety, and welfare of the county, and on its citizens and property, and on the character of its neighborhoods and development will be curtailed, and to impose a regulatory fee on such regulated businesses. This article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests for the protection of people and property through the regulation of shooting galleries and firearm ranges versus any legally protected rights of such operations and its patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment, or activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 26-133. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chairman means the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
Church means a place where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
Conviction means an adjudication of guilty, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the state First Offender Act (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq.). 
Distance and measurement mean the measurement in lineal feet from any part of the proposed premises of a shooting gallery or firearm range establishment to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence, or hospital. A radius shall be measured from the property line of the proposed premises of such establishment to the nearest church, library, school, college, public park, residence or hospital, to include any parking lot, garage or outbuilding associated with such premises. 
Employee means any person engaged to provide or in fact providing services for a shooting gallery or firearm range to patrons whether for legal consideration or otherwise. 
Firearm means any legally possessed hand held weapon from which a shot or bullet is expelled (fired) by explosive force, i.e., a rifle, pistol or shotgun. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if such person has not been convicted of a felony, any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, or a drug-related, alcohol-related, or sex-related crime in the past ten years. 
Minor for the purposes of this article means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Park means any lands or facility owned, operated, controlled or managed by a county, city, state or federal government or any governmental entity or agency in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Residence means a house, apartment, mobile home, boardinghouse or roominghouse, duplex, or other multifamily housing, presently being used or that is regularly occupied by or used for human dwelling. 
School means any state, county, city, church or other schools, public or private, that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges, post high school learning centers, kindergartens and day care centers for persons of all ages. 
Shooting gallery and firearm range mean an area or business establishment designated and operated by a person for the sport shooting of firearms at a designated target or otherwise for the payment of a fee, membership, contribution, or dues or by invitation of an authorized person, or any area so designated regardless of the terms of admission thereto. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-134. - Regulations. 
The following regulations apply to all shooting galleries and/or firearm ranges as described in this article and located within the unincorporated areas of the county: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to employ minors or any person that is not of good moral character in a licensed premises. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of any person under the age of 14 years within a licensed premises. 
(3)  No shooting gallery or firearm range establishment shall be located within the following distances as defined and measured: 
a.  Within 1,000 feet of any single-family or multifamily residence or within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which may be zoned for single-family or multifamily uses or purposes; 
b.  Within 1,000 feet of a church, school, governmentally owned or operated building, library, civic center, public park, hospital, nursing home or community club; 
c.  Within 1,000 feet of another shooting gallery or firearm range establishment; 
d.  Within 1,000 feet of an establishment selling alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  The minimum standards for the operation of a safe shooting gallery or firearm range approved, adopted or established by the National Rifle Association (NRA), as from time to time amended, are hereby established and set as the minimum requirements to be in place for the operation of a shooting gallery or firearm range in the unincorporated area of the county. No shooting gallery or firearm range establishment shall be granted a license that does not have in place and meet the minimum standards for such an operation. In addition to the minimum standards required for the operation of a shooting gallery or firearm range, the licensee must post conspicuously in the shooting area a list of shooter's safety rules for patrons to see, which must include the following rules: 
a.  No person shall have a loaded weapon anywhere about the firing range or premises, except at a clearly marked loading and firing area. 
b.  No person shall stand or sit about the premises with a loaded weapon in his possession unless actually in the designated firing zone. 
c.  There shall be no person under the age of 18 years on the premises without a parent, guardian or designated supervising person over the age of 21 years. 
d.  No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or illegal substances on the licensed premises and any person suspected of being under such influence shall not be permitted on the premises. 
(5)  No shooting gallery or firearm range establishment licensee shall employ or contract with any person to work or provide any services in such establishment who is a person not permitted for employment pursuant to this article. 
(6)  A shooting gallery and/or firearm range establishment shall be closed between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, and from 12:00 midnight through 11:59 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(7)  No licensee shall permit the use of alcoholic beverages of any kind to be sold, possessed or consumed in or on the premises, or permit anyone who appears to be under the influence such alcoholic beverages to come upon or remain on the premises. 
(8)  No licensee shall permit the use of any illegal drugs or illegally controlled substances of any kind to be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold in or on the premises, or permit anyone who appears to be under the influence of such drugs to come upon or remain on the premises. 
Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) of this section, a shooting gallery or firearm range establishment operating in an unincorporated area of the county on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall not be required to meet the distance requirements set forth in this section as the distance requirement pertains to such location for so long as the licensee holds a legally recognized and perfected property right to use and possess such location as of the date of filing of an application for a shooting gallery or firearm range license or renewal thereof, but only if such legal right as to such location was vested at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article was derived and such vested legal right has continued without the necessity of act or consent to renew, continue or extend such applicant's property right by applicant or other party holding a superior legal property right in such location. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 3) 
Sec. 26-135. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the unincorporated area of the county any shooting gallery or firearm range business or activity as defined in this article without a license to do so. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if such activity is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a shooting gallery or firearm range establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 4, 5) 
Sec. 26-136. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on a shooting gallery or firearm range establishment shall make application to the board of commissioners. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the county, shall be paid to the clerk of the county to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. Such fee is hereby established in the amount of $150.00. 
(b)  The application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any shooting gallery or firearm range establishment. 
(c)  All licenses shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws, applicable provisions of this article and other ordinances and resolutions of the county relating to such business. 
(d)  All licenses shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and revoked under the provisions of the Ordinances of Brantley County." 
(e)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(f)  Where the applicant: 
(1)  Is a corporation, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either: 
a.  The majority shareholder; or 
b.  A person employed full time in a managing capacity by the corporation; 
(2)  Is a partnership, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either: 
a.  The managing general partner; or 
b.  A person employed full time in a managing capacity by the partnership; 
(3)  Is a sole proprietor, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he is working full time in a managing capacity on the premises, and, if not, then to the sole proprietor and a person employed full time in a managing capacity by the sole proprietor. 
For purposes of this subsection, the term "managing capacity" means the president or chief executive officer or managing or general partner of a corporation or partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations at the location to be licensed and who is a full-time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietor, or other ownership entity. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 6) 
Sec. 26-137. - Application contents; supporting documents. 
(a)  Application for a shooting gallery of firearm range establishment license shall be written and on forms supplied by the office of the board of commissioners. Such application shall state the name, address, social security number and date of birth of the applicant, and the nature and character of the business to be carried on. 
(b)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation, the social security numbers of each of its current officers and directors as well as all stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, whether general or limited, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address, dates of birth and social security numbers of the partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. 
(1)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the premises and, if leased, a copy of the lease agreement. 
(3)  A plat, filed in duplicate, by a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 26-134(3) which provide that no shooting gallery or firearm range establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any residential premises, parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single-family uses or purposes; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; within 1,000 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined under this article is located; or within 1,000 feet of any establishment selling alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Should the requirements of this article dictate that more than one individual and/or entity apply for a license issue to such applicants, then all such applicants shall, on such application, designate the name, address and telephone number of an individual resident of the county, to act as agent for applicants/licensees for the purpose of receiving communications and notices under this article. Proof of delivery to the agent shall be conclusive proof of receipt by a licensee of such notice, process or information. 
(d)  Each application must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the county for filing and processing. 
(e)  All applicants for licenses as to any premises which is to be subsequently renovated or improved shall furnish in duplicate plans and renderings of the premises as it is to exist at the time of opening. The premises shall comply with all building, health and similar county codes, as well as meet the minimum standards for a shooting gallery or firearm range as set forth in the standards established by the National Rifle Association, and such standards, as they may be amended from time to time, are incorporated in this article by reference. 
(f)  Each application for a shooting gallery or firearm range establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by the following persons: 
(1)  The individual, if the applicant is an individual; 
(2)  The manager or general partner, if a partnership; 
(3)  The president of the corporation, if a corporation; 
(4)  The chief administrative official, if any other organization or association. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 7) 
Sec. 26-138. - Notice of intent to engage in business. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses for a shooting gallery or firearm range establishment shall give notice that application has been filed and of the purpose of making such application by publication of an advertisement once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration of the application by the board of commissioners in the newspaper in which legal advertisements are published. The first advertisement shall not appear more than 20 days prior to the date of such consideration. The advertisement shall be of type not smaller than ten point capital and lower case and shall be at least a two-inch column. The advertisement shall appear on the same days as legal advertisements are regularly published, but not among the published legal ads. 
(b)  The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business, the name of the applicant, the date, time and place of hearing, and a statement that any legal objections to the issuance must be made at or prior to the time of hearing, and, if prior to the time of hearing, must be in writing and received by the office of the board of commissioners on or before the date and time of hearing. 
(c)  Applicants shall provide proof of such notice by providing the board of commissioners, at the time of the hearing on license issuance, the affidavit of the publisher of the newspaper in which such notice was published, which affidavit shall reflect the content of the notice and the dates of publishing. 
(d)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign stating the following: "The County Shooting Gallery or Firearm Range License Applied for. A hearing before the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County shall be held on the ____________ day of ____________ ____________ . All interested persons take notice." The sign shall be at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks or other public property which adjoins the location so as to be clearly visible by persons using such public area. The sign shall be posed on the property from the date of the first publication of the legal advertisement through the date of consideration by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 8) 
Sec. 26-139. - Application; investigation; issuance. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners or his designee shall have a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days to investigate the application for a shooting gallery or firearm range establishment. Upon completion of the investigation and after holding a public hearing, the board of commissioners shall issue the license if it is determined that: 
(1)  The application conforms in all respects to this article. 
(2)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in this application. 
(3)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(4)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors or shareholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation, or any partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime involving a firearm for which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(5)  All buildings, structures, protective berms or other required protective structures, or location of such business, as proposed by applicant, comply with this article. 
(6)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(7)  On the date the business for which a license is required commences and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(8)  Notwithstanding subsections (1)—(7) of this section, no license shall be issued to an applicant if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of an application one or more of the following shall have occurred: 
a.  The same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of this article applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection for reasons related to the location itself. 
b.  The location has been rejected for any applicant. 
c.  The applicant has withdrawn, without providential cause, an application at any time within seven days immediately preceding the time and date set for the hearing before the board of commissioners unless at least one year shall have expired from such withdrawal. The one year waiting period will not apply where the applicant shall apply for a new location which has not been rejected within the preceding 12 months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding 12 months because of lack of qualifications of the applicant. 
(9)  Notwithstanding subsections (1)—(8) of this section, no license shall be issued until an annual license fee, established by resolution of the board of commissioners and prorated on a calendar year basis, is paid to the county clerk. The annual license fee is hereby resolved to be $250.00 until otherwise set. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 9) 
Sec. 26-140. - License renewal. 
Licenses for a shooting gallery and/or firearm range establishment shall be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the licensee continues to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the license shall be established by resolution of the board of commissioners. The renewal fee is hereby resolved to be $250.00. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15 of each year prior to January 1 of the year for which such license is requested. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 10) 
Sec. 26-141. - License nontransferable. 
No shooting gallery or firearm range establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepted, however, that if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or shareholder without affecting a surrender or termination of such license and in such case, the licensee shall immediately notice the office of the board of commissioners. A shooting gallery or firearm range establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license pursuant to this article is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 11) 
Sec. 26-142. - Changes and modifications. 
(a)  Change of location. No licensee shall change the location of the shooting gallery or firearm range establishment without obtaining a new license. 
(b)  Change of name. No licensee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on any shooting gallery or firearm range establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(c)  Modification of licensed premises. After issuance of any license, no change in the physical location of the shooting activity within the premises shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance or other requirement of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, §§ 12—14) 
Sec. 26-143. - License; refusal. 
If the chairman of the board of commissioners or his designee, following investigation of the applicant for a shooting gallery or firearm range establishment license, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, he shall notify the applicant of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Any such decision shall be final unless appeal is filed to the board of commissioners by any aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of the decision. A hearing by the board of commissioner of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing at a regular or special meeting of the board. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 15) 
Sec. 26-144. - Suspension. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners may suspend a shooting gallery or firearm range establishment license for a period not to exceed 180 days if he determines that the licensee or an employee has violated any section of this article. If the chairman deems a license suspension appropriate, he shall notify the licensee of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Such suspension shall take effect ten days following the licensee's notification thereof unless an appeal is filed with and to the board of commissioners by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision. A hearing by the board of commissioners of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing in a regular or special meeting of the board. Enforcement of the suspension shall be stayed pending the board's ruling on the licensee's appeal. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 16) 
Sec. 26-145. - Revocation. 
(a)  Revocation for suspension. The chairman of the board of commissioners may revoke a license for a shooting gallery or firearm range establishment if a cause for suspension occurs and the license has been suspended within the past 12 months. 
(b)  Revocation for various determinations. The chairman may also revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process. 
(2)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended. 
(3)  The owner or operator of the licensed establishment knowingly allowed a person under 14 years of age to enter the establishment. 
(4)  The owner or operator of the licensed establishment knowingly allows or permits a person under 18 years of age to work or perform services within the licensed establishment. 
(c)  Notification; hearing. If the chairman deems a license revocation appropriate, he shall so notify the licensee of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Such revocation shall take effect ten days following the chairman's serving of his written decision upon the licensee unless an appeal is filed with and to the board of commissioners by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision of the chairman. A hearing by the board of commissioners on the decision shall occur within 30 days of its filing in a regular or special meeting of the board. Revocation shall continue for a one year period from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(d)  Appeal procedure. An applicant or licensee who has timely filed an appeal with the board of commissioners as allowed by this article shall be entitled to a hearing before the board of commissioners. At the time set for the hearing, the board of commissioners shall receive all relevant testimony in evidence from county staff or interested parties, and from the licensee or employee. In all hearings pursuant to this article, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The chairman of the board of commissioners shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications against the charged party. He shall then read or cause to be read any response filed by the charged party. 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specifications as filed against the charged party and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows: The county representative shall present his evidence in support of the charges; the charged party shall then present his evidence. Evidence of each party may be supported by submission of pertinent documents. Each party shall be allowed to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)  The charged party and county may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross examine witnesses. Additionally, the board of commissioners may interrogate all parties and witnesses to obtain necessary information. 
(e)  Removal of signs. Should any license be revoked or suspended, all signs indicating that such businesses conducted on the premises shall be removed from the premises during the period of revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 17) 
Sec. 26-146. - Service of notice. 
(a)  Any notice required to be given under this article to any applicant, licensee or employee of a shooting gallery or firearm range establishment may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States Postal Service, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for license/permit, or such updated address which may have subsequently been provided in writing to the county clerk. Notices mailed shall be deemed given on the second day subsequent to their deposit in the United States Postal Service. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each applicant, licensee and employee to furnish notice to the county clerk in writing of any change of mailing address. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 18) 
Sec. 26-147. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating the sections of this article shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any person who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post bond for his future appearance. 
(c)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations which shall be issued to an alleged violator of any sections of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the representative of the county who completes and serves it. The citation may be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(d)  Citations issued under this article may be tried without a prosecuting attorney, however, in the event the prosecuting attorney is needed, the county attorney shall serve as the prosecuting attorney. 
(e)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county, and shall be tried in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the board of commissioners or any other aggrieved party from bringing any civil action for injunction, or other proceedings to present, correct, or abate any violation of this article or other state or federal law. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed herein shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanctions, penalty or remedy provided by law. 
(g)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999, § 19) 
Secs. 26-148—26-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TIMBER OPERATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 9, 2009, §§ I—VII, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as Art. V, §§ 26-171—26-176 was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 26-171. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Brantley County Timber Operations Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 6-9-2009, § I) 
Sec. 26-172. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms: 
(1)  Board means the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County, or their successors in office, being the governing authority of Brantley County. 
(2)  County means the unincorporated area of Brantley County, Georgia. 
(3)  Timber means pine, cypress and hardwood trees and trees of every size, species and description. Also, for purposes of this article, "timber" includes such trees after harvesting and while being transported as logs or in shorter lengths. 
(4)  Timber operations means purchasing and/or cutting and harvesting timber in Brantley County, or transporting such timber from the site at which it was cut; or the moving of equipment to and from the site of such cutting. 
(5)  Timber operator means any person, firm or corporation engaged in commercial timber operations, whether engaged in one or all of said activities described in subsection (4) above. It shall not include persons cutting or transporting timber solely for noncommercial personal use or firewood. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2009, § II) 
Sec. 26-173. - Permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No timber operator shall engage in the timber operations in the unincorporated area of Brantley County without first obtaining a permit to conduct such operations as provided herein; provided, however, employees of a timber operator shall not be required to obtain separate permits for activities within the scope of such employment if their employer has obtained a valid permit for such activities; and provided further, that an independent contractor transporting timber for another timber operator shall not be required to obtain a separate permit if the timber operator for whom he is transporting timber has obtained a valid permit for such timber operations at the same location. 
(b)  Place of filing. The application for permit shall be signed by the applicant and filed with the Office of the Board of Tax Assessors for Brantley County, and forms shall be available at such office. The chief appraiser or his designee at said office of the Brantley County Tax Assessor shall review the application and issue the permit if all required information is provided. Completed application forms may be faxed or e-mailed to said office, and if the applicant provides his fax number, the permit may be faxed back to the applicant. 
(c)  Application for permit. The application for permit shall be in the form prescribed by the board of commissioners from time to time and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, timber operator or timber purchaser. 
(2)  If the applicant or timber operator intends to engage another or other contractor(s) to harvest or transport the timer, the application shall also include the name, address and telephone number of each such contractor or harvester. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the real property on which the applicant/purchaser/timber operator will perform the timber operations. 
(4)  The location of the real property on which the applicant/purchaser/timber operator will engage in timber operations (to include the tax map and the parcel number). 
(5)  The roads in Brantley County upon which motor vehicles will travel in transporting such timber and in transporting the equipment to be used in the timber operations. 
(6)  The dates cutting operations are expected to commence and end. 
(d)  Incomplete applications. Incomplete applications will not be accepted and will be returned to the applicant. 
(e)  Other laws. In addition to the provisions of this article, the applicant for a permit shall comply with all state and federal regulations pertaining to its timber operations, including payment of all applicable ad valorem tax on the timber. 
(f)  Cost. No fee shall be charged for filing the application or issuing the permit. 
(g)  Separate applications. Applicants must file a separate application and receive a separate permit for each timber cutting operation and each separate landowner. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2009, § III) 
Sec. 26-174. - Notice to timber operators. 
The county board of tax assessors shall mail or deliver a copy of this article to all timber operators and other persons whom the board has knowledge of or can identify as persons or businesses which cut, harvest or transport trees or timber on or from lands in Brantley County. A notice as to the adoption of this article shall be published in the newspaper for two weeks and made known to as many persons as possible dealing with timber in this county. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2009, § V) 
Sec. 26-175. - Application/permit numbers. 
Each application filed shall be assigned a number consisting of the year and quarter of year of filing, followed by a number representing the order in which that application was filed in that year. (For example: The first application filed in the first quarter of 2009 would have a number of "2009-1-1"). 
The permit number will be the same number as the application number. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2009, § VI) 
Editor's note— The permit application referenced above has not been set out, but may be reviewed at the county offices. 
Sec. 26-176. - Violations; penalties. 
Any timber operator who shall willfully fail to comply with this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The violation of the article shall be tried in the Magistrate Court of Brantley County, Georgia, and upon conviction, the timber operator shall be punished by fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2009, § VII) 
Secs. 26-177—26-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - JUNKYARDS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 8, 2010, §§ 1—9, 11, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as Art. VI, §§ 26-201—26-210 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 26-201. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Brantley County Junkyard Ordinance" and is hereby enacted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 26-202. - Purpose. 
This article prescribes rules and regulations relating to the exercise of effective control of junkyards in the unincorporated areas of Brantley County, Georgia, adjacent to or within 1,000 feet of a residential area, church or public school, or located on primary residential roads or streets. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 2) 
Sec. 26-203. - Definitions. 
The following terms as used in this article, shall have the following meaning unless the context requires otherwise: 
Automobile graveyard means any establishment which is maintained or used for storing, buying, or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. 
Board of commissioners shall mean the Brantley County Board of Commissioners. 
County road means any road, street or highway which is a portion of a county road or secondary state road system. 
Establish means to construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, create or in any way bring into existence. 
Junk means old or scrap copper, brass, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste; junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof; or iron, steel, and other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous material. 
Junkyard means any establishment which is maintained or used for storing, buying, or selling junk or for an automobile graveyard; and the term shall include scrap processing establishments. 
Maintain means to allow to exist. 
Nonconforming junkyard means any junkyard which was lawfully established and in existence for ____________ ( ____________ ) years, holds a valid Brantley County Business License and any part of junkyard located within 1,000 feet of any residence, church or public school, except: 
(1)  Those which are screened by natural objects, plantings, fences, or other appropriate means so as not to be visible to a residence, church or public school or otherwise removed from sight; and 
(2)  Those located within an unzoned industrial area, which area shall be determined from actual land use as defined by the board of commissioners; and 
(3)  Those not visible from the main traveled way of well traveled county roads or from secondary state highways; and 
(4)  Those not located within close proximity to an established residential subdivision, and does not use residential roads or streets to access their property. 
Person means any individual, firm, agency, company, association, partnership, business trust, joint stock company, body politic or corporation. 
Screening means the use of any vegetative planting, fencing, ornamental wall of masonry, or other architectural treatment or device, earthen embankment, or a combination of any of these which will effectively hide from view any deposit of junk from a residence, church or public school, within a distance of 1,000 feet, on a yearround basis. Screening does not include the use of junk. 
Unlawful junkyards means any junkyard which comes into existence after the adoption of this article. 
(1)  Which is located within 1,000 feet of the nearest residence, church or public school and is not screened by natural objects, plantings, fences, or other appropriate means so as to be visible from the residence, church or public school; or 
(2)  Is located within an unzoned industrial area of the unincorporated area of the county; and 
(3)  Is visible from the well-traveled county roads or secondary state highways in the unincorporated area of the county; and 
(4)  Is located on a primarily residential road in the unincorporated area of the county. 
Visible means capable of being seen without visual or optical aid by a person of normal visual acuity. 
Zone of control means all areas within the boundaries of this county which are adjacent to and within 1,000 feet a residential area, church or public school within Brantley County. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 3; Amd. of 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 26-204. - Policy. 
In carrying out the purpose of this article: 
(1)  Every effort shall be made to screen nonconforming junkyards which are to be continued as on-going businesses. 
(2)  Nonconforming junkyards are to be relocated only as a last resort. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 4) 
Sec. 26-205. - Measurement of distance. 
Distance from the edge of a residential property, church or public school line shall be measured horizontally along a straight line. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 5) 
Sec. 26-206. - Screening. 
(a)  Responsibility for screening. 
(1)  Any junkyard lawfully in existence [on] effective date of this article, which is within 1,000 feet of the nearest residence, church or public school. 
(2)  Junkyards established subsequent to adoption of this article by Brantley County Board of Commissioners in non-industrial areas within 100 feet of a residence, church or public school must provide for adequate screening located between the junkyard and residences, churches or public schools and at the expense of the person owning the junkyard. Screening provided by such owner must be in compliance with this article and of a type approved by the board of commissioners. Those junkyards which are established subsequent to the adoption of this article and located within zones of control and which cannot be adequately screened shall be relocated at the owner's expense. 
(b)  Every effort shall be made to screen nonconforming junkyards where they are to be continued as on-going businesses. Screening may be accomplished by use of natural objects, landscaping, plantings, fences, and other appropriate means, including relocating inventory on site to utilize an existing natural screen or a screenable portion of the site. 
(c)  Where screening is used, it must, upon completion of the screening project, effectively screen the junkyard from the residential areas, churches or public schools on a yearround basis, and be compatible with the surroundings. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 6) 
Sec. 26-207. - Nonconforming junkyards. 
For the purposes of this article, a discontinued junkyard is any junkyard which was operated as a business enterprise in the past and where the proprietor is retaining the inventory for the present but not actively engaged in buying or selling junk. 
(1)  The nonconforming junkyard may continue as long as it is not extended, or changed in use. Once a junkyard has been made conforming, the subsequent placement of junk so that it may be seen, above or beyond a screen, or if the junk otherwise becomes visible, said junkyard shall then be treated the same as the establishment of a new junkyard. 
(2)  A nonconforming junkyard must have been in lawful existence and operation on adoption of this article, and may continue to exist and operate (1) as long as it continues to be lawfully maintained, (2) is not extended or enlarged, (3) is not substantially changed in use, or (4) is not located on a primary residential street or road. 
(3)  In order for a junkyard to continue as a nonconforming junkyard, there must be existing property rights in the junkyard and junk affected by this article. A junkyard may not continue to exist if it has been abandoned, destroyed, or voluntarily discontinued. Brantley County shall consider the following criteria as the minimum criteria which must exist and must be applied before any determination can be made by the board of commissioners that a junkyard or junk has been abandoned: 
a.  The junkyard has not operated or conducted business for one year or more; or 
b.  The junkyard is in need of substantial repair or maintenance; or 
c.  The junkyard owner cannot be found or determined after a diligent search has been made by a building inspector as verified by his affidavit which shall set forth all the steps taken and attempts made to locate and determine said owner. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 7) 
Sec. 26-208. - Unlawful junkyards. 
The Brantley County Code Enforcement Department, through its designated representatives shall inspect junkyards periodically to insure that they are being operated in accordance with the applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to junkyard control, and shall require that all screening materials be maintained in such a manner as to accomplish the objective of this article. If the inspection discloses that a junkyard is being operated in violation of this article, the owner shall be informed in writing, sent by registered mail, stating the violation and instructing him to make the corrections within 60 days from the date of the letter. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 8) 
Sec. 26-209. - Screening criteria. 
(a)  [Plan for screening.] Plan for screening of junkyards established after the adoption of this article. 
(1)  The screening shall be located on the owner's land and not on any part of the public land. 
(2)  The screen shall be in place prior to the time the junk is deposited. 
(3)  At no time after the screen is established shall the junk be stacked high enough to be visible above the screen. No junk shall be placed outside of the screened areas. 
(4)  Fences must be located in such a manner as to not be hazardous to the traveling public. 
(5)  The construction of fences shall be uniform and no patchwork type of construction shall be permitted. 
(6)  When fences are painted, the paint used shall be of a color so as to blend into the environs of the area. 
(b)  Acceptable fencing materials. Acceptable fencing shall include fences of steel or other metals, durable woods such as heart cypress, redwood, or other wood treated with a preservative, or walls of masonry. Some of the types acceptable are: 
(1)  Chain link type with aluminum, steel, plastic, or wooden slat inserts. 
(2)  Wooden types of basket weave, palisade, louver, or other suitable design. 
(3)  Walls of masonry including plain or ornamental concrete block, block, brick, stone, or other suitable masonry material. 
(4)  An earth wall, if properly designed, grassed, and landscaped. 
Note: The above types of fencing and walls appearing in subparagraphs (b)(1), (2), (3), and (4) above are given for examples only. Any other design of fencing constructed of other materials may be submitted to the board of commissioners for consideration. 
(c)  Plant material. 
(1)  All plant material shall be predominantly evergreen and approved by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  The minimum size of plant material at the time of planting shall be as follows: 
a.  Large trees deciduous: 1″—1½″ caliper (Maples, Sycamore, Sweetgum). 
b.  Small trees: 4′—5′ in height (Hawthorn, Crepe Myrtle, etc.). 
c.  Evergreen trees: 4′—5′ in height (Pinus, Magnolia, etc.). 
d.  Evergreen shrubs: 2½′—3′ in height (including Elaeaqnus, Abelia, etc.). 
(d)  Maintenance. The owner or owners of any junkyard shall maintain the screening established initially, doing such painting and repairs to keep any fences, walls or other structural material in good appearance. Plant material shall be watered, cultivated, or mulched, and given any required maintenance including spraying for insect control, to keep the planting in a good healthy condition. Dead or destroyed plant material will be removed immediately and shall be replaced during the next spring or fall planting season. 
The replacement plants shall be at least as large as the initial planting. 
(e)  Junkyards screened. The owner or owners of any junkyard lawfully in existence on the adoption of this article, and which has been screened from view may not extend the deposit of junk beyond such screening so as to be visible from the main traveled way of the highway or a residence, church or public school. Any such extension shall be screened by the owner at his own expense and such screening shall be subject to these rules and regulations. Piling of junk above planned height of screening established by the department is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 9) 
Sec. 26-210. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this article, or failure to comply therewith, or with any requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the junkyard article is committed or is continued. 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall be governed by O.C.G.A. § 15-10-62 and O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63. The Brantley County Building Inspector may file accusations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-62 upon the approval of such actions by the chairman of the Brantley County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 11) 
Secs. 26-211—26-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 26-220. - Required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, a special events permit shall be required for the activities of this article. A "special event" is defined for purposes of this chapter as any organized activity involving 150 or more participants having as its purpose entertainment, recreation, charitable promotion or fundraiser, recreation and/or education, such as a festival or celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade or march, rally or assembly which takes place on a public road, street, sidewalk or right-of-way, or occurs on private property. No more than four special events permits shall be issued for the same location within a one-year period and the total duration of all cumulative special events may not take place more often than 45 cumulative days at the same location. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 26-221. - Application. 
A person seeking issuance of a special events permit shall file an application with the office of the county clerk on forms provided by the county. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a special events permit shall be filed not less than 21 days or more than 180 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the activity. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a special events permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the activity; and the applicant, if different. 
b.  If the activity is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of that organization. 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the activity leader and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
d.  The proposed date and location. 
e.  The approximate number of persons who are expected to attend [who] will participate in the activity. 
f.  The hours the activity will start and terminate, and the hours of operation, but in no event earlier than 7:00 a.m. or later than 12:00 midnight. 
g.  A plan that identifies adequate provisions for parking and transportation of participants in the activity. 
h.  If the activity requires law enforcement and/or security (of whatever kind) as to the safety of attendees or for protection or traffic control, the number of law enforcement officers/security personnel to be employed by applicant to provide such protection and control. 
i.  Reserved. 
j.  Proof of liability insurance in not less than the amount of $1,000,000.00 to cover any damages or injuries arising from the event and a hold harmless agreement releasing Brantley County, its board of commissioners, its officers, employees and/or agents from any and all claims or damages arising from the permitting of the event. 
k.  Any additional information which the county clerk shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a special events permit should [be issued]. 
l.  Whether alcoholic beverages are to be sold, distributed and/or consumed at the event (permit required if sold or distributed). 
m.  For events involving more than 150 participants and/or the consumption of alcohol, the application must meet the following additional requirements: 
1.  A preapplication and review meeting with the county clerk and the Sheriff shall be required. 
2.  The adjoining property owners shall be notified of the application for the special event and a sign, not less than 24 inches high and 36 inches wide, shall face toward all public roads adjoining the location where the special event is to be held, and shall be erected at the location 14 days prior to the approval of the application. The notice and sign shall identify the type of event, date and time and estimated number of persons expected to attend. 
3.  The applicant must submit a site plan to the county clerk for the special event; 
4.  The applicant must provide a traffic plan and a security plan, and said plans must be approved by the sheriff's department. 
5.  The applicant must submit a plan for removal of trash and provision of toilet facilities and said plan must be approved by the environmental health department. 
6.  The applicant must submit a description of the structures, including tents and stages, to be used in the event and a plan of the use of any electricity. 
(3)  Fee. A fee as established by the board of commissioners shall be charged for such special events permit. Fees may vary by event and shall include but not [be] limited to the amount of county staff time allocated for the proper safety and security during the conduct of the event, the estimated number of participants, the estimated time the event will be in progress, whether alcohol beverages will be sold, distributed and/or consumed, the event location in relation to the surrounding property(ies), and the use of the surrounding property(ies) (such as: residential, commercial, agriculture, forest, wetlands or any combination thereof), but in no event shall the fee be less than $100.00. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 26-222. - Standards for issuance. 
(a)  For special events where no alcohol consumption or sales shall take place, the county clerk shall issue a special events permit under this article when, from a consideration of the application and from any other information as may otherwise be obtained, the county clerk finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the special event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to the activity. 
(2)  The conduct of the special event will not likely require the deployment of any county law enforcement officer(s) to review the activity, but that adequate provisions for police protection and traffic control have been made by the applicant and approved by the sheriff's department. 
(3)  The conduct of the special event will not unreasonably interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(4)  The conduct of the special event is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. 
(5)  The special event is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product or goods. 
(6)  The special event will not unreasonably burden the roadways of the county so as to substantially interfere with the normal use thereof by the public, but that adequate provisions for parking and transportation of participants in the activity have been made by the applicant. 
(7)  The special event will not interfere with another special event for which a special events permit has been approved. 
(8)  The conduct of the special event will not create a public nuisance or interfere with the quiet enjoyment of the neighboring property owners. 
(9)  The applicant for the special event shall be current in all fees or taxes owed the county. 
(10)  The applicant shall be sui juris and/or laboring under no legal incapacity. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 26-223. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision by the county clerk shall have the right to appeal the denial of a special events permit to the board of commissioners. The appeal shall be filed within two business days after receipt of the notice by the applicant along with a filing fee established by the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall act upon the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting where the appeal is received in time to be placed on the regular agenda and may grant, grant with conditions or limitations, or deny a special events permit. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 26-224. - Notice to county and other officials. 
Immediately upon the application for a special events permit, the county clerk shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  Each member of the board of commissioners; 
(2)  The county manager; 
(3)  The sheriff; 
(4)  The environmental health department; 
(5)  Emergency 9-1-1; and 
(6)  The emergency management agency. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 26-225. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions, all permit conditions and with all applicable rules, regulations, ordinances and laws. 
(b)  The permittee, leader or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the special events permit upon his/her person at all times during the period of the permitted activity. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 26-226. - Revocation of permit. 
The county clerk shall have the authority to revoke a special events permit issued under this division upon a finding that the application filed contains misleading or incomplete information and does not comply with the standards for issuance as set forth under this ordinance. A special event permit issued pursuant to this ordinance may be suspended or revoked by the sheriff for due cause for violation of this ordinance or any provision thereof; for failure to comply with the terms of the permit or when such violation results in an emergency situation in which continued operation of the premises by the person(s)/entity holding the permit endangers the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 26-227. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article as to the requirement for the payment of a fee shall not apply to: 
(1)  Spontaneous events; 
(2)  Recreational activities, including jogging or walking, that do not require closing public road, streets or other public rights-of-way and that do not interfere with or have a tendency to interfere with the normal use of any public property in a place open to the general public; 
(3)  Door-to-door advocacy, including canvassing, pamphleteering, religious or political proselytizing and the distribution of written materials, and similar activities that do not interfere with or have a tendency to interfere with the free passage of pedestrians and vehicles on the public rights-of-way or the normal use of any public property in a place open to the general public; 
(4)  Door-to-door sales of goods or services, and similar activities that do not interfere with or have a tendency to interfere with the free passage of pedestrians and vehicles on the public rights-of-way or the normal use of any public property in a place open to the general public; provided, however, that any persons or organizations engaging in such activities shall comply with any other applicable requirements of the county's ordinances; 
(5)  Funeral processions; 
(6)  Students going to and from school classes; 
(7)  The United States Army, Navy, Air Force and Coast Guard, the military forces of the state and the public safety divisions of the county; 
(8)  Park and recreation areas that are regulated by the county's department of parks and recreation. 
(9)  Group demonstration. 
(10)  Private gatherings, parties, tours or other similar type of events hosted by a property owner in the property owner's own residential building, structure or land for the property owner's own enjoyment and benefit, without monetary charge and/or compensation to attend, and otherwise permitted under the county's ordinances; 
(11)  Charity events organized and sponsored by a nonprofit organization registered with the Georgia Secretary of State's Office as an active entity and where alcohol beverages are not sold, distributed and/or consumed. 
(12)  Special events which take place on or at privately owned country club facilities, church events on church property, or public airport facilities; and 
(13)  Yard sales or estate sales. 
(c)  Permits may be granted if they are requested by individuals or organizations who desire to have a permit, even though the permit is not required under this section. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2013) 
Sec. 26-228. - Violations prohibited; penalties. 
(a)  No person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or assist another in evading the requirements imposed by this chapter. 
(b)  Any person knowingly violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense against the county, punishable upon citation being issued before the magistrate court. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 12 months, or both. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2013) 
Chapter 30 - CIVIC AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for libraries, archives and arts and sciences programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(10). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-61 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-31. - Established. 
There is established the Brantley County Public Library System pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 20-5-40. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § A) 
Sec. 30-32. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  Trustees. There shall exist within the county, the county library board of trustees which shall consist of eight people who are residents of the county. 
(b)  Appointment. The members of the library board of trustees shall be appointed by the board of commissioners to serve a term of three years, with the right to reappointment. 
(c)  Authority. The library board of trustees is delegated the authority to generally oversee and set policies and practices for the operation of the county library in accord with O.C.G.A. § 20-5-43 and with the constitution and bylaws of the county library board, which are set out in this article, and are approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, §§ B—D) 
Secs. 30-33—30-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTITUTION 

Sec. 30-51. - Name. 
The name of the library shall be the Brantley County Library. It is located in Nahunta, Georgia. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att. 1), art. I) 
Sec. 30-52. - Purpose. 
(a)  The constitution from which this division is derived and the bylaws of the library board are companion documents. They are intended to clarify local practices and the relationship of the local library to the regional system. There should be no conflict between the provisions of the constitution from which this division is derived and bylaws and those of the Brunswick-Glynn Regional Library System. If an inadvertent conflict occurs, the regional constitution and bylaws shall govern unless such conflict exceeds any delegated authority from the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The county library shall furnish library service to the people of the county in cooperation with the Brunswick-Glynn Regional Library System, and under the regulations governing public libraries as set forth by the state. The county library shall offer a full program of library service to all citizens of the county to meet their informational, educational, and recreational needs. 
(c)  The county shall provide and maintain its own library facilities. It shall staff its library facilities and its staff shall cooperate and coordinate its library services with the Brunswick-Glynn Regional Library System Board. 
(d)  In this division, the terms "county library" and "library board" refer to the Brantley County Library and the Brantley County Library Board of Trustees. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att.1), Art. II) 
Sec. 30-53. - Constituency. 
The county library shall be a member of the Brunswick-Glynn Regional Library System. Membership in the Brunswick-Glynn Regional Library System provides the citizens of the county with reciprocal borrowing privileges in all libraries in the system. Likewise, the county library shall lend materials to the citizens of all other counties within the regional library system at no charge. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att. 1), Art. III) 
Sec. 30-54. - Library board of trustees: 
(a)  Members of the board; appointment. The county library board of trustees shall consist of ten members. The board of commissioners shall appoint all eight members. The county library board may recommend individuals for appointment to the library board. 
(b)  Term of office. The term of office shall be three years. Date of appointment is July 1. Members may be appointed to successive terms on the board. 
(c)  Residency of board members. Any person appointed to the county library board must be a resident of the county. If he moves his legal residence outside the county, he shall be replaced on the board. 
(d)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as appointments are made. If a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of a board member's term, the new appointee shall complete the unexpired term. 
(e)  Compensation; expenses. Board members shall receive no compensation. They may be reimbursed for any reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of library business, upon approval of the board of commissioners. 
(f)  Representatives. The county library board shall appoint two of its members to represent it as members of the Brunswick-Glynn Regional Library System. Such members shall be entrusted with representing and interpreting the interests of the county library board and the entire regional system on the regional board. 
(g)  Authority and powers. The library board of trustees shall exercise only such authority and powers as are expressly delegated to it by the board of commissioners, or the laws of the state. The library board shall have no authority to create any debt binding upon the treasury of the county. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att. 1), art. IV, §§ 1—7; Res. of 12-12-2000) 
Sec. 30-55. - Officers. 
(a)  Generally. The officers of the library board of trustees shall be a chairman, a vice-chairman, and a secretary elected from those serving on the board. A treasurer may be elected from the board membership, or a nonmember may be appointed to perform the duties of the treasurer. A nonmember appointed to perform the duties of treasurer shall not have a vote and shall be appointed at the same time as election of officers. There shall be no limit on the number of terms he may serve in succession. These officers shall perform the duties as prescribed in this division and by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, which are not in conflict with this division. 
(b)  Officer nominations. Nominations shall be made by a committee of three board members appointed by the chairman of the board. The chairman and/or the library manager may serve as one of the three members on the nominating committee. An officer is elected for a one year term and may succeed himself. 
(c)  Term of officers. The officers shall be elected at the January meeting to serve for one year or until their successors are elected, and their terms of office shall begin at the close of the meeting at which they are elected. 
(d)  Receiving funds. Should the regional board delegate to the county board the activity of receiving funds, the county board must appoint or elect a treasurer, according to subsection (a) of this section. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att. 1), art. V, §§ 1—4) 
Sec. 30-56. - Committees. 
(a)  Executive committee. An executive committee, composed of the duly appointed members who are officers of the board, shall be entrusted to govern in the name of the board of trustees between meetings of the board. 
(b)  Standing committee. Standing committees shall be the finance committee, the building and grounds committee, and the committee on constitution and bylaws. Other special committees may be appointed by the chairman as needed. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att. 1), arts. VI, VII) 
Sec. 30-57. - Amendment of constitution. 
The constitution from which this division is derived may be amended at any meeting of the board of trustees by a two-thirds vote of the members present, provided that notice is made in writing at least one week prior to the meeting, that a quorum is present, and the amendment is approved by the board of commissioners. All amendments to this division will be filed with the director of the Brunswick-Glynn Regional Library System who will forward them to the division of public library services of the state department of education immediately upon adoption. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att. 1), art. VIII) 
Secs. 30-58—30-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BYLAWS 

Sec. 30-81. - Duties and responsibilities of board members. 
(a)  Members. The county library board of trustees is one group from which the members of the Brunswick-Glynn Regional Library System board of trustees, the governing body of the Brunswick-Glynn Regional Library System, are drawn. 
(b)  Discharge of duties. The county library board of trustees shall discharge those duties delegated to it by the Brunswick-Glynn Regional Library System board of trustees, the laws of the state, and the board of commissioners. All formal actions of the county library board of trustees in discharging those duties shall be reported to the regional board of trustees for approval and recording at the next meeting. 
(c)  Policies and practices. The county library board of trustees shall set local policies and practices to include hours of operation, which shall be consistent with the rules and policies of the regional library system. 
(d)  Annual budget. The county library board of trustees shall, in consultation with the regional system director and the library manager, prepare and submit the annual county library budget, through its finance committee, together with the fiscal needs of the local and regional libraries, to the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Notification of meetings. The regional library system director shall be notified in advance of all meetings of the board or its committees. 
(f)  Employment of staff. The county library board shall appoint, with the consent of the board of commissioners, and supervise the library manager and any other necessary staff with the advice of the library manager. The library manager and any other approved staff shall be employed by the board of commissioners, upon consultation with the library board. The library manager and all other library staff shall be employees of the county, subject to and entitled to all rights, privileges and benefits of employees of the county, and the personnel policies and rules as established by the board of commissioners. 
(g)  Termination of employees. The library board shall not have the direct authority to terminate any employee, but may recommend any adverse personnel action for a library staff person, including the manager, to the board of commissioners. The library board shall have only such authority in personnel matters as may be expressly delegated to it by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att. 2), art. I, §§ 1—4) 
Sec. 30-82. - Duties of the officers. 
(a)  Chairman. The chairman shall preside at all regular or called board meetings. He shall appoint all committees and shall be an ex officio (nonvoting) member of all committees. 
(b)  Vice-chairman. The vice-chairman shall preside and act for the chairman when the chairman is absent or unavailable. All other duties of the vice-chairman shall be assigned by the chairman. 
(c)  Secretary. The secretary shall record the official actions of the board, keep a record of attendance at board meetings, and have the custody of the official books, which shall be housed in the county library. He shall notify the appointing authorities of vacancies which may occur on the county library board. The secretary shall send copies of the minutes of all meetings to the director of the Brunswick-Glynn Regional Library System. He shall also report changes of membership to the director. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att. 2), art. II, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 30-83. - Funds. 
(a)  Authority to receive and administer funds. Should the library board of trustees be delegated authority to receive and administer funds, the library board must appoint a treasurer according to the terms of subsection 30-55(a). The county library board of trustees shall receive and disburse funds in keeping with any regional board authorization, and the budget balanced. A record of all receipts, deposits, and expenditures shall be forwarded to the regional board for its review, approval, and recording at the next meeting. Funds shall be audited annually in accordance with state aid criteria and other state regulations. 
(b)  Bonding of employees. The treasurer and any other library employee who handles public funds shall be bonded for an amount commensurate with the amount of funds handled, determined by the county library board and entered in the minutes, with a copy of the bond filed with the division of public library services of the state department of education. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att. 2), art. II, §§ 4, 5) 
Sec. 30-84. - Meetings of the library board. 
(a)  Meetings. Meetings of the library board shall be held according to the bylaws of the Brunswick-Glynn Regional Library System, and as to otherwise provided for in this division. 
(b)  Schedule and location meetings. The county library board shall hold no less than four regular meetings during each fiscal year, including no less than one each calendar quarter. Meetings shall be held on the second Thursday in the months of January, April, July and October at 3:30 p.m. at the county library, or at some other location as designated by the chairman. 
(c)  Notification of meetings. Prior to each regular or called meeting, the chairman or library manager shall notify each member, the regional library director, and the appropriate local media of the date, time, and place of the county board meeting. Called meetings may be convened by the chairman, or upon the request of three members of the board, for the transaction of business stated in the call for the meeting. All meetings shall be held in compliance with the state Open Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). 
(d)  Quorum. Five members of the library board of trustees shall constitute a quorum. No official business may be conducted without a quorum. Except as stated in section 30-87, a simple majority affirmative vote of the quorum present and voting shall be necessary to approve any action before the board. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att. 2), art. III, §§ 1—4) 
Sec. 30-85. - Reports. 
The library board shall submit all reports requested by the board of commissioners or the regional library system, and provide the information necessary to complete reports required by state, federal, or local laws or regulations, or to manage the regional library system in an efficient and businesslike manner. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att. 2), art. IV) 
Sec. 30-86. - Attendance. 
(a)  A county library board member shall be removed for cause or for failure to attend three consecutive meetings. 
(b)  A letter reporting the removal and specifying the cause shall be sent by the chairman to the affected board member and to the authority responsible for his appointment. The local appointing authority shall be asked to appoint another representative to fill that member's unexpired term. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att. 2), art. IV, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 30-87. - Amendments. 
These bylaws may be amended at any meeting of the board of trustees by a two-thirds vote of the members present, provided that notice is made in writing at least two weeks prior to the meeting, and provided that a quorum is present, and the amendment is approved by the board of commissioners. All amendments to these bylaws shall be filed with the regional director of the Brunswick-Glynn Regional Library System who will forward them to the division of public library services of the state department of education immediately upon adoption. 
(Res. of 5-11-1993, § D(att. 2), art. VI) 
Chapter 34 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; emergency services, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Disaster recovery and redevelopment plan; adoption. 
There is hereby adopted by the city council, by reference thereto, the provisions set forth in the Brantley County Disaster Recovery and Redevelopment Plan and as may from time to time hereafter be amended. The complete text is available in the offices of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2016) 
Secs. 34-2—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted August 9, 2012, §§ I—VII, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 34-31—34-37, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from a resolution adopted April 10, 1990, §§ I—VII and an ordinance adopted February 17, 2009. 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-31. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, home land security, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2012) 
Sec. 34-32. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency: 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the county and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the board of commissioners may declare a local emergency for the county. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the chairman may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the county to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the chairman finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the chairman shall execute and file with the county administrator a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the chairman. The board of commissioners may, by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of emergency: 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the chairman shall automatically activate the county emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The Brantley County Emergency Management Agency (LCEMA) director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the emergency management agency, including implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency response of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disasters sites. 
2.  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations the director or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the county; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the board of commissioners. 
3.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the county who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the chairman is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the chairman may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: 34-35 (registration of building and repair services) to become effective if the governor declares a state of emergency; and 34-36 (closed or restricted areas and curfews) If any of these sections is included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the county administrator and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to declaration of emergency, the board of commissioners is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of 34-34 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the county administrator. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The chairman of the board of commissioners shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation, and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, explosives and flammable liquids and substances; 
4.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
5.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any county departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
6.  To utilize all available resources of the county and subordinate agencies over which the county has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
7.  To commandeer or utilize public or private property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
8.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of county business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any county agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
9.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
10.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration of local emergency: 
Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "declaration of local emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the county administrator and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
"DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY" 
WHEREAS, Brantley County, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [description of event] on [date]; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Chairman of the Brantley County board of commissioners, with advice from the Brantley County Emergency Management Agency, there exist emergency circumstances located in [describe geographic location] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Brantley County, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event. 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the Brantley County Emergency Management Agency activates the Emergency Operations Plan; 
(2)  That the following sections of the Brantley County Code be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: 34-35, Registration of Building and Repair Services; and/or 34-36, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews]; and 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from section 34-32(a)(4)c. or d. or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [time] on [date]. 
____________________________________ 
Chairman, Brantley County Board of Commissioners. 
Contracts with Municipalities 
In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2012) 
Sec. 34-33. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the county sheriff's office shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the chairman or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the chairman or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 120 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. The owner of land upon which a violation occurs, and each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief . In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMA Director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this ordinance may be enforced by the county sheriff's office, the EMA director and chairman of the BOC. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2012) 
Sec. 34-34. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  County business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chairman of the board of commissioners, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the board of commissioners shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. [Note: Local legislation should reviewed to determine whether there are restrictions upon moving the meeting location if it is only locally declared emergency and not a state of emergency declared by the governor]. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public's health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chairman of the board of commissioners, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. County officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairman of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairman of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners or designees may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the county on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the county pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or chairman of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2012) 
Sec. 34-35. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of the county designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the county development board and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the county without complying with this ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $ _____ per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's social security number or federal employer identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required; 
(9)  Copy of license from the secretary of state if required. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency by the governor and local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the board of commissioners, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2012) 
Sec. 34-36. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the chairman until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the chairman shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The chairman shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the local emergency operations plan. which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the county; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through an emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by the EMA director or the sheriff. 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2012) 
Sec. 34-37. - Regulation continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense homeland security, emergency management and disaster relief that are not in conflict with this chapter are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the county administrator. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2012) 
Chapter 38 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; civil emergencies, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq.; standards for ambulances, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-34; restrictions on operation, installation, maintenance, etc., of electronic security systems by local governments, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; emergency vehicle equipment, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-90 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 911 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq.; authority to provide ambulance and emergency rescue services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - E 911 SYSTEM 

Sec. 38-31. - Advisory board. 
(a)  Created. There is created the county 911 system advisory board, which board shall not exceed 13 members. 
(b)  Membership. The members of the advisory board shall consist of the following persons: 
(1)  The sheriff of the county; 
(2)  The chief of police of the City of Nahunta; 
(3)  The chief of police of the City of Hoboken; 
(4)  The emergency medical services director of the county; 
(5)  Two members of the board of commissioners; 
(6)  The mayor or councilmember as designated by the City of Nahunta; 
(7)  The mayor or councilmember as designated by the City of Hoboken; 
(8)  Two representatives designated by and from the firefighter's association of the county; 
(9)  The county forest ranger (state forestry commission); 
(10)  The county civil defense director; and 
(11)  A citizen designated by the board of commissioners, initial appointment being Jack Crawford (retired from GSP). 
(c)  Functions and duties. The advisory board shall have the functions and duties as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-136 (b). 
(Res. of 2-9-1993) 
Cross reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 38-32. - Charge imposed. 
In compliance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(d)(2), a 911 system charge in the amount of $1.50 per month is imposed upon each exchange access facility and same shall be billed to each subscriber of any exchange from which E-911 service is available from the county. This section shall be retro-active to January 1, 2013, and will remain in full force and effect until further action by the county board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 1-14-1992; Res. of 2-8-1994; Res. of 2-14-1995; Res. of 12-13-2011; Res. of 5-9-2013) 
Secs. 38-33—38-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - 911 CHARGE ON WIRELESS SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 14, 2011, §§ 1—4, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as Art. III, §§ 38-51—38-54 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 38-51. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 911 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 38-52. - Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
Prepaid wireless 911 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the Department of Revenue at the times and in the manner provided by Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2011, § 2) 
Sec. 38-53. - Administrative provisions. 
The clerk of the county is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this article and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten days of enactment of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2011, § 3) 
Sec. 38-54. - Depositing of funds; use of funds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this article shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by this county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Ord. of 6-14-2011, § 4) 
Sec. 38-55. - Wireless enhanced 911 charge. 
A E-911 system charge in the amount of $1.50 per month is imposed on each wireless telecommunications with a billing address within the county and said charge shall continue for the following 12 months hereafter. 
(Res. of 12-13-2011) 
Chapter 40 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; floods, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 58; planning, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 70. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1—40-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WETLANDS, GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS AND RIVER CORRIDORS PROTECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS 

Sec. 40-31. - Purpose. 
(a)  In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within Brantley County and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that Brantley County and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. 
(b)  Groundwater resources are contained within underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rock beneath the earth's surface capable of containing or producing water from a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § I) 
Sec. 40-32. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Drastic means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. (Note: the DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility). 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. 
Pollution susceptibility map means maps of the relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. (Georgia Department of Natural Resources Hydrologic Atlas 20: Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia). 
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Significant recharge areas means those areas mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § II) 
Sec. 40-33. - Establishment of the groundwater recharge area protection district. 
(a)  [ Generally. ] The groundwater recharge area protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of Brantley County, Georgia that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this division. 
(b)  Determination of pollution susceptibility. Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this division. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § III) 
Sec. 40-34. - Protection criteria. 
(a)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources for On-Site Sewage Management (hereinafter DHR Manual), and subsections (b) and (c) below. 
(b)  New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in subsections (a)—(f)) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(c)  New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in subsections (a)—(f)) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(d)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet, or a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resource and Conservation Service. 
(e)  New above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(f)  New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(g)  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § IV) 
Sec. 40-35. - Exemptions. 
Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this division is exempt from the minimum lot size requirements contained in subsections 40-34(b), (c) of this division. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § V) 
Sec. 40-36. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Site plans. Application for a local development permit within the groundwater recharge area protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(b)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the building official. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(c)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(d)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the building official and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by Brantley County. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the building official. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the building official. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the building official. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the building official may be appealed to the county commission. 
(e)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the building official. 
(f)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the building official. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the building official. 
(3)  If the building official discovers a violation of this division that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the county commission shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation. The building official may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The building official shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(h)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the county concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewed in the Magistrate Court of Brantley County. 
(2)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the Magistrate Court of Brantley County, the county commission, or its designee may, within the time specified by the state court, elect to: 
a.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
b.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
c.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the county commission. 
(i)  Amendments. These regulations and the areas mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition) may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(j)  Relief assessment. Assessors and Boards of Assessors shall consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(k)  Separability and abrogation. All sections and subsections of this division are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this division be declared by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph, or part of this division. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § VI) 
Secs. 40-37—40-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WETLANDS 

Sec. 40-51. - Purpose. 
(a)  The wetlands in Brantley County are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control, flood control, erosion control, natural resource education, scientific study, and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
(c)  The purpose of this division is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § I) 
Sec. 40-52. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for Brantley County, Georgia. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. section 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § II) 
Sec. 40-53. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
(a)  The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of Brantley County, Georgia that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this division, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
(b)  The generalized wetlands map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the county and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this division does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § III) 
Sec. 40-54. - Protection criteria. 
Requirement for local permit or permission. No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the county. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by an authorized official of the county using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § IV) 
Sec. 40-55. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. [The activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances.] 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the Unites States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject o best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § V) 
Sec. 40-56. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § VI) 
Sec. 40-57. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Site plans. Application for a local development permit within the wetlands protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(b)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the building official. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(c)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(d)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the building official and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by Brantley County. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the building official. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the building official. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the building official. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the building official may be appealed to the county commission. 
(e)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the building official. 
(f)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the building official. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the building official. 
(3)  If the building official discovers a violation of this division that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the county commission shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation. The building official may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The building official shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(h)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the county concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewed in the Magistrate Court of Brantley County. 
(2)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the Magistrate Court of Brantley County, the county commission or its designee may, within the time specified by the state court, elect to: 
a.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
b.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
c.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the county commission. 
(i)  Amendments. These regulations and the areas mapped by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory for Brantley County, may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(j)  Relief assessment. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(k)  Separability and abrogation. All sections and subsections of this division are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this division be declared by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph, or part of this division. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § VII) 
Secs. 40-58—40-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RIVER CORRIDORS 

Sec. 40-71. - Purpose. 
(a)  River corridors are the strips of land that flank major rivers in Georgia. These corridors are of vital importance to Georgia in that they help preserve those qualities that make a river suitable as a habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. River corridors also allow the free movement of wildlife from area to area within the state, help control erosion and river sedimentation, and help absorb floodwaters. 
(b)  The Satilla River has been designated as a protected river by the State of Georgia. The purpose of this division is to establish measures to guide future growth and development in the areas adjacent to the Satilla River as defined herein. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § I) 
Sec. 40-72. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 C.F.R. section 261.3. (Note: This is same definition as used in the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act.) 
Land disturbing activity means any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land, clearing of vegetation, and any construction, rebuilding, or alteration of a structure. Land-disturbing activity shall not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations, individual home gardens, yard and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions or minor modifications to a single-family dwelling, and the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Natural vegetative buffer or buffer area means a river corridor containing the flora native to that area. The natural floras for specific areas are described in Georgia Geologic Survey Bulletin 114, "The Natural Environments of Georgia." Habitats for endangered and threatened species may require human management of the river corridor in order to maintain those species. 
Perennial river means a river or section of a river that flows continuously throughout the year. 
Port facility means any facility for the docking, loading, and unloading of ships. 
Protected river means any perennial river or watercourse with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second as determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents. However, those segments of river covered by the Metropolitan River Protection Act or the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act are specifically excluded from the definition of a protected river. In coastal areas, the seaward limit of any protected river shall be the inland limits of the jurisdiction of the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act. 
Public utility or utilities means a service or services provided by a public utility company or a private entity that provides such service or services and all equipment and structures necessary to provide such services. 
River bank means the rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
River corridor means all the land, inclusive of islands, not regulated under the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-440—12-5-457), or the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-280—12-5-293), in areas of a protected river and being within 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river as measured from the river banks. 
The 100-foot buffer shall be measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the river banks, usually marked by a break in slope. Although not within the measured 100-foot wide buffer, the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the river shall be treated by the local governments in the same manner as the river corridor and shall be included within the river corridor protection district. 
Because stream channels move due to natural processes such as meandering, river bank erosion, and jumping of channels, the river corridor may shift with time. For the purposes of these standards, the river corridor shall be considered to be fixed at its position at the beginning of each review period for the Brantley County Comprehensive Plan. Any shift in the location of the protected river after the review period will be shown by revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of the next comprehensive plan review by the department of community affairs. 
Sensitive natural area means any area, as identified now or hereafter by the department of natural resources, which contains one or more of the following: 
(1)  Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
(2)  Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
(3)  Significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; or 
(4)  Other areas so designated by the department of natural resources; and which are sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
Single-family dwelling means a dwelling structure that is designed for the use of one family. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § II) 
Sec. 40-73. - Establishment of the Satilla River Corridor Protection District. 
The Satilla River Corridor Protection District is hereby designated and shall comprise all land, inclusive of islands, in areas of the Satilla River within the county and being within 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river as measured from the river banks. Also included is the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the river although this strip of land is not included as part of the 100-foot buffer requirement contained in the minimum standards. This district shall be further defined and delineated on the Satilla River Corridor Protection District overlay map. The map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this division by reference. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § III) 
Sec. 40-74. - Protection criteria. 
(a)  Construction within the buffer area is prohibited except as provided herein. 
(b)  A natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained at all times in the river corridor, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(c)  The natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land disturbing activity. 
(d)  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the river corridor, except as expressly provided in subsection 40-74(e) of this division. 
(e)  Single-family dwellings including the usual appurtenances are permitted in the buffer area subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The dwelling shall be in compliance with all local zoning regulations. 
(2)  The dwelling shall be located on a tract of land containing at least two acres. For the purposes of these standards, the size of the tract of the land shall not include any area that lies within the protected river, (that is, for tracts of land that include portions of a protected river, the area between the river banks can not be counted towards the two-acre minimum size). 
(3)  There shall be only one such dwelling on each two-acre or larger tract of land. 
(4)  A septic tank or tanks serving such a dwelling may be located within the buffer area. 
(5)  Septic tank drainfields shall not be located within the buffer area. 
(f)  Industrial and commercial land uses existing in the river corridor prior to the promulgation of this division are exempt from the criteria contained herein, provided that: 
(1)  These uses do not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
(2)  These uses meet all state and federal environmental rules and regulations. 
(g)  The construction of road crossings and utility crossings is permitted in the river corridor, provided such construction meets all requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975, and all applicable local ordinances on soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(h)  The following uses are permitted in the river corridor, provided that such uses do not impair the long-term functions of the protected river or the river corridor: 
(1)  Timber production and harvesting, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Forestry activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission; and 
b.  Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(2)  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
(3)  Wastewater treatment. 
(4)  Recreational usage consistent either with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river-dependent recreation. For example, a boat ramp would be consistent with this criterion but a hard-surface tennis court would not. Parking lots are not consistent with this criterion. Paths and walkways within the river corridor are consistent with this criterion. 
(5)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(6)  Agricultural production and management, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Soil And Water Conservation Commission; 
b.  Agricultural activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended; and 
c.  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with all state and federal laws, and all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(7)  Other uses permitted by the department of natural resources or under section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(i)  Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste are prohibited within the river corridor. 
(j)  Hazardous waste or solid waste landfills are prohibited within the river corridor. 
(k)  The standards and requirements in this division do not supersede those contained in the Metropolitan River Protection Act, the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act, and the Erosion and Sedimentation Act. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § IV) 
Sec. 40-75. - Exemptions. 
The following uses are exempted from the river corridor protection plan. 
(1)  Land uses existing prior to the promulgation of the county river corridor protection district. For the purposes of this division a pre-existing use is defined as any land use or land-disturbing activity, including all human endeavors directly associated with such use or activity, which, prior to the promulgation of this division falls within one of the following categories (see subsection 40-74(f) for additional regulations governing pre-existing industrial and commercial uses): 
a.  Is completed; 
b.  Is under construction; 
c.  Is fully approved by the governing authority; 
d.  All materials have been submitted for approval by the governing authority; or 
e.  Is zoned for such use and expenditures in excess of $2,500.00 have been made in preparation for construction in accordance with such zoning. 
(2)  Mining activities, if permitted by the department of natural resources pursuant to the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, as amended. 
(3)  Utilities, (except as discussed above in subsection 40-74(g)) if such utilities cannot feasibly be located outside the buffer area (feasibility shall be decided conservatively by the local government), provided that: 
a.  The utilities shall be located as far from the river bank as reasonably possible; 
b.  Installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the buffer area as well as is reasonably possible; and 
c.  Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
(4)  Specific forestry and agricultural activities except as discussed above in subsections 40-74(h)(1) and 40-74(h)(6). 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § V) 
Sec. 40-76. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Site plans. Application for a local development permit within the river corridor protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any river corridor boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(b)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the building official. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(c)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(d)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the building official and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the county. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the building official. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the building official. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the building official. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the building official may be appealed to the county commission. 
(e)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the building official. 
(f)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the building official. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the building official. 
(3)  If the building official discovers a violation of this division that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the county commission shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation. The building official may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The building official shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(h)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the county concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewed in the Magistrate Court of Brantley County. 
(2)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the magistrate court of the county, the county commission or its designee may, within the time specified by the state court, elect to: 
a.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
b.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
c.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the county commission. 
(i)  Amendments. These regulations and the mapped river corridor may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(j)  Relief assessment. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(k)  Separability and abrogation. All sections and subsections of this division are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this division be declared by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph, or part of this division. 
(Res. of 11-15-2001, § VI) 
Secs. 40-77—40-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 14, 2010, §§ 1.1—1.7, 2.0, 3.1—3.7, 4.1—4.3, 5.1, and 5.2, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as Art. III, §§ 40-101—40-108, 40-121—40-127, 40-141—40-143, 40-161, and 40-162 was at the discretion of the editor. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 40-101. - Findings of fact. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The land development process generally alters the hydrologic response of development sites. If not properly designed land development can result in increasing stormwater runoff rates, volumes and pollutant loads, can alter salinity concentrations and potentially increases flooding, channel erosion and pollutant transport and deposition in wetlands, rivers, estuaries and streams; 
(2)  The land development process may increase bacteria transport and deposition in near coastal waters, which leads to beach contamination and poses a serious threat to human health; 
(3)  The land development process may decrease the amount of rainfall that is available to recharge shallow groundwater aquifers; 
(4)  The negative impacts of the land development process can be controlled and minimized through the management of stormwater runoff rates and pollutant loads; 
(5)  Therefore, Brantley County has determined that it is in the public interest to control and minimize the adverse impacts of the land development process and has established this set of local stormwater management regulations to control post-construction stormwater runoff rate on development and redevelopment sites. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 1.1) 
Sec. 40-102. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect and maintain the integrity of local aquatic resources and, consequently, the health, safety and welfare of the general public, by establishing local stormwater management regulations that control and minimize the adverse impacts of the land development process. The ordinance seeks to achieve these goals by: 
(1)  Establishing decision-making processes that can be applied during the site planning and design process to help protect the integrity of local aquatic resources; 
(2)  Establishing site planning and design criteria to help protect natural resources from the direct impacts of the land development process; 
(3)  Establishing post-construction stormwater management and site planning and design criteria to help reduce flooding, channel erosion and pollutant transport and deposition in local aquatic resources; 
(4)  Establishing design guidelines for green infrastructure and stormwater management practices that can be used to meet the post-construction stormwater management and site planning and design criteria; 
(5)  Offer as an option and encourage use of green infrastructure practices, which include better site planning techniques and low impact development practices. All green infrastructure practices must be sized using the design guidelines provided in the Coastal Stormwater Supplement (CSS) to the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM); 
(6)  Establishing administrative procedures for the submittal, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans and for the inspection of approved development projects. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 40-103. - Applicability and exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall be applied to all land disturbing activities, unless exempt pursuant to applicable provisions of this article. The stormwater management regulations presented within shall be applied to any new development or redevelopment activity that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development on a site greater than 1.0 acre that increases the two-year, 24-hour peak discharge rate by more than one cfs; 
(2)  Redevelopment on a site greater than 1.0 acre that increases the two-year, 24-hour peak discharge by more than one cfs. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  New development or redevelopment on a residential site less than 1.0 acre or that increases the peak runoff rate by less than 1.0 cfs for the two-year, 24-hour storm event. 
(2)  New development or redevelopment activities on an individual residential lot. 
(3)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family homes and duplex residential units that do not meet any of the applicability criteria listed above. 
(4)  Development projects that are undertaken exclusively for agricultural or silvicultural purposes within areas zoned for agricultural or silvicultural land use; 
(5)  Maintenance, repairs or replacement or addition of any infrastructure or stormwater management practices deemed necessary by the county engineer; 
(6)  Any part of a land development project that was approved by the county engineer prior to the adoption of this article; and, 
(7)  Redevelopment activities that involve the replacement of impervious cover when the original impervious cover was wholly or partially lost due to natural disaster or other acts of God occurring after November 15, 2010. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 1.3) 
Sec. 40-104. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The county engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance [from which this article derives]. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 1.4) 
Sec. 40-105. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 1.5) 
Sec. 40-106. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 1.6) 
Sec. 40-107. - Stormwater Management Local Design Manual (LDM). 
Brantley County will utilize the information presented in the latest edition of the Brantley County Stormwater Management Local Design Manual (LDM). The Coastal Stormwater Supplement (CSS) and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) are included by reference to assist in the proper implementation of this article. The LDM may be updated and expanded periodically, based on additional information obtained through scientific research, performance monitoring or local experience. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 1.7) 
Sec. 40-108. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Applicant means a property owner or agent of a property owner who has submitted an application for a post-construction stormwater management permit. 
Aquatic buffer means an area of land located around or near a stream, wetland, or waterbody that has intrinsic value due to the ecological services it provides, including pollutant removal, erosion control and conveyance and temporary storage of flood flows. 
Aquatic resource protection means measures taken to protect aquatic resources from several negative impacts of the land development process, including complete loss or destruction, stream channel enlargement and increased salinity fluctuations. 
Better site design techniques means site design techniques that can be used during the site planning and design process to minimize land disturbance and the creation of new impervious and disturbed pervious cover. Better site design techniques include reducing clearing and grading limits, reducing roadway lengths and widths and reducing parking lot and building footprints. 
Better site planning techniques means site planning techniques that can be used during the site planning and design process to protect valuable aquatic and terrestrial resources from the direct impacts of the land development process. Better site planning techniques include protecting primary and secondary conservation areas. 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal or property and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that continuously or periodically flows water. 
Conservation areas means permanently protected areas of a site that are preserved, in perpetuity, in an undisturbed, natural state. 
Conservation easement means a legal agreement between a land owner and a local, state or federal government agency or land trust that permanently protects conservation areas on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place within them but continues to leave the conservation areas in private ownership. 
Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management practice for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge rates and providing gravitational settling of pollutants. 
Developer means a person who undertakes a land development project. 
Development project means a new development or redevelopment project. 
Development site means a parcel of land where land disturbing activities have been or will be initiated to complete a land development project. 
Drainage easement means a legal right granted by a land owner to a grantee allowing the grantee to convey, treat or manage stormwater runoff on the private land subject to the drainage easement. 
Easement means a legal right granted by a land owner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for conveyance, treatment and management of stormwater runoff and access to green infrastructure and stormwater practices. 
Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize and control the accelerated erosion and increased sediment loads that occur at a site during land disturbing activities. 
Evapotranspiration means the loss of water to the atmosphere through both evaporation and transpiration, which is the evaporation of water from the aerial parts of plants. 
Flooding means a volume of stormwater runoff that is too great to be confined within the banks of a stream, river or other aquatic resource or walls of a stormwater conveyance feature and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Green infrastructure practices means the combination of three complementary, but distinct, groups of natural resource protection and stormwater management practices and techniques, including better site planning and design techniques and low impact development practices, that are used to protect valuable terrestrial and aquatic resources from the direct impacts of the land development process, maintain pre-development site hydrology and reduce post-construction stormwater runoff rates, volumes and pollutant loads. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impaired waters means those streams, rivers, lakes, estuaries and other water bodies that currently do not meet their designated use classification and associated water quality standards under the Clean Water Act. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that greatly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into the underlying native soils. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, sidewalks, driveways, streets and roads. 
Infiltration means the process of allowing stormwater runoff to percolate into the underlying native soils. 
Infiltration practice means a green infrastructure or stormwater management practice designed to provide infiltration of stormwater runoff into the underlying native soils. These stormwater management practices may be above or below grade. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that has been determined to be under the jurisdiction of the army corps of Engineers. 
Land development means any project undertaken to change or improve a site that involves one or more land disturbing activities. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity that changes stormwater runoff rates, volumes and pollutant loads on a site. These activities include, but are not limited to, the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, the placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation and any activity that bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse. 
Land owner means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
Low impact development practice means small-scale stormwater management practices that are used to disconnect impervious and disturbed pervious surfaces from the storm drain system and reduce post-construction stormwater runoff rates, volumes and pollutant loads. Low impact development practices include, but are not limited to, soil restoration, site reforestation/revegetation, infiltration swales, vegetated filter strips and rain gardens. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the EPA, or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b), that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the State, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
New development means a land development project undertaken on a previously undeveloped or unimproved site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means pollution from any source other than from a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, such as a wastewater treatment plant or industrial discharge. Sources of nonpoint source pollution include, but are not limited to, agricultural, silvicultural, mining and construction activities, subsurface disposal and urban stormwater runoff. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice means any natural resource protection or stormwater management practice or technique that uses natural processes and natural systems to intercept, convey, treat and/or manage stormwater runoff. Nonstructural stormwater management practices include, but are not limited to, protecting primary and secondary conservation areas, reducing clearing and grading limits, reducing roadway lengths and widths, reducing parking lot and building footprints, soil restoration, site reforestation/revegetation, green roofs, vegetated filter strips and rain gardens. 
Off-site stormwater management practice means a green infrastructure or stormwater management practice located outside the boundaries of a development site. 
On-site stormwater management practice means a green infrastructure or stormwater management practice located within the boundaries of a development site. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a piece of land, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm, or corporation in control of the site. 
Permanent stormwater management practice means a green infrastructure or stormwater management practice that will be operational after the land disturbing activities are complete and that is designed to become a permanent part of the site for the purposes of managing post-construction stormwater runoff. 
Permit means the permit issued by a local development review authority to an applicant, which is required for undertaking any land development project or land disturbing activities. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Post-development hydrology refers to the set of hydrologic conditions that may reasonably be expected to exist on a development site, after the completion of all land disturbing and construction activities. 
Pre-development hydrology refers to the set of hydrologic conditions that exist on a development site prior to the commencement of any land disturbing activities and at the time that plans for the land development project are approved by the local development review authority. 
Receiving stream or receiving aquatic resource means the body of water or conveyance into which stormwater runoff is discharged. 
Recharge means the replenishment of groundwater aquifers. 
Redevelopment means a change to previously existing, improved property, including but not limited to the demolition or building of structures, filling, grading, paving, or excavating, but excluding ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of buildings on the existing footprint, resurfacing of paved areas and exterior changes or improvements that do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management practice means a stormwater management practice designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may participate in providing land, financing, design services, construction services and/or maintenance services for the practice. 
Responsible party means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns that is named on a stormwater permit as responsible for the implementation of the stormwater management plan. 
Site means development site. 
Stop work order means an order issued that requires that all land disturbing activity on a site be stopped. 
Stormwater hotspot means an area where land use or pollution generating activities have the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater runoff. Stormwater hotspots include, but are not limited to, fueling stations (including temporary fueling stations during construction), golf courses, public works yards and marinas. 
Stormwater management means the interception, conveyance, treatment and management of stormwater runoff in a manner that is intended to prevent increased flood damage, channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management plan means a written document that details how stormwater runoff will be managed on a development site and that shows how the stormwater management criteria that apply to the development project have been met. 
Stormwater management practice means a practice or technique, either structural or nonstructural that is used to intercept stormwater runoff and change the characteristics of that runoff. Stormwater management practices are used to control post-construction stormwater runoff rates, volumes and pollutant loads to prevent increased flood damage, channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation. 
Stormwater management system means the entire suite of green infrastructure and stormwater management practices and stormwater conveyance features that are used to intercept, convey, treat and manage stormwater runoff on a development site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a green infrastructure or stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had no green infrastructure or stormwater management practice in place or had a practice that was not meeting local stormwater management criteria. 
Stormwater runoff means surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Stormwater runoff reduction means providing for the interception, evapotranspiration, infiltration, or capture and reuse of stormwater runoff to help maintain pre-development site hydrology and help protect aquatic resources from several indirect impacts of the land development process, including decreased groundwater recharge, decreased baseflow and degraded water quality. 
Subdivision means the division of a parcel of land to create one or more new lots or development sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, transfer of ownership, or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or construction of a new street or roadway or a change in the layout of an existing street or roadway. 
Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water. 
Watershed management plan or subwatershed management plan means a document, usually developed cooperatively by government agencies and other stakeholders, to protect, restore and/or otherwise manage the water resources found within a particular watershed or subwatershed. Watershed or subwatershed management plans commonly identify threats, sources of impairment, institutional issues and technical and programmatic solutions or projects to protect and/or restore water resources. 
Water quality protection means adequately treating stormwater runoff before it is discharged from a development site to help protect downstream aquatic resources from water quality degradation. 
Wetland hydroperiod means the pattern of fluctuating water levels within a wetland caused by the complex interaction of surface water, groundwater, topography, soils and geology within a wetland. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 2.0) 
Secs. 40-109—40-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 40-121. - Permit application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall undertake any development activity without first meeting the requirements of this article and receiving a permit for the proposed development activity from Brantley County. Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a development project shall submit to Brantley County a permit application on a form provided by Brantley County. Unless otherwise exempted by this article, the following items shall accompany a permit application: 
(1)  Stormwater management concept plan prepared in accordance with section 40-122; 
(2)  Stormwater management design plan prepared in accordance with section 40-124; 
(3)  Permit application and plan review fees prepared in accordance with sections 40-125 and 40-126; and, 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 3.1) 
Sec. 40-122. - Stormwater management concept plan. 
Prior to the preparation and submittal of a stormwater management design plan and permit application, the owner or developer shall submit to Brantley County for review and approval, a stormwater management concept plan illustrating the layout of the proposed development project and showing, in general, how post-construction stormwater runoff will be managed on the development site. 
Green infrastructure practices (i.e., better site planning techniques, better site design techniques, low impact development practices) are encouraged, but not required, to be used during the creation of a stormwater management concept plan. Green infrastructure practices include, but are not limited to, protecting primary and secondary conservation areas, reducing clearing and grading limits, reducing roadway lengths and widths, reducing parking lot and building footprints, soil restoration, site reforestation/revegetation, vegetated filter strips and rain gardens. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 3.2) 
Sec. 40-123. - Consultation meeting. 
All applicants are encouraged to hold a consultation meeting with Brantley County to discuss the proposed development project, the stormwater management concept plan and the approach that was used to satisfy the post-construction stormwater management and site planning and design criteria that apply to the development site. This consultation meeting shall take place on-site after submittal, but prior to approval, of the stormwater management concept plan, for the purposes of verifying site conditions and the feasibility of the stormwater management concept plan. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 3.3) 
Sec. 40-124. - Stormwater management design plan. 
Subsequent to approval of the stormwater management concept plan, the owner or developer shall submit to Brantley County for review and approval, a stormwater management design plan that details how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed on the development site. The stormwater management design plan shall detail how the proposed development project will meet the post-construction stormwater management and site planning and design criteria that apply to the development site. 
A copy of the stormwater management concept plan shall be included with the submittal of the stormwater management design plan. The stormwater management design plan should be consistent with the stormwater management concept plan. If any significant changes were made to the plan of development, the county engineer may ask for a written statement providing rationale for any of the changes that were made. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 3.4) 
Sec. 40-125. - Permit application procedure. 
(a)  Applications for permits shall be filed with Brantley County on a permit application on a form provided by the county. 
(b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 40-121. 
(c)  The county engineer shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management design plan are approved or disapproved. 
(d)  If the permit application and stormwater management design plan are disapproved, the county engineer shall notify the applicant of that fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements of this article and resubmit the application. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the county engineer that the permit application and stormwater management design plan meet the requirements of this article, the county engineer may issue a permit for the development project, provided that all other applicable legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in undertaking the new development or redevelopment activity, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved stormwater management design plan and the provisions of this article; 
(2)  The development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved stormwater management design plan; 
(3)  The county engineer or his designee shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the development project in accordance with applicable sections of this article; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved stormwater management design plan without review and verbal approval on minor items and written approval on all others by the county engineer or his designee; and, 
(5)  Upon completion of the development project, the design engineer for the project shall submit a statement that the constructed improvements for the project have met the design intent of the approved stormwater management design plan. The applicant or other responsible person shall also submit record drawings for the stormwater management system, as required under the applicable sections of this article. Any detention or retention ponds shall require certification by the design engineer with respect to design and constructed volumes and outfall structures. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 3.5) 
Sec. 40-126. - Application review fees. 
A nonrefundable permit fee shall be collected at the time the permit application is submitted to Brantley County. Any permit fees that are collected shall be used to support the administration of the plan review and approval process and the inspection of all development projects subject to the requirements of this article. Brantley County shall develop a fee schedule based on the area of land disturbed by the project and may amend the fee schedule from time to time. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 3.6) 
Sec. 40-127. - Compliance through off-site stormwater management practices. 
All stormwater management design plans shall include on-site stormwater management practices, unless arrangements are made with the county engineer to manage post-construction stormwater runoff in an off-site or regional stormwater management practice. The off-site or regional stormwater management practice must be located on property legally dedicated to that purpose, be designed and sized to meet the post-construction stormwater management criteria presented in the Brantley County LDM. In addition, appropriate stormwater management practices shall be installed, where necessary, to protect properties and drainage channels that are located between the development site and the location of the off-site or regional stormwater management practice. 
To be eligible for compliance through the use of off-site stormwater management practices, the applicant must submit a stormwater management design plan to Brantley County that shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional stormwater management practice and demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the county engineer, that the off-site or regional stormwater management practice will not result in the following impacts: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage or endangerment to public health or safety; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 3.7) 
Secs. 40-128—40-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 

Sec. 40-141. - Notice of construction commencement. 
The applicant must notify Brantley County at least 24 hours prior to the commencement of construction on a development site. In addition, the applicant must notify the county engineer in advance of the installation of critical components of the stormwater management system shown on the approved stormwater management design plan. The county engineer may, at his discretion, issue verbal or written authorization to proceed with the installation of critical components of the stormwater management system, such as permanent green infrastructure and stormwater management practices, based on the stabilization of contributing drainage areas and other factors. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 4.1) 
Sec. 40-142. - Inspections during construction. 
Periodic inspections of the stormwater management practices shown on the approved stormwater management design plan shall be conducted by staff or representatives of the county engineer during construction. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management design plan for establishing compliance with the provisions of this article. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing about the nature of the violation and the remedial measures that are required to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the approved stormwater management design plan. In the event that the remedial measures described in such notice have not been completed by the date set forth in the notice, any one or more of the enforcement actions outlined in this article may be taken against the applicant. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 4.2) 
Sec. 40-143. - Final inspection and record drawings. 
Subsequent to the final installation and stabilization of all infrastructure and stormwater management practices shown on the approved stormwater management design plan, and before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat, the applicant is responsible for assuring that the project has been completed in accordance with the approved stormwater management design plan and submitting record drawings for all green infrastructure and stormwater management practices shown on the approved stormwater management design plan. The record drawings must show the final design specifications for all green infrastructure and stormwater management practices and must be certified by a licensed design professional such as a landscape architect (green infrastructure only) or professional engineer. A final inspection shall be conducted by the county engineer or his designee to confirm the accuracy of the record drawings. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 4.3) 
Secs. 40-144—40-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 40-161. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction that violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management design plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction that is continuous with respect to time may be deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 5.0) 
Sec. 40-162. - Notice of violation. 
If Brantley County determines that an owner, applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, or the terms and conditions of an approved stormwater management design plan or permit, it shall issue a written notice of violation to said owner, applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in a new development or redevelopment activity covered by this article without having first secured a stormwater management permit, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the person in charge of the new development or redevelopment activity being conducted on the development site. 
The notice of violation shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner, applicant or other responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the provisions of this article, or the terms and conditions of the approved stormwater management design plan, permit or inspection and maintenance agreement and plan, and the date for the completion of such remedial measures; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is issued; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to Brantley County by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or safety, a written notice of appeal must be filed within 24 hours after the notice of violation). 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 5.1) 
Sec. 40-163. - Penalties. 
In the event that the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was issued. 
Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, Brantley County shall first notify the owner, applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action and shall provide a reasonable opportunity of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or safety, 24-hours notice shall be sufficient) to correct the violation. In the event the owner, applicant or other responsible person fails to correct the violation by the date set forth in said notice, Brantley County may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. Brantley County may issue a stop work order that shall be served on the owner, applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the owner, applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violation or violations described therein. The stop work order may temporarily be withdrawn or modified by Brantley County to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the remedial measures necessary to correct such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy or final plat approval. Brantley County may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other structure constructed or being constructed on the development site or refuse to approve the final plat until the owner, applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violation or violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation, or modification of permit. Brantley County may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the owner, applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violation or violations described therein. The permit may be modified by Brantley County to enable the owner, applicant or other responsible person to take the remedial measures necessary to correct such violation or violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the owner, applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to correct the violation or violations described therein, by the date set forth in the notice of violation, Brantley County may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains un-remedied after the date set forth in the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, Brantley County may issue a citation to the owner, applicant or other responsible person, requiring said person to appear in magistrate court to answer to criminal charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment for up to 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 5.2) 
Chapter 42 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 40; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes, ch. 50; planning, ch. 62; roads and bridges, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.; construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Statutory authorization; findings of fact; purpose; objectives. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has in O.C.G.A. §§ 36-1-20 and 15-10-66, inclusive, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt and enforce regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the board of commissioners does ordain the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, are protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(d)  Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1988, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 42-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter loadbearing walls is new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the chairman's (chairman of the board of commissioners) interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance, or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which establishes the area of special flood hazard. 
Flood and flooding mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement, i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include longterm storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive dates or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD). 
National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced after the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance, or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which establishes the area of special flood hazard. 
Start of construction, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (PL 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a building, including a manufactured home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building taking place during the life of a building, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. 
For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1988, art. 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-3. - General provisions. 
(a)  Applicable lands. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the county and the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)  Areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study, dated September 30, 1988, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the sections of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all sections shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the board of commissioners; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the county or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Violation of the sections of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Reference 36-1-20(b).) 
(Ord. of 9-13-1988, art. 3, §§ A—H) 
Secs. 42-4—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 42-31. - Administrator. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners is hereby appointed to administer and implement the sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1988, art. 4, § A) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-101 et seq. 
Sec. 42-32. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the chairman on forms furnished by him prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of such structures, materials, and facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including the basement, of all buildings; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential building will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection 42-62(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. Provide a floor elevation or floodproofing certification after the lowest floor is completed, or instances where the building is subject to the regulations applicable to coastal high hazard areas, after placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the chairman a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, floodproofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. The certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by such land surveyor or professional engineer. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by such land surveyor or professional engineer. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The chairman shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections required shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1988, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 42-33. - Duties and responsibilities of the chairman. 
(a)  Duties of the chairman shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Reviewing all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Advising the permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, requiring that copies of such permits are provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)  Notifying adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submitting evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)  Ensuring that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)  Verifying and recording the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all new or substantially improved buildings, in accordance with subsection 42-32(2). 
(6)  Verifying and recording the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 42-32(2). 
(7)  Obtaining certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with subsection 42-62(2), when floodproofing is utilized for a particular building. 
(8)  Making the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard; for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section. 
(9)  Obtaining, reviewing and reasonably utilizing any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of sections 42-61—42-65, when base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 42-32(2). 
(b)  All records pertaining to this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the chairman and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1988, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 42-34. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of commissioners as established for the county, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-13-13, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the chairman in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of commissioners or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county as provided in O.C.G.A. § 50-13-19. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section, except for subsection (h)(1) and (h)(4) of this section, and provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not result in the building losing its historical designation. 
(e)  In passing upon such applications, the board of commissioners shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(f)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in subsection (e) of this section, and the purposes of this chapter, the board of commissioners may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(g)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)  Conditions for variances are as follows: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The chairman shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1988, art. 4, § D) 
Secs. 42-35—42-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 42-61. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is in compliance with the sections of this chapter shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this article. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is not in compliance with the sections of this chapter shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1988, art. 5, § A) 
Sec. 42-62. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in subsection 42-3(b), or subsection 42-33(9), the following are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential building or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (3) of this section. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A-zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in subsection 42-33(7). 
(3)  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; 
b.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(4)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 42-3(b) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If subsection (4)a. of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 42-61—42-65. 
c.  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes) except in an existing manufactured home (mobile home) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of subsection 42-61(1), and the elevation standards of subsection (1) of this section and the encroachment standards of subsection (4)a. of this section are met. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1988, art. 5, § B) 
Sec. 42-63. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevation and/or floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 42-3(b) where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with subsection 42-33(9). 
(Ord. of 9-13-1988, art. 5, § C) 
Sec. 42-64. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
Standards for subdivision proposals are as follows: 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1988, art. 5, § D) 
Sec. 42-65. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding, AO zones. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 42-3(b) are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential buildings shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1988, art. 5, § E) 
Chapter 46 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by state department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq.; power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4(a)(4); power of county board of health to adopt rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6; authority to provide public health facilities and services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Rules and regulations. 
There are currently in existence certain rules and regulations adopted by the county board of health with the purpose of preserving the public health, safety, and welfare of citizens of Brantley County, Georgia. This article specifically incorporates by reference the provision of the following rules and regulations which are in force at the time of the adoption of the ordinance on which this article is based: 
(1)  Rules and regulations pertaining to food service (adopted by the department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 290-5-14 as subsequently amended and updated), and policies of the county board of health pertaining to food service; 
(2)  Rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems (adopted by the department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-3-1 as subsequently amended and updated), and policies of the county board of health pertaining to on-site sewage management systems; 
(3)  Rules and regulations for mass gatherings (adopted by the department of public and the county board of health and being chapter 511-3-2 as subsequently amended and updated), and policies of the county board of health pertaining to mass gatherings; 
(4)  Rules and regulations pertaining to drinking water supply (adopted by the department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-3-3 as subsequently amended and updated), and policies of the county board of health pertaining to drinking water supply; 
(5)  Rules and regulations pertaining to solid waste (adopted by the department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-3-4 as subsequently amended and updated), and policies of the county board of health pertaining to solid waste; 
(6)  Rules and regulations pertaining to public swimming pools, spas, and recreational water parks (adopted by the department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-3-5 as subsequently amended and updated), and policies of the county board of health pertaining to public swimming pools, spas, and recreational water parks; 
(7)  Rules and regulations pertaining to portable sanitation contractors (adopted by the department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-3-6 as subsequently amended and updated), and policies of the county board of health pertaining to portable sanitation; 
(8)  Rules and regulations pertaining to Georgia Smoke Free Air Act of 2005 (adopted by the department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-3-7 as subsequently amended and updated), and policies of the county board of health pertaining to smoke free air; 
(9)  Rules and regulations pertaining to rabies control (adopted by the department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-4-2 and the "rabies control ordinance" as subsequently amended and updated), and policies of the county board of health pertaining to rabies control; 
(10)  Rules and regulations pertaining to tourist accommodations (adopted by the department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-6-2 as subsequently amended and updated), and policies of the county board of health pertaining to tourist accommodations; 
(11)  Rules and regulations pertaining to body art and/or tattooing (adopted by the department of public health and/or the county board of health and being rules and regulations for body art studios and artists as subsequently amended and updated), and policies of the county board of health pertaining to body art and/or tattooing; and 
A copy of all these rules and regulations are attached to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2005, § I; Ord. of 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 46-2. - Enforcement. 
The duty of implementation and enforcement of these regulations rests with the county board of commissioners, and by virtue of this article is hereby expressly delegated to the county board of health who is hereby charged with promulgation of sufficient procedures for ensuring compliance with these rules and regulations by the citizens of the county or those individuals found within the boundaries of the county. The county board of health is directed to implement procedures which will ensure that the citizens of the county or those individuals found within the boundaries of county will receive all procedural rights to which they are entitled under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2005, § II; Ord. of 4-7-2016, § II) 
Sec. 46-3. - Violations. 
Any violation of the rules and regulations hereby referenced shall be a violation of this article and shall be a misdemeanor offense. Any violator shall be subject to the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days. Any failure of payment of inspection fees listed within the fee schedule adopted by county board of health and approved the county board of commissioners within 60 days of first notice, may result in suspension of permit. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2005, § III; Ord. of 4-7-2016, § III) 
Sec. 46-4. - Jurisdiction. 
The magistrate's court of Brantley County shall have jurisdiction over violators of this article and all procedures for enforcement of such ordinance shall be as provided in Article 4, Chapter 10 of Title 15, Official Code of Georgia. Complaints of violation of any provision of this article shall be brought before the magistrate's court by a designated representative of the county board of health and shall be prosecuted through that court. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2005, § IV; Ord. of 4-7-2016, § IV) 
Secs. 46-5—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Regulations for septic tanks or individual sewerage management systems in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1. 

Sec. 46-31. - Rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems. 
There are currently in existence certain rules and regulations adopted by the county board of health on the June 10, 1986, with the purpose of preserving the public health, safety, and welfare of citizens of the county. This article specifically incorporates by reference the provisions of these rules and regulations which are in force at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. These rules and regulations are for on-site sewage management systems and have been adopted by the state department of human resources as set forth in Ga. Admin. Code ch. 290-5-26. A copy of these rules and regulations are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 46-32. - Enforcement. 
The duty of implementation and enforcement of the on-site sewage management system regulations rests with the board of commissioners, and by virtue of this section, enforcement is hereby expressly delegated to the county board of health who is hereby charged with promulgation of sufficient procedures for ensuring compliance with these rules and regulations by the citizens of the county or any citizen that owns land, subdivides land or owns or operates mobile home parks in the county. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1987, § 2) 
Sec. 46-33. - Violations. 
Any violation of the rules and regulations hereby referenced shall be a violation of this article and shall be a misdemeanor offense. Any violator shall be subject to the imposition of a penalty as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1987, § 3) 
Sec. 46-34. - Prosecution through court. 
The magistrate court of the county shall have jurisdiction over violators of this article, and all procedures for enforcement of such article shall be provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. Complaints of violation of any provisions of this article shall be brought before the magistrate court by a designated representative of the county board of health and shall be prosecuted through that court. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1987, § 4) 
Secs. 46-35—46-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FEES 

Sec. 46-61. - Established. 
The board of commissioners is charged with the responsibility of managing and protecting the health, safety, resources and property of the county, as well as its citizens; and the county health department is regularly called upon to perform and provide environmental services for the citizens and property owners of the county for compliance with various state and federal laws and regulations. Therefore, the board of commissioners does adopt, establish and impose fees for environmental health services performed and/or provided by the county health department as set forth on the schedule in section 46-62. 
(Res. of 6-20-2002) 
Sec. 46-62. - Schedule of fees. 
Brantley County Environmental Health Services Fees 

 
(Res. of 6-20-2002; Res. of 12-12-2006) 
Secs. 46-63—46-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RULES AND REGULATIONS OF TATTOO/BODY PIERCING STUDIOS AND ARTISTS 

Sec. 46-71. - Authority. 
The legal authority for this rule is Chapter 16-5-71 and Chapter 31-40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. (O.C.G.A. Chapters 16-5-71, 31-40-1, 31-40-2, 31-40-3, 31-40-4, 31-40-5, 31-40-6, 31-40-7, 31-40-8, 31-40-9, and 31-5.) 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § I) 
Sec. 46-72. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules and regulations is to establish reasonable standards for individuals performing tattoo and body piercing procedures and for the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards should insure the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving these services. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § II) 
Sec. 46-73. - Exemptions. 
These regulations do not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § III) 
Sec. 46-74. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined by specific sections as used in these rules and regulations the term: 
Antibacterial solution means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly. 
Appropriate disinfectant means an EPA registered disinfectant or a 1:10 dilution of bleach and water. 
Body piercing artist means any person who performs body piercing. 
Body piercing means the creation of an opening in an individual's body other than the individual's ear, to insert jewelry or other decoration. 
County means the local county board of health or its duly authorized representatives. 
Currently licensed health care professional includes physicians, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurses (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians. 
Department means the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia. 
Governing body means the partnership, the corporation, the association, or the person or group of persons who maintain and control the tattoo/body piercing studio and who are legally responsible for the operation of the studio. 
OSHA means Occupational Safety and Health Association. 
Permit means the authorization granted by the county to the governing body to operate a tattoo/body piercing studio. 
Plan of correction means a plan for correcting deficiencies in meeting rules and regulations of the department of human resources. 
Sanitary means clean and free of agents of infection or disease. 
Sanitized means effective antibacterial treatment by a process that provides sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the bacteria count including pathogens to a safe level on equipment. 
Sterilization means holding an instrument in an autoclave for required length of time at 15—30 pounds pressure at a temperature of 273 degrees Fahrenheit or 121 degrees Celsius. 
Tattoo artist means any person who performs tattooing. 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin. 
Tattoo/body piercing studio means any permanent building or structure on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business license and permit from the county board of health, wherein a tattoo/body piercing artist performs tattooing or body piercing. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § IV) 
Sec. 46-75. - Governing body. 
(a)  The governing body shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in Chapter 31-40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, with applicable administrative rules and regulations of the county board of health, including but not limited to all applicable statutes, rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(b)  Prior to being granted a permit each tattoo/body piercing studio shall develop a written statement of policies and procedures outlining the responsibilities of management. 
(1)  Tattoo/body piercing artists shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing tattoo/body piercing procedures. 
(2)  No person shall be tattooed or pierced who appears to be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs. 
(3)  No animals, except for guide dogs accompanying blind persons, shall be allowed in the tattoo studio. 
(4)  No one under the age of 18 shall be tattooed or pierced. The tattooing of a minor is prohibited in the State of Georgia. 
(5)  Written report of any infection or allergic reaction resulting from the application of a tattoo or body piercing shall be forwarded to health department within five working days of its occurrence or knowledge thereof. 
(6)  Tattoo artists shall not remove an existing tattoo from a person. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § V) 
Sec. 46-76. - Minimum floor plan requirements. 
(a)  The tattoo/body piercing studio shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers. 
(b)  The studio shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the tattoo/body piercing adequate privacy from observers. The work area shall be separate from the waiting area. 
(c)  Tattoo/body piercing studios must have adequate ventilation. 
(d)  Walls and ceilings must be painted or covered in a manner which would allow for easy and effective cleaning. Paint or covering must be light in color. 
(e)  Floors of the work area must not be carpeted. Surfaces shall be of a nonabsorbent material that would allow for effective cleaning by conventional methods. 
(f)  A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility shall be made accessible to customers; however, it shall be separate from the work area. 
(g)  The work area shall be equipped with at least one sink and basin providing hot and cold running water for the use of the artists for washing their hands and preparing customers for tattooing/piercing. This area shall be provided with soap, an antibacterial solution, single use towels or air blower, and individual hand brushes for each artist. 
(h)  The work area shall be provided with adequate lighting. 
(i)  The work area shall not be used as a corridor for access to other rooms. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § VI) 
Sec. 46-77. - Furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)  Furnishings of the tattoo/body piercing studio shall be maintained in good condition, intact, and functional. Furnishings should be made of or covered in a material that is easily cleanable and non-absorbent. The studio shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)  Cabinets for the storage of instruments, dyes, pigments, single use articles, carbon, and stencils shall be provided for each tattoo artist and shall be maintained in a sanitary manner which protects them from contamination. 
(c)  Work tables and chairs shall be provided for each tattoo/body piercing artist. 
(1)  Surfaces of all work tables and chairs shall be constructed of material which is smooth, nonabsorbent, corrosive resistant, and easily sanitized. 
(2)  Work tables and chairs shall be sanitized with a bactericidal solution after each application. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § VII) 
Sec. 46-78. - Supplies. 
(a)  Bulk single use articles shall be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These articles shall be stored in an area separate from the toilet facilities. 
(b)  All materials applied to the human skin shall be from single use containers and shall be disposed of after each use. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § VIII) 
Sec. 46-79. - Dyes and pigments. 
(a)  All dyes and pigments used in tattooing shall be from professional suppliers specifically providing dyes and/or pigments for the tattooing of human skin. 
(b)  In preparing dyes or pigments to be used by a tattoo artist, only nontoxic sterile materials shall be used. Single-use or individual portions of dyes or pigments in clean, sterilized individual containers or single-use containers shall be used for each patron. 
(c)  After tattooing, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use or individual containers shall be discarded along with the container. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § IX) 
Sec. 46-80. - Regarding piercers jewelry. 
(a)  Client and piercer should have appropriate size and quality jewelry chosen before the procedure begins. 
(b)  Only appropriate jewelry should be used in piercing. Appropriate jewelry is made of implant grade, high quality surgical stainless steel (316LVM series), solid 14K or 18K gold, niobium, titanium, platinum. Appropriate jewelry has no nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces that might endanger the tissues. 
(c)  Ear studs or other jewelry designed for earlobe piercing are not appropriate jewelry for other body parts and must not be used by piercers. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § X) 
Sec. 46-81. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Prior to the start of the tattoo/body piercing procedure the artist should inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Trim fingernails to insure that gloves are not punctured. 
(b)  All jewelry such as watches, rings, etc. should be removed prior to the start of the tattoo procedure. 
(c)  Before working on each client, the fingernails and hands of the tattoo/body piercing artist shall be thoroughly washed and scrubbed with warm water, and antibacterial soap, using an individual hand brush that is clean and in good repair. The hands should then be dried by either an air blower or by single use towels prior to beginning work on each client or when interrupted in the process. 
(d)  Single use disposable latex or approved non-latex examination gloves shall be worn during the tattooing process. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the application of the tattoo, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whenever their ability to function is compromised. 
(e)  Each artist shall wear a clean outer garment, apron or smock. These items shall be changed after each client. 
(f)  Tattoo/body piercing artists who are experiencing symptoms of diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, or skin infections shall refrain from tattooing/body piercing activities. 
(g)  Adequate numbers of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each artist for the entire day and night operation. 
(h)  Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the area to be tattooed. 
(i)  Smoking and consumption of food or drink is prohibited in tattoo/body piercing studio. 
(j)  Universal precautions are to be followed per OSHA standards and guidelines. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § XI) 
Sec. 46-82. - Sterilization. 
(a)  An operational sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided in each tattoo/body piercing studio. 
(b)  Non-disposable instruments shall be kept in a separate puncture resistant container until brush scrubbed in hot water and soap, and then sterilized by autoclaving. 
(c)  The following procedures should be followed during the sterilization process: 
(1)  Prior to being placed in the autoclave all equipment shall be bagged, labeled, dated and sealed. 
(2)  Each autoclave bag may hold no more than one liner and shader tube with needle and bar inserted into tube. 
(3)  To protect needle tips from damage an appropriate sterile protective covering shall be placed on the needle tip. 
(4)  Instruments shall remain in the autoclave according to manufacturer's specifications. 
(5)  If the process begins with a hot start then instruments should be processed according to manufacturer's specifications. 
(6)  To achieve proper sterilization, temperature must reach 273 degrees Fahrenheit and 15—30 psi. 
(7)  Sterilization indicators shall be used each time and the results must be kept in a log at the location for a minimum of three years. Spore tests must be conducted at least every 90 days. 
(d)  If using pre-sterilized equipment, documentation must be on file from equipment manufacturer that describes the method of sterilization meeting the manufacturer's recommendations for storage and maintenance of sterility. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § XII) 
Sec. 46-83. - Tattoo preparation. 
(a)  Before placing the tattoo design on the client's skin, the artist shall treat the skin area with an antibacterial solution. 
(b)  If an acetate stencil is used by a tattoo artist for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be thoroughly cleaned and rinsed in a germicidal solution for at least 20 minutes and then dried with sterile gauze or dried in the air on a sanitized surface after each use. 
(c)  If a paper stencil is used by a tattoo artist for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be single use and disposable. 
(d)  If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied with a single use article only. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § XIII) 
Sec. 46-84. - Requirements of body piercers. 
Body piercers shall: 
(1)  Set up equipment in front of client. 
(2)  Open sealed autoclave bags containing sterile equipment in front of client, and discard the autoclave bag. 
(3)  Disinfect all jewelry contaminated with only airborne pathogens (not previously worn or contaminated) with a non-hazardous hard surface disinfectant approved by the EPA. All jewelry contaminated or potentially contaminated with blood borne pathogens (previously worn by another person) should be autoclaved, stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(4)  Pre-sterilize all needles used in piercing, use only on one person, at one sitting, for a single piercing, and immediately dispose of in a medical sharps container. 
(5)  Pre-sterilize all forceps, tubes, etc. in sealed, dated, sterile indicator bags. These items are to be used on one person, in one sitting. After one such use, they must be autoclaved and stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § XIV) 
Sec. 46-85. - After tattoo/body piercing application. 
(a)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution. 
(b)  After the area has dried, apply a layer of antibacterial ointment from a collapsible or plastic tube. 
(c)  A bandage shall then be applied to the tattoo using sealed telfa (non-sticking) pads. 
(d)  Verbal and written instructions, approved by the county health department for the care of the body art procedure site shall be provided to each client by the operator upon completion of the procedure. The written instructions shall advise the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection and contain the name, address and phone number of the establishment. These documents shall be signed and dated by both parties, with a copy given to the client and the operator retaining the original with all other required records. The facility shall also post in public view the name, address and phone number of the county health department and the procedure for filing a complaint. The notice for filing a complaint shall be included in the establishment application packet. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § XV) 
Sec. 46-86. - Disinfection of workplace. 
Each tattoo/body piercing studio must be kept clean and sanitary. The owner must develop and implement a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination and tasks or procedures to be performed. This written schedule must be based on the location within the studio, the type of surfaces to be cleaned, type of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the studio. 
The following procedures should be adhered to. 
(1)  Clean and sanitize all equipment and work surfaces with an appropriate disinfectant after completion of tattoo/body piercing procedures and at the end of work shift when surfaces have become contaminated since the last cleaning. 
(2)  Inspect and decontaminate, on a daily basis or more frequently if necessary, reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have a likelihood for becoming contaminated. When contamination is visible, clean and decontaminate receptacles immediately, or as soon as feasible. 
(3)  Studios should be free of insects, rodents and vermin. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § XVI) 
Sec. 46-87. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)  Needles, razors, or other sharp instruments used during tattoo/body piercing procedures, shall be placed in puncture resistant, closed containers immediately after use. 
(b)  Needles shall not be purposely bent or broken, or otherwise manipulated by hand. 
(c)  Containers of sharp waste shall be sent to a bio-hazardous waste facility where they are either incinerated or otherwise rendered non-hazardous in compliance with 29 CFR Part 1920.1030, Occupational Exposure to Blood Borne Pathogens. Record of disposal must be kept on site. 
(d)  Disposable waste shall be placed in easily cleanable, closed containers provided with tight fitting lids, to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(e)  Waste containers shall be kept closed when not in use. 
(f)  Disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. 
(g)  The containers shall be located as near as feasible to the area of use. These containers shall not be overfilled. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § XVII) 
Sec. 46-88. - Personnel/operator/artist permit. 
(a)  No person shall practice body art procedures without first obtaining an operator/artist permit from the county health department. 
(b)  The operator/artist permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire in one year and must be renewed annually unless revoked sooner by the department. 
(c)  Application for operator/artist permits shall include: 
(1)  Name. 
(2)  Date of birth. 
(3)  Sex. 
(4)  Residence address. 
(5)  Mailing address. 
(6)  Phone number. 
(7)  Place(s) of employment as an operator/artist. 
(8)  Training and or experience. 
(9)  Proof of attendance at a blood borne pathogen training program and first aid course given or approved by the county board of health. 
(10)  Physical examination. 
(11)  Criminal history report. 
(12)  Fingerprinting. 
(13)  Photograph. 
(d)  All operator/artist permits shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where they may be readily observed by clients. 
(e)  Persons performing the tattoo/body piercing operation shall be 18 years of age or older and maintain current certification in CPR first-aid and have proof of attendance at a blood borne pathogen training program (or equivalent), given or approved by the county health department. Training/courses provided by professional body art organizations/associations may also be submitted for consideration. 
(f)  The above certification must be obtained prior to the permit being issued. 
(g)  The artist must obtain a physical examination by a licensed physician within 12 months prior to employment or initial application for permit. The examination must be sufficiently comprehensive to assure that the artist is free of communicable diseases. 
(h)  Proof shall be provided upon request that all operators have completed the Hepatitis B vaccination series; that antibody testing has revealed that the employee is immune to Hepatitis B; or that the vaccine is contraindicated for medical reasons. Contraindication requires a dated and signed physician's statement specifying the name of the employee and that the vaccine cannot be given. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § XVIII) 
Sec. 46-89. - Client files. 
(a)  For each client, proper records of tattoos administered shall be maintained by the studio. 
(b)  Records of each client shall be prepared prior to the procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name and signature, address, phone number, type of positive picture ID, proof of age, date tattooed, design, its location and name of the artist. 
(c)  A statement of informed consent by the individual receiving the tattoo must be maintained on file. 
(d)  A statement by the client attesting that he/she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs shall be on file. 
(e)  A copy of procedures signed by the client advising them of proper subsequent care of the tattoo shall be maintained on file. 
(f)  A copy of instructions signed by the client informing them on the risks involved and possible complications that might result from the tattoo/body piercing procedure must be maintained on file. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2003, § XIX) 
Chapter 50 - MANUFACTURED HOMES/MOBILE HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 8, 2010, effective Aug. 2, 2010, § 2(1—16), did not specifically amend the Code and has been included herein as set out, superseding the provisions of former ch. 50, manufactured homes, §§ 50-31—50-38 and 50-61—50-68, which derived from an ordinance adopted May 9, 1989, §§ 1—9; an ordinance adopted July 12, 1994, § 1; a resolution adopted April 11, 1995; and an ordinance adopted Jan. 13, 2004. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Purpose. 
This article I is being promulgated to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Brantley County, Georgia who purchase, own or occupy manufactured homes or mobile homes. The county recognizes that manufactured housing meets the needs of many Brantley County residents for affordable housing and is compatible with site-built housing, if developed in accordance with comparable standards. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 50-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act shall mean the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq., as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
Approved manufactured home/mobile home space means any lot or parcel of land designed and designated for the location of one manufactured home/mobile home, its accessory buildings or structures, and accessory equipment for exclusive use of the home meeting the requirements of this article, as administered by the building official. 
Board of commissioners shall mean the duly elected Board of Commissioners of Brantley County, Georgia. 
Building official shall mean the Brantley County Building Inspector or his appointed deputies. 
Dwelling or home means any manufactured home/mobile home which contains one or two dwelling units used, intended, or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for living purposes. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Installation shall mean construction of a foundation system and the placement of a manufactured home or a mobile home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such home. The term "set up" may be used interchangeably with the term "installation." 
Installer shall mean the person responsible for performing installation of a manufactured home or mobile home and who is required to obtain a State of Georgia license pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-164. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit of transfer or ownership, or for development, or both for the location of a pre-owned manufactured home or mobile home, and shall not include any part of the right-of-way of a street or road. 
Manufactured home shall mean a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein: except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements. 
Manufactured home dealers shall mean any person engaged in the business of buying and thereafter selling manufactured homes on a regular basis, for the purpose of restoration, renovations and resale of the manufactured homes. 
Manufactured home/mobile home park means a premises where three or more manufactured home/mobile home dwelling units are parked for living or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation, or where spaces or lots are set aside and offered for rent for use by manufactured homes/mobile homes for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building, structure or facility used by occupants of manufactured homes/mobile homes on such premises. The term "manufactured home/mobile home park" shall not include manufactured homes/mobile home sales lots. 
Manufactured/mobile home safety decal or decal shall mean a decal issued by the Brantley County Building Official after inspections required by this chapter have been performed. 
Manufacturer shall mean any person who constructs or assembles manufactured housing. 
Mobile home shall mean a used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and built prior to June 15, 1976. All mobile homes constructed after June 15, 1976, are considered manufactured homes for the purpose of this chapter. 
Mover is an individual who transports a manufactured homes or mobile homes to a site for installation, but is required to have an installer's license issued by the State of Georgia; provided, the mover may perform temporary blocks, as necessary, to stabilize the home and shall not, under any circumstance, be considered as an installer. However, any further blocking of the home by a mover shall be considered to be an installation of a home, and the mover shall be in violation of the chapter unless he or she is state licensed as an installer. 
Occupant shall mean the person occupying or will occupy a home. 
Owner shall mean a person who owns the manufactured home or mobile home at the time of the set up or installation, who may or may not be the occupant of the home. 
Person shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, association, or another legal entity, but doesn't include the State of Georgia or any political subdivision of the state. 
Planning commission means the Brantley County Planning Commission. 
Pre-owned manufactured home shall mean any manufactured home or mobile home that has been previously used as a home that has been titled to another person by the State of Georgia, or a sister state. 
Temporary permit shall mean a permit issued to an installer or manufactured home dealer and shall be valid for a period of 90 days. During the temporary permit time, or until the requested permit is issued, the manufactured home or mobile home shall remain unoccupied. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 2) 
Sec. 50-3. - Permit application. 
(a)  Before any manufactured home or mobile home is located or relocated on any site in Brantley County, the owner shall first apply to building officials for a permit to locate or relocate such manufactured home or mobile home in Brantley County. 
(b)  The application for a permit shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of the owner; 
(2)  Name of the occupant, if different from the owner; 
(3)  The location of the manufactured home or mobile home at the time the application is being made; 
(4)  The name of the owner of the real estate on which the manufactured home or mobile home is to be situated identified by tax map and parcel number; 
(5)  If the owner is an installer or manufactured home dealer, the current location of the manufactured home or mobile home and destination where the home is to be relocated identified by tax map and parcel; and 
(6)  If the owner is an installer or manufactured home dealer, the application shall include his or her respective license numbers as issued by the State of Georgia. 
(7)  Proof that the manufactured home or mobile home has permanently affixed a certificate or tag that it was constructed in accordance with the Act, or the preceding act. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 3) 
Sec. 50-4. - Utilities/heath department. 
(a)  No public utility shall provide service to any manufactured home or mobile home in the unincorporated area of Brantley County without first determining if the owner thereof has a manufactured home permit, or temporary permit and the public utilities at a minimum, shall require a copy of the permit to turn on service. The temporary service shall not exceed 90 days. The public utilities shall abide by the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  A copy of the application for permits will be forwarded to the Brantley County Health Department for approval of site pursuant to its regulations dealing with water and sanitary requirement. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, §4) 
Sec. 50-5. - Facilities required. 
The following facilities shall be included in any manufactured home or mobile home to be located or moved within or into any unincorporated area of Brantley County and shall be inspected by the building official, or his assistants. Prior to the owner, dealer or installer obtaining a manufactured home/mobile home safety decal: 
(1)  Sanitary facilities. Every manufactured home or mobile home shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub, or shower, and a water closet all in working condition when properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the Brantley County Health Department. Every plumbing fixture, water and waste pipe shall be in a sanitary working condition free from leaks and obstruction. 
(2)  Hot and cold water supply. Every manufactured home or mobile home shall have connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory, and tub or shower a supply of both cold water and hot water. 
(3)  Water heating facilities. Every manufactured home or mobile home shall have water-heating facilities in safe, working condition. 
(4)  Heating facilities. Every manufactured home or mobile home shall have heating facilities in safe, working condition. Where a central heating system is not provided, each manufactured home/mobile home shall be provided with facilities whereby heating appliances may be connected. Un-vented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited except for gas heaters listed for un-vented use and the total input rating of the un-vented heaters is less than 30 BTU per hour per cubic feet of room content. Un-vented fuel burning heaters shall also be prohibited in bedrooms. In lieu of inspecting the heating facilities of a manufactured home or mobile home, the installer, the manufactured home dealer or owner may request a heating inspection by a qualified licensed third party. Written approval by such a person will be accepted as being in compliance with those portions of the safety standards established herein which pertain to heating systems. 
(5)  Smoke detector. Every manufactured home or mobile home shall be provided with a State of Georgia approved smoke detector installed and tested in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listings. 
(6)  Windows. Every habitable room excluding bathrooms, kitchens, and hallways shall have at least one window, which can be opened, facing directly to the outdoors, unless the window looks into an enclosed porch with accessible windows and doors. 
(7)  Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be opened, or such other device that will ventilate the room. 
(8)  Electrical. 
a.  Distribution panels. Distribution panels shall be installed in compliance with approved listing, complete with required breakers or fuses, with all unused openings covered with blank covers approved and listed for that purpose. Connection shall be checked for tightness. Panels shall be accessible. 
b.  Electrical system. The electrical system (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed, wired and shall be in working condition. The pre-owned manufactured home or mobile home shall be subjected to an electrical continuity test(s) to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
c.  Third party inspection. The manufactured home dealer, installer or owner may, in lieu of inspecting the electrical and heating system of a manufactured home or mobile home, request an electrical inspection by a qualified licensed third party. Written approval by such a person will be accepted by the building official, as compliance with those portions of the safety standards established herein which pertain to the electrical systems. 
(9)  Exterior walls. The exterior of the home shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions, which might admit rain, mold or dampness to the interior portions of the occupied spaces of the home. 
(10)  Exterior siding. The exterior siding of the home shall be free of rot and rust and all portions firmly attached to home. 
(11)  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects, which might admit rain, or cause mold or dampness to the interior portion of the dwelling. 
(12)  Interior floors, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be in sound condition to prevent the admittance of rain, dampness, mold or the escape of heating and cooling. 
(13)  Stairs or ramps. Where the means of egress from a manufactured home or mobile home is substantially different from the elevation of the ground, the dealer, installer, pursuant to contract with the owner, or the owner shall construct an appropriate set of stairs or a ramp. All ramps shall be constructed in accordance with the American Disabilities Act. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 5) 
Sec. 50-6. - Inspection. 
(a)  All pre-owned manufactured homes or mobile homes will be inspected by the Brantley County Building Official prior to being occupied as a residence in Brantley County. Mobile homes built prior to June 15, 1976 will have to meet HUD 1974 standards existing prior to the adoption of the Act. In addition, pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following specifications: 
(1)  All wiring (existing and new) shall comply with the National Electrical Code. All wiring, except service entry wiring, shall be copper. 
(2)  The inside panel box must be a minimum of 100 amperes at 120/240 volts according to the National Electrical Code (NEC 550.326). 
(b)  Installer or manufactured home dealer will be permitted to move a manufactured home/mobile home on their lots, or yards for repair. The repair will be completed within three months from the date of the move. This period may be extended for an additional 60 days without cost upon an installer or manufactured home dealer submitting a request for extension to the county manager stating why such an extension is necessary. 
(c)  Pre-owned manufactured homes or mobile homes in Brantley County that change ownerships and are not moved to a new location will be inspected on site if the home has not been previously inspected. 
(d)  The building official is authorized to make inspections of manufactured home and mobile home installation to insure compliance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(e)  Installers or manufactured home dealers will have three months from date of approval of these standards to repair any pre-owned manufactured homes or mobile homes located on their lots. 
(f)  Inspection fees for pre-owned manufactured homes located in Brantley County shall be subject to a $300.00 fee. Pre-owned manufactured homes or mobile homes located in adjacent counties shall pay a $360.00 fee, plus mileage as established by the county commission. All fees shall be collected before any inspections shall be performed. 
(g)  All electrical, plumbing, and mechanical improvements/alterations shall be completed by an appropriate State of Georgia licensed contractor. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 6) 
Sec. 50-7. - Installation requirement. 
(a)  All pre-owned manufactured homes or mobile homes moved or placed inside Brantley County will be set up and tied down (anchored) in accordance with Georgia State Fire Marshal's Office Rules and Regulations Sections 120-3-7.13 through 120-3-7.18. Skirting will be installed within 30 days after set up. The skirting shall consist of wood, vinyl, masonry, metal, or brick. 
(b)  Existing manufactured homes/mobile homes in Brantley County that are moved to a new site (location) will comply with subsection (a). 
(c)  No pre-owned manufactured home/mobile home shall be occupied as a residence until the standards set forth in this article have been met. If the manufactured home or mobile home fails to meet the requirements of the chapter, the building official will give written notice to the appropriate individual to bring the manufactured home or mobile home into immediate compliance of the provisions of this chapter. If the dealer, installer or owner fails to comply with written notice within 30 days, the manufactured home or mobile home shall be required to be removed from Brantley County. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 7) 
Sec. 50-8. - New manufactured homes minimum standards. 
(a)  New manufactured homes placed in Brantley County shall be installed in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-165 and/or the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, Sections 120-3-7.13 through 120-3-7.18, Georgia Administrative Code. 
(b)  New manufactured homes will be inspected when installed on site. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 8) 
Secs. 50-9—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MANUFACTURED HOME/MOBILE HOME SITES 

Sec. 50-31. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
This article shall govern the use and operation of all manufactured homes/mobile homes on single lots or within parks used for permanent residential occupancy in the unincorporated areas of Brantley County. It is the intent of this article to empower the planning commission, the health department, and the building inspection department to review the development of manufactured home/mobile home sites within the unincorporated areas of Brantley County for the purposes stated in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 9) 
Sec. 50-32. - Nonconforming manufactured home/mobile home parks. 
Nonconforming manufactured home/mobile home parks lawfully existing at the time of adoption of the article may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 90 days, the manufactured home/mobile home park shall be made to conform with the requirements of these regulations prior to its being occupied again. Any expansion or addition to an existing manufactured home/mobile home park shall be in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 10) 
Sec. 50-33. - Issuance of manufactured home/mobile home permit. 
Any owner of a manufactured home/mobile home, whether locating or relocating said manufactured home/mobile home, shall obtain a permit from the building official's office, as set forth in section 50-7, indicating compliance with all applicable codes before any person or persons are authorized to occupy any newly installed manufactured home/mobile home. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 11) 
Sec. 50-34. - Site approval. 
(a)  Manufactured home/mobile home permit to move a manufactured home/mobile home into or within Brantley County shall not be issued by the building official until the following site approval requirements have been met in accordance with established administrative procedures: 
(1)  All manufactured homes/mobile homes shall be located in an approved manufactured home/mobile home space, as defined within section 50-2, or in an approved manufactured home/mobile home park subject to the requirements of this article. 
(2)  A sanitary permit must be obtained from the Brantley County Health Department for on-site sewage disposal, or in the event that a municipality will provide sewer hookup, a letter must be provided by that municipality verifying that it will allow public sewer hookup. 
(b)  The building official's office shall issue the aforementioned manufactured home/mobile home permit, and the Brantley County Health Department shall issue the sanitary permit. Upon the issuance of the above permits, a manufactured home/mobile home may be moved to an approved location in Brantley County provided the requirement of articles I and II of the chapter has been met. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 12) 
Sec. 50-35. - Exception to issuance of manufactured home/mobile home permit. 
A manufactured home/mobile home permit shall be required to locate a manufactured home/mobile home in the county except under the following exceptions: 
(1)  Manufactured homes/mobile homes may be brought into the county and located on a sales lot of a state-approved dealer as listed in the office of the state safety fire commissioner for sale without a building or sanitary permit. However, under no exceptions shall any manufactured home/mobile home, which is located on a sales lot, be occupied as a residence unless all permit requirements in this chapter are met. Installation must comply with the rules and regulations for manufactured homes the rules and regulations of the state safety fire commissioner pursuant to authority set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 13) 
Secs. 50-36—50-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, ETC. 

Sec. 50-61. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. The board of commissioners is authorized to adopt, after a public hearing, such written regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Such regulations shall have the same force [and] effect as the provision of this chapter and the penalty for violation of the provisions thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as provided in this section. 
(b)  Violations; notice. In cases where a violation of this chapter has been found by the building official, he shall notify the owner of the property on which such violation is found by certified mail sent to the address of the owner of the manufactured home/mobile home if different from the property owner. The violation notice shall also be sent by certified mail to the owner of the manufactured home/mobile home. In case no valid mailing address can be obtained, or if the certified mail is returned to the building official, the notice of violation may be hand delivered to the person deemed responsible for occurrence of the violation. The notice of violation shall clearly state the nature of the violation, including specific provisions of this article which have not been complied with, and the date upon which said violation(s) must be remedied. Such date will be determined by the building official based on the nature and extent of the violation, but in [no] case shall exceed 30 days from the date the certified mail was received or other service was accomplished. In cases where the notice of violation is hand delivered, the date upon which said violations will be remedied shall not exceed 30 days from the date of delivery. 
(c)  Issuance of stop work orders. The building official is authorized to issue stop work orders in any instance where a violation of this chapter is found. The procedure for issuance of stop work orders shall be the same as the notification procedure for violations as specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 14) 
Sec. 50-62. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or failure to comply therewith, or with any requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, or move any home including electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the manufactured home/mobile home ordinance is committed or is continued. 
(b)  Any violation of this chapter shall be governed by O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-62, 15-10-63. The Brantley County Building Inspector may file accusations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-62 upon the approval of such actions by the Chairman of the Brantley County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 15) 
Sec. 50-63. - Tax decal. 
Nothing in this article shall replace the permit required to be obtained by the tax commissioner to evidence payment of ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, § 16) 
Sec. 50-64. - Verification of current paid property taxes for application. 
The applicant shall certify and provide documentation that all property taxes billed to date for the parcels listed in the "Verification of Current Paid Property Taxes for Application" have been paid in full to the tax commissioner of Brantley County, Georgia. In no case shall an application for a manufactured home be processed or approved without such property tax verification. 
(Amd. of 4-5-2012) 
Chapter 54 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Policy regarding prisoners working for county. 
After consideration of the issues involved, it is deemed in the best interest of the county that no prisoner incarcerated in the county jail or held in custody in any manner by the sheriff of the county shall at any time be called upon or permitted to engage in any work activity where the prisoner has or may have any expectation of any payment from the county for the work performed, unless and until the matter has been specifically brought before the board of commissioners and an agreement on payment has been entered into between the county and the prisoner. 
(Res. of 12-14-1992) 
Sec. 54-2. - Prohibitions on excessive force. 
(a)  The board of commissioners recognizes and respects the value and special integrity of each human life. 
(b)  Law enforcement officers with the legal authority to use force to protect the public welfare requires a careful balance of interest, and many decisions of law enforcement officers have serious consequences, but none are so irrevocable as the decision to use force, particularly deadly force. 
(c)  Law enforcement officers are armed and trained to achieve control of various situations through the officers presence, verbal commands, control and restraint, use of temporary incapacitations, or in situations where any persons are in danger by the use or threat of deadly force. 
(d)  The law enforcement officers shall respond with the least necessary force which is necessary to preserve and prevent the commission of offenses. 
(e)  The board of commissioners directs the county sheriff's department to adopt and enforce a policy prohibiting the use of excessive force by any law enforcement officer of the county sheriff's department against any individuals engaged in nonviolent civil rights demonstrations. 
(Res. of 1-8-1991) 
Sec. 54-3. - Jail fund. 
(a)  In every case in which the municipal court of this city imposes a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state or any ordinance of the City of Hoboken, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine; and, 
(b)  At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this state or ordinance of the City of Hoboken, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In every case in which the court of this municipality shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be collected; and, 
(c)  The additional penalty set forth above shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund or by any other law for any other special fund; and, 
(d)  The additional penalties as herein prescribed shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds, and paid over to the office of the county board of commissioners by the tenth day of the month following the month in which said sums are collected; and, 
(e)  All such funds collected and paid over to the county shall be deposited into the special account known as the "county jail fund"; and, 
(f)  All monies collected pursuant to this resolution and placed in the "county jail fund" shall be expended solely and exclusively for constructing, operating and/or staffing the jail of the county, or for such other purposes as specified by O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95. 
(Res. of 4-1-2003) 
Secs. 54-4—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Hindering apprehension of criminals, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-50; loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 

Sec. 54-31. - Created. 
This article is created to prohibit conduct which is offensive and adverse to public safety, which conduct is hereby classified as disorderly. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 54-32. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Definition. Conduct which shall be deemed to be offensive and adverse to public safety and thereby classified as disorderly conduct is exhibited or occurs when: 
(1)  Any person acts in a violent or tumultuous manner towards another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Any person acts in a violent or tumultuous manner towards another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Any person endangers the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive language; 
(4)  Any person causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous acts which endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(5)  Any person utters, while in a state of anger in a public place, any bawdy, lewd, obscene or fighting words or epithets directed toward another person to demean or provoke such person; or 
(6)  Any person congregates with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when so ordered by a lawful authority. 
(b)  Prohibited. No person shall engage in or exhibit disorderly conduct within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1995, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 54-33. - Enforcement. 
The sheriff of the county, the deputies thereof, constables, and all other law enforcement officers shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the officer who completes and services it. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1995, § 4) 
Sec. 54-34. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating this article, or any sections hereof, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(b)  Persons accused of violating this article shall be arrested and required to post a bond for his future appearance in an amount as set by order of the magistrate court. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1995, § 5) 
Sec. 54-35. - Court proceedings. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citation as described in section 54-33 and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. The county attorney shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county, and shall be tried in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(c)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1995, § 6) 
Secs. 54-36—54-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INTERFERENCE WITH DRAINAGE FACILITIES AND TRAFFIC 

Sec. 54-61. - Findings. 
(a)  The drainage ditches and canals of the county are being used for the dumping of various debris, including logs, limbs, pulp, general trash, etc., by some citizens which causes damage to roads and additional maintenance on the ditches, canals and roads. 
(b)  The use of county roads in ways that interfere with normal travel thereon is dangerous and adverse to the health and safety of the citizens of the county. 
(Ord. of 5-15-1991) 
Sec. 54-62. - Prohibited. 
(a)  Debris in ditches and canals. No person shall place or permit anyone to place any debris of any kind, including but not limited to logs, limbs, and/or general trash, in any drainage ditches or canals along county roads or located on lands of the county or on lands which the county has an easement for such lands. 
(b)  Activities on county roads. No person shall engage or permit anyone to engage in any activities on the county roads which, while being carried on, interferes with or impedes the normal automobile traffic thereon. 
(Ord. of 5-15-1991, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 54-63. - Enforcement. 
The sheriff of the county, the deputies thereof, constables and all other law enforcement officers shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, and shall be signed by the officer who completes and services it. 
(Ord. of 5-15-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 54-64. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating this article, or any sections herein, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(b)  No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
(Ord. of 5-15-1991, § 4) 
Sec. 54-65. - Court proceedings. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon as described in section 54-63 and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. The county attorney shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county, and shall be tried in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the board of commissioners from bringing any civil action to present, correct or abate any violation of this article. No penalty or remedy prescribed in this section shall be exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other penalty or remedy by law. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1991, § 5) 
Secs. 54-66—54-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES 

Sec. 54-91. - Intent. 
This article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests for the protection of peoples' health and the county's property versus any legally protected rights of citizens. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 54-92. - Prohibited acts. 
No person shall engage in the act of smoking tobacco (cigarette, cigar, pipe or the like), this to include the lighting or disposal of such tobacco, within the inside premises of the Brantley County Courthouse or any county office building. This does not include the steps or approaches to the county facilities, but such tobacco products must be properly disposed of by the using person in a receptacle which shall be provided for such tobacco products at the entrance to the facility. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2001, § 2) 
Sec. 54-93. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating this article, or any provision, shall, upon conviction, be punished as follows: 
(1)  First offense, by a warning with a fine of $10.00 which is to be suspended unless a second violation occurs within a period of 30 days from the entry of sentence; 
(2)  Second offense, by a fine of $25.00; 
(3)  Third offense, by a fine of $50.00; 
(4)  Fourth offense, by a fine of $100.00; 
(5)  Fifth and all subsequent offenses, by a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00, and/or a sentence of one to 60 days in the county jail. The magistrate court shall have authority to permit the sentenced party to perform community service in lieu of payment of that portion of a fine imposed above $250.00 at the rate of $6.00 per hour; however, this would not include any statutory imposed fine add-ons. The performance of such community service shall be in compliance with such conditions as the magistrate may order. 
(b)  No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any person who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post bond for his future appearance. 
(c)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations which shall be issued to an alleged violator of any provisions of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the representative of the county who completes and serves it. The citation may be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(d)  Citations issued under this article may be tried without a prosecuting attorney; however, if the prosecuting attorney is needed, the county attorney shall serve as the prosecuting attorney. 
(e)  Violations of this chapter shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county, and shall be tried in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the board of commissioners from bringing any civil action for injunction, or other proceedings to abate any violation of this article or other state or federal law. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed in this section shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanctions, penalty or remedy provided by law. 
(g)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2001, § 3) 
Secs. 54-94—54-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 11, 2001, §§ 1—6, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as art. V, §§ 54-111—54-116 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 54-111. - Title. 
There is hereby created and established within the unincorporated area of Brantley County, Georgia, an ordinance to eliminate loud, offensive and disturbing noises. This article shall be cited and known as the "Brantley County Noise Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 12-11-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 54-112. - Loud, offensive and disturbing noise prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or continue to make any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, or injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in Brantley County, Georgia; and 
(b)  The noise complained of shall not be fanciful of such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2001, § 2; Ord. of 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 54-113. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board of commissioners shall mean the duly elected board of commissioners; 
Brantley County shall mean the unincorporated area of Brantley County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia; 
Hour shall refer to Eastern Standard Time zone or daylight savings time, whichever is appropriate for days, months, of the year. 
Neighboring inhabitant shall mean people who live within or occupy a residence within 1,000 feet from the building, structure, vehicle or site in which the noise emanates; and 
Noise shall mean the type of noises delineated in section 54-114 of this article; 
Person shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity but does not include the State of Georgia or any political subdivision thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2001, § 3; Ord. of 8-10-2010, § 2) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of an ordinance adopted Aug. 10, 2010, changed the title of § 54-113 from "Definitions of loud, offensive and disturbing noises" to "Definitions." 
Sec. 54-114. - Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise. 
(a)  The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Radios, phonographs and similar devices. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with a volume louder than necessary for the convenient hearing of the person who is in the room, vehicle, or chamber, in which the machine or device is operated, and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any set, instrument, phonograph, machine, or device between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 1,000 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(2)  Loudspeakers and amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer in person and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, church, dwelling, motel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any motorized vehicle including but not limited to the following: automobile, truck, motorcycle, road bike, ATV, or other motorized vehicle creating loud and un-muffled sounds, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. in a manner that is plainly audible at a distance of 500 feet and which affects the comfort and repose of any person in a building, church, neighboring person of a dwelling or residence or create loud and unnecessary grinding, rattling, or other noise. 
(5)  Schools, public buildings, and places of worship. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, place of worship, or public buildings, while in use, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in those streets indicating a school, a public building and place of worship. 
(6)  Hawkers, peddlers and vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(7)  Noise to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show, or sale. 
(8)  Sound tracks. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes. The use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during hours and in places and with volume as would constitute this use as a public nuisance. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the governmental entity while engaged in necessary public business; 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county, or state at night when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day; or 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2010, § 3; Amd. of 8-8-2013(1)) 
Editor's note— Sections 3, 5, and 6, of an ordinance adopted Aug. 10, 2010, amended the Code by adding new provisions designated as §§ 54-114 and 54-115, and renumbering former §§ 54-114—54-116 as §§ 54-116—54-118. 
Sec. 54-115. - Standard for determining violations. 
The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of this article exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The volume of noise; 
(2)  The intensity of the noise; 
(3)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
(4)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
(5)  The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
(6)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
(7)  The nature of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(8)  The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(9)  The time of day or night the noise occurs; 
(10)  The duration of the noise; 
(11)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and 
(12)  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2010, § 3) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 54-114. 
Sec. 54-116. - Enforcement. 
The Sheriff of Brantley County, the deputies thereof, constables, and all other law enforcement officers shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provisions of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have any identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, shall be signed by the officer who completes and services it. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2001, § 4; Ord. of 8-10-2010, § 5) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 54-114. 
Sec. 54-117. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating this article, or any provision hereof upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: By a fine or not less than $25.00 but not more than $500.00, or imprisonment in the Brantley County Jail for up to 60 days, or both. 
(b)  No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2001, § 5; Ord. of 8-10-2010, § 6) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 54-114. 
Sec. 54-118. - Court proceedings. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citation as described in section 54-114 of this article and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. The county attorney shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the Magistrate Court of Brantley County, and shall be tried in accordance with the O.C.G.A. ch. 15-10. 
(c)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2001, § 6; Ord. of 8-10-2010, § 7) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 54-114. 
Secs. 54-119—54-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - USE OF CERTAIN COUNTY PROPERTY PROHIBITED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 13, 2009, §§ 1—4, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as art. VI, §§ 54-131—54-134, were at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 54-131. - Prohibited acts. 
No person shall in any manner or way go upon or use any part or portion of the county's property identified and described in section 54-132 herein for the following purposes: for hunting, discharging firearms in any manner, or operating vehicles, including motorcycles. The use of said property for such a purpose is specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 54-132. - Property on which the prohibited acts are forbidden. 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, located and being in Land Lot 128 of the 9th Land District of Brantley County, Georgia, being 55.04 acres, more or less, and being more particularly described and shown on that plat of survey prepared by Harry Strickland, Brantley County Surveyor, dated August 4, 1985, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. Said property being bound as follows: On the East by County Road No. 15, a/k/a Slaughterville Road and other lands of Brantley County that are being used by the County's recreation department; on the North by lands of Dixon Memorial State Forest; on the West and South by County Road 19. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 54-133. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this article, or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: 
By a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00, and/or a sentence of one to 60 days in the Brantley County Jail. The magistrate court shall have authority to permit the sentenced party to perform community service in lieu of payment of that portion of a fine imposed above $250.00 at the rate of $6.00 per hour; however, this would not include any statutory imposed fine add-ons. The performance of such community service shall be in compliance with such conditions as the magistrate may order, 
(Ord. of 1-13-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 54-134. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any person who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post bond for his future appearance. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations which shall be issued to an alleged violator of any provisions of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the representative of the county who completes and serves it. Said citation may be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(c)  Citations issued hereunder may be tried without a prosecuting attorney, however in the event the prosecuting attorney is needed the county attorney shall serve as the prosecuting attorney. 
(d)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the magistrate court of Brantley County, Georgia, and shall be tried in accordance with the O.C.G.A. ch. 15-10. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County from bringing any civil action for injunction, or other proceedings to abate any violation of this article or other state or federal law. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed herein shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanctions, penalty or remedy provided by law. 
(f)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. Every day a violation of this article occurs shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2009, § 4) 

Chapter 58 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted December 3, 2015(2), repealed ch. 58, §§ 51-1 and 82-31 and enacted a new ch. 58 as set out herein. Former ch. 58 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from a resolution adopted May 14, 1990. 
State Law reference— State parks, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; Georgia state games commission, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq.; authority to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Recreation required. 
The board of commissioners shall provide recreational activities to the citizens of the county, employ a recreation director to carry out the recreation activities in the county and to provide for a parks and recreation advisory committee to advise the board of commissioners and assist the recreation department. 
(Res. of 12-3-2015, § 3) 
Secs. 58-2—58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-61 et seq. 

Sec. 58-31. - Establishment of a parks and recreation advisory committee. 
(a)  There is established and created for the county a committee to be known as the county parks and recreation advisory committee (referred to in this article as the committee). 
(b)  The committee shall consist of five members, posts 1 through 5, and one optional youth member, post 6, appointed by the board of commissioners as follows: 
(1)  Post 1 shall be an ex-officio position held by a county commissioner. The term for this post shall be for a period of two years as long as the member still holds elected office. This member can be reappointed at the expiration of a term and shall hold all powers and duties as other committee members. 
(2)  Post 2 shall be an ex-officio position held by the county recreation director. This member shall serve as secretary of the committee and shall hold all powers and duties as other committee members. 
(3)  Posts 3 through 5 shall be held by citizens of the county who are eighteen years of age or older and have knowledge and interest in sports and recreation, and/or property maintenance and/or development. The terms for these posts shall be for a period of two years and can be reappointed. Committee members holding these posts shall have a meetings attendance policy such that members missing two consecutive meetings or three meetings within a calendar year will be replaced. Individuals with children that participate in recreation sports programs directed by other counties or private entities with the exception of travel teams that do not directly conflict with the seasonal programs offered by the recreation department shall be ineligible to hold these posts. Members holding these posts shall not be an employee of the recreation department or the immediate family of any full-time employee of the recreation department as defined in section 500.700 of the county human resources policy. 
(4)  Post 6 shall be an optional youth member. If the board of commissioners decides to make an appointment to this post, it shall be held by an individual whom at the time of appointment is a high school student in the county and is between the ages of 15 and 18 years old. The term for this post is one year and the member cannot be reappointed to the same post at the expiration of their term. This post shall not vote on matters coming before the committee but shall hold all other powers and duties as other committee members. Committee members holding this post shall have a meetings attendance policy such that members missing two consecutive meetings or three meetings within a calendar year will be replaced. Members holding this post shall not be an employee of the recreation department or the immediate family of any full-time employee of the recreation department as defined in section 500.700 of the county human resources policy. 
(c)  The committee shall organize itself at its initial meeting by the election of a chairman, and vice chairman both of which shall be chosen only from posts three, four, or five and shall have a term of one year and are elected annually at the first meeting of each calendar year. The committee shall meet at the recreation department office regularly on the second Tuesday of every other month with the first annual meeting being in January and the committee can also meet upon the call of the chair; the committee shall hold its meetings in compliance with the state Open Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). The committee shall hold its first meeting within 15 days of the final appointment of all of its initial members. 
(d)  Any issue coming before the committee for a vote must receive a majority vote of the attending members to pass, with the chair and vice chair having the authority to vote on all matters. Three voting members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. The committee shall function under Robert's Rules of Order. 
(e)  Neither the committee nor any member thereof shall have the authority or power to make any purchases or otherwise bind the county to any financial obligation or undertaking, such authority being hereby expressly prohibited and reserved unto the board of commissioners. Nothing in this section shall be construed to repeal any powers, duties, or authority of the ex-officio members in their capacity beyond this committee. 
(f)  All members of the committee shall be provided a full and complete copy of this chapter of The Code of Brantley County, Georgia prior to participating in their first committee meeting. 
(Res. of 12-3-2015, §§ 5, 6) 
Sec. 58-32. - Powers, duties, and responsibilities. 
The parks and recreation advisory committee was created to represent the board of commissioners and the community regarding matters related to our local parks and recreational activities. 
The advisory committee shall recommend and advise the following to the county board of commissioners: 
• The initiation, planning, design of a system of parks, facilities, etc., that will accommodate the public's need for parks and recreation activities. 
• Rules and regulations by which parks and recreation programs may operate. 
• Results of review of that portion of the annual budget of the county pertaining to the parks and recreation department. 
• Fee schedules for programs conducted or operated by the department of parks and recreation. 
• Ways and means by which parks and recreation programs may be improved or strengthened. 
• Support of new parks, programs, and activities as public need may dictate. 
• A system of fees and charges for use of parks and recreation facilities or for participation in parks and recreation programs, and to identify alternate sources of funding to parks and recreation such as grants, gifts, endowments, sponsor donations, etc. 
• Rules governing participation in parks and recreation programs. 
• Rules governing use of county parks and facilities. 
The advisory committee shall be charged with the following responsibilities and report to the board of commissioners the same: 
• Evaluate programs and activities which are offered from year to year. 
• Assist with the adjudication of complaints, disputes or other grievances from the public arising out of parks and recreation activities. 
• Assess the safety and security of site locations and physical facility standards. 
• Perform other duties and responsibilities as may be conferred by the county board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Res. of 12-3-2015, § 7) 
Chapter 62 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 50; roads and bridges, ch. 66; subdivisions, app. A. 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq.; authority to adopt plans and exercise zoning powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Development procedures manual. 
100. General Provisions. 
101. Purpose. 
This Manual has been prepared to facilitate the development review process by providing detailed instructions and specifications to supplement the regulations contained in the County's development regulations. The Manual can give more detailed instructions and explanations than are appropriate for the ordinances themselves. In addition, since this Manual is adopted by resolution it can be updated and modified more easily than can the ordinances. 
102. Intent. 
The intent of this Manual is to provide detailed information to supplement the regulations contained in the County's development regulations. The information contained in this Manual does not replace the information in the ordinances, but is to be interpreted in such a way that any conflicts between the information herein and the ordinances themselves shall be resolved in favor of the ordinances. 
103. Administration, Interpretation, and Appeals. 
The provisions in this Manual will be interpreted and applied by the Brantley County Director of Planning. Where an interpretation concerns a requirement of the Zoning Ordinance, it may be appealed as provided in Article X of the Zoning Ordinance. Where an interpretation concerns a requirement of the Subdivision Regulations, it may be appealed as provided in the relevant section of the Subdivision Regulations. 
104. Definitions. 
"Planning Department" shall mean the Brantley County Planning or the Department or the Planning Director, as indicated by the context. The Planning Director may designate one or more people to carry out his or her duties and responsibilities as set forth in this Manual. 
"Review Coordinator" shall mean the person within the Planning Department designated by the Planning Director to coordinate the intake and review of applications and the placement of applications on the agenda of the appropriate commission or body. 
105. Adoption and Amendments. 
As provided in Article IX of the Zoning Ordinance (§909) and Article X of the Subdivision Regulations (§1004), this Manual shall be adopted and may from time to time be amended by action of the Brantley County Board of Commissioners upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission. 
106. Dates and Times. 
Where a date or a day of the week is used in this Manual to indicate an event or action and an occurrence of the date or day of the week is an official Brantley County holiday, the activity mentioned will occur on the next regular working day. When a time is indicated (either specifically or as "close of business") and the time falls during non-working hours (such as for a half-day holiday), the time will be interpreted as the opening time for business on the next regular working day. Normal Brantley County office hours are 8:00 AM to 5:00 PM. 
200. Processing of Applications for Development Review. 
201. Submittal of Applications. 
Applications may be submitted to the Department of Planning by delivery or by mail at the Department's address: 104 Allen Street, Nahunta, GA 31553. Mailed or shipped applications should be marked: "Attention: Application Submittal Desk." Applications may be submitted at any time during regular working hours. All complete applications received by 4 PM local time on Tuesday of each work week will be processed according to the time schedule set forth herein. Applications received after that time will be processed based on time availability, or will be processed with the following week's applications. Note: if the Tuesday is a holiday, applications will be processed on the next regular working day.) 
202. Initial Review of Applications. 
It is the intent of this Manual that applications will be closely reviewed upon submittal to ensure that they are complete and meet all requirements necessary for processing. Toward that end, staff will be available each Tuesday afternoon to assist with the intake review of applications. Applications that do not meet the minimum requirements for processing will be returned to the applicant or agent as quickly as possible (no later than the close of business on Wednesday, the day after submittal) so that they may be corrected and re-filed. Applications that meet necessary submittal requirements will be distributed for processing not later than noon on the Wednesday following the Tuesday application intake day. 
203. Distribution and Formal Review of Applications. 
Prior to distribution, all applications will be entered in the Brantley County Tracking System. Each department that makes reviews will enter review comments into the Tracking System not later than noon on the Wednesday one week after distribution of the applications. Each agency making reviews is responsible for making a checklist of review items. Such checklists shall be available to the public upon request. If there are network or Tracking System software problems and comments cannot be entered, the reviewing agency is responsible for providing a review memorandum to the Review Coordinator by FAX or by email prior to the Wednesday noon deadline. 
Where the review indicates the need for further work or discussion, it is the responsibility of the reviewing agency to request the Review Coordinator to arrange such a meeting and to include all agencies that are likely to have an interest in the outstanding issue. If there are outstanding issues, these shall be identified in the review comments. Similarly, any arrangements to obtain additional information or to meet concerning the issue will be summarized in the comments. 
The agencies involved in review shall include, but are not limited to: 
•  Planning, Building & Planning Department 
•  County Engineer 
•  Public Works, Drainage & Traffic 
•  Geographic Information System (GIS) 
•  Fire Department 
•  Police Department 
•  Board of Health, Environmental Health Division 
•  Georgia Department of Transportation 
•  Brantley County Board of Education 
•  Private Utilities (Telephone, electric, cable TV, etc., serving the site) 
On a case by case basis, review may also be requested from: 
•  Department of Natural Resources 
•  City of Nahunta 
•  City of Hoboken 
•  Southeast Georgia Regional Development Center (for "developments of regional impact") 
•  Other county, state, or federal agencies with installations in close proximity to the development site 
204. Distribution of Comments to Applicants. 
It is the intent of this Manual that substantive comments on an application be identified and noted for the benefit of the applicant as early in the review process as is possible, and to use the review process to find solutions to any problems and to take advantage of any opportunities that are identified. 
Each week, a report of the comments on any application currently under review will be produced by the Tracking System. No later than close of business (5:00 PM) on the Wednesday that review comments are due, a copy of the report will be sent by email, fax, or U.S. mail to the applicant or agent for each currently pending case, as well as to the engineer, surveyor, architect, property owner and/or developer. Any other information or memoranda relating to comments or relevant issues will also be forwarded at this time. Note: if the Wednesday is a holiday, comments will be distributed on the next regular working day. 
An applicant may also request a current report at any time by contacting the Review Coordinator, and shall receive a report within one business day. 
The Review Coordinator will monitor progress on completing reviews and will remind reviewers of those reviews needed in order to be able to return a complete set of comments to the applicant by the review deadline. Where specific issues requiring meetings are identified, the Review Coordinator will begin the process of arranging such meetings. Where a review is missing, the Review Coordinator will contact the reviewer or his/her agency to arrange for a complete review. While it is the intent of this Manual that all comments be returned to the applicant and his or her design team not later than one week after distribution of the plans, in no event shall comments from County agencies be provided later than two weeks after distribution, except where the delay is at the specific written request of the applicant. It is the intent of this Manual that additional methods for distributing review comments be made available, subject to the availability of technology. These may include emailing of comments to applicants and/or posting of comments on the Internet. 
205. Disposition of Applications. 
Once comments have been collected, a determination shall be made by the Planning Director or his designee as to whether or not the application materially meets the requirements of the applicable ordinances. This determination shall be forwarded to the applicant or his agent in conjunction with the delivery of comments. 
If the comments indicate that there are issues or problems to be resolved, the applicant may subsequently revise and re-submit an application for review according to the process described above. [Note: fees are not being addressed at this time. It is the intent that after review of fees, one re-submittal be expected as part of the initial fee and that thereafter a fee shall be charged for each re-submittal.] 
If the comments indicate that the application meets all applicable requirements, the application shall be moved to the next step in the review process. If required by the type of review, the application shall be immediately placed on the next available agenda of the Planning Commission or the Board of Commissioners. The "next available agenda" will be determined by the schedule of meetings, agenda deadlines, and report distribution dates established by the Planning Director. 
Where the comments indicate that all major issues are resolved, but minor corrections or changes may be required, the applicant shall be so advised. If the Planning Director offers and the applicant agrees; the application may be placed on the next available agenda with the recommendation that it be approved subject to meeting any corrections indicated by the comments. 
206. Meetings to Resolve Issues. 
It is the intent of this Manual that the review process be facilitated where there are significant issues by direct meetings between interested reviewing agencies and the applicant or his agent. It is further the intent that these meetings be held as expeditiously as possible to help move the application to an appropriate conclusion in an orderly manner. 
When an issue or problem is identified, it is the responsibility of the reviewing agency to bring this fact to the Review Coordinator's attention. The Review Coordinator shall contact the applicant and the relevant reviewing agencies or other parties to arrange a meeting at the earliest opportunity. Such meetings shall generally be held at Brantley County facilities, but other arrangements may be made if indicated. The reviewing agencies are responsible for being represented at such meetings and being prepared to address the issues or problems noted. Reviewing agencies will reserve time on Thursday mornings to facilitate the scheduling of such meetings. Note: where the Thursday falls on a holiday, the review meetings will be scheduled for the next regular working day. 
Where issues cannot be resolved by such a meeting, the scope of the conflicting positions shall be detailed and a determination made by the Planning Director. Where appropriate, the Planning Director may confer with the head(s) of other review agencies in making this determination. 
The applicant may appeal any decision by the Planning Director as provided in the relevant ordinance or regulation. It is the intent of this Manual that, where appropriate and indicated by the issue or regulation, any issue that cannot be resolved be forwarded as quickly as possible to an approval authority, such as the Planning Commission or the Board of County Commissioners. Where the applicant and/or the Planning Director believe that the issues cannot be resolved through the meeting process, either may have the matter placed on the next available agenda of the Planning Commission for review. 
207. Pre-Application Meetings (Optional). 
Brantley County encourages applicants to meet staff prior to submittal of applications to discuss substantive issues of the development as well as the procedures and expected timetable for review of the application. These meetings can be arranged through the Review Coordinator. 
208. Application Checklists. 
[Note: checklists will be prepared and inserted here for use in determining the completeness of submittals.] 
Preliminary Plat Checklist 
The subdivision Preliminary Plat provides the legal and technical data required to confirm compliance with the Brantley County Regulations and to proceed with approval process for a subdivision. The Preliminary Plat shall consist of a map or maps, drawn at a scale of not less than one inch in two hundred feet, and showing the following (Note: References are to Article VII of the Brantley County Subdivision Regulations - §703): 
□  The proposed name of the subdivision and proposed street names, and the name of former subdivision(s), if any (703.1): 
□  Name and address and telephone number of the owner of record (703.2); 
□  Name, address, and telephone number of the subdivider (703.3); 
□  The names of owners of record and zoning of land adjacent to the tract to be subdivided (703.14); 
□  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of data, date of plat drawing, and space for revision dates (703.4); 
□  A vicinity map (703.6): 
□  Preliminary Plat Certificates and Statements and the statement "PRELIMINARY PLAT DO NOT RECORD" 
a) Certificate of Preliminary Design 
b) Certificate of Preliminary Plat Approval (703.5); 
□  Exact boundary lines of the tract or parcel to be subdivided, indicated by a heavy line giving length and bearings, and total subdivision land area in acres (703.8); 
□  Natural features within the proposed subdivision, including drainage channels, bodies of water, flood plain, wetlands and other significant features; (703.9) 
□  Cultural features within the proposed subdivision, including rights-of-way widths, and names of existing and proposed streets and alleys, existing structures, existing easements, buildings, city and county lines, zoning districts and boundaries, and other significant information (703.10); 
□  Proposed layout including lot lines with rough dimensions, lot numbers, block letters, street and alley lines, sites reserved through covenants, dedication or otherwise for public uses (703.11); 
□  Location of existing water and sewer utilities, if a connection to a water or sewer system is proposed (703.12); 
□  Proposed unit division or stage of development, if any (703.13); 
□  FIRM Panel Number and flood zone designation (703.15); and 
□  Building setback information including setback lines on odd shaped lots (703.16). 
Final Plat Processing Checklist 
Project Name: _____ Items to be addressed prior to submittal of final plat package (set up meeting with applicant if there are any questions about this): 

 
Items to by included in final plat application package (Complete submittal will be forwarded to Board of Commissioners for approval on the next available agenda): 

 
(Ord. of 2-17-2009) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 17, 2009, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 62-1 was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 62-2—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-61 et seq. 

Sec. 62-31. - Establishment of a planning commission. 
(a)  There is established and created for Brantley County an organization to be known as the Brantley County Planning Commission (the "planning commission"). 
(b)  The planning commission shall consist of seven members, posts 1 through 7, who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. 
(1)  Posts 1, 2 and 3 shall be for a period of three years; 
(2)  Post 4 shall be for a period of four years; and 
(3)  Posts 5, 6, and 7 shall be for a period of five years. 
(c)  The term for a member of the planning commission shall be for a period of five years. Any member may be reappointed for one term. 
(d)  The planning commission shall organized itself at its initial meeting by the election of a chairman, vice chairman and secretary. The planning commission shall meet in a facility provided for it by the county, at times as set by the members of the planning commission, but at least on a monthly basis, and in compliance with the State of Georgia's Open Meetings Act. The planning commission shall hold its first meeting within 15 days of the final appointment of all of its initial members. 
(e)  Any issue coming before the planning commission for a vote must receive the vote of four members to pass, with the chair having the authority to vote on all matters. Four members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. The planning commission shall function under the Robert's Rules of Order. 
(f)  The members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses that may be incurred in carrying out his/her duties as a member of the planning commission. Such expenses shall be paid from the general funds of the county on the filing of a claim for same in the manner as required by county policy, and upon approval of the board of commissioners. 
(g)  The planning commission nor any member thereof shall have the authority or power to make any purchases or otherwise bind the county to any financial obligation or undertaking, the same being hereby expressly prohibited and reserved unto the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 8-14-2001, § I; Amend. of 9-9-2008; Amend. of 1-13-2009) 
Editor's note— Section I of an amendment adopted Sept. 9, 2008, changed the title of § 62-31 from "Established; membership and term; meetings; compensation; authority" to "Establishment of a planning commission." 
Sec. 62-32. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The members of the planning commission shall adopt bylaws for the planning commission, and may establish committees. 
(b)  The planning commission shall investigate, review, consider and recommend to the board of commissioners any codes, regulations, land use plans or other matters concerning and affecting the shortterm or longterm management, growth and development of the county. 
(c)  The planning commission shall recommend an annual budget to the board of commissioners for such expenses it deems appropriate and necessary in order to carry out its duties, responsibilities and objectives. The annual budget recommendation shall be made by a date set each year by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  The planning commission shall work with and give advisory supervision and guidance to any staff which the board of commissioners may from time to time secure or employ for the development and/or implementation of various codes, regulations and/or land use plans. 
(e)  The planning commission may do such other things as are necessary and proper to effectuate the purpose of this article and is not expressly prohibited in this article. 
(Res. of 8-14-2001, § II) 
Secs. 62-33—62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

Sec. 62-61. - Approval for transmittal. 
(a)  The board of commissioners approves the Brantley County-Hoboken-Nahunta Comprehensive Plan to be sent to the Southeast Georgia Regional Development Center and to the state department of community affairs for review for compliance with the Comprehensive Planning Act. 
(b)  The board of commissioners submits the county shortterm work program update and report of accomplishments to the Southeast Georgia Regional Development Center for review. 
(Res. of 12-13-1994; Res. of 3-21-1995; Res. of 9-13-2000) 
Chapter 66 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(9); buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 50; planning, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Probate court's jurisdiction involving the removal of obstructions from roads, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.1; obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; state grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq.; authority to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Road abandonment guidelines. 
(a)  Application. Application for county road or easement closing/abandonment shall be made to the county clerk on an application provided by Brantley County. The applicant shall outline the nature of the request and specify the anticipated follow-on use of the road or easement for which the request is made. The applicant shall provide a plat that shows the road or easement for which the application is being filed. The plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered by the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Review. The county clerk will coordinate the review of the request with the county manager, county attorney and the road department. 
If the county manager determines that the application does not meet the criteria for abandonment because the road in question still has substantial useful purpose, the process will stop. The county manager will notify the applicant of the decision in writing within ten days. The applicant may appeal the county manager's decision to the board of commissioners by filing a written notice of such appeal with the county manager within ten days of the date of his decision. The board of commissioners may either uphold the manager's decision or direct him to proceed with a public hearing. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision by the county manager within ten days. 
If the county manager finds that the application meets the criteria of these guidelines, an advertisement will be sent to the official organ of the county, once a week for two weeks, advising that a public hearing will be held to determine whether the proposed abandonment has "ceased to be used by the public or no longer serves any useful public purpose". The county clerk will notify, by return receipt requested mail, all effected property owners who own property adjacent to the proposed road to be abandoned, of the public hearing. 
(c)  Determination by the county commission. If the board of commissioners approves the abandonment, the county attorney will prepare a deed and file it for recording with the clerk of superior court if the identity of the grantee for such a deed is clear. The submitted plat may require a revision if the board of commissioners places conditions on the approved abandonment. The applicant will bear the cost of any required plat modifications. Only after the deed recording by the county attorney is the action final. The original deed (if any) will be mailed to the applicant(s) by the county clerk. 
No application for abandonment may be made, or considered, if any portion of the property sought to be abandoned has been the subject of an abandonment application filed, or considered by the Brantley County Board of Commissioners, within the immediate preceding two years. 
(d)  Fee. Any request submitted under this provision shall be accompanied by a $350.00 cashier's check, a non-refundable application fee. The applicant may withdraw the application or request a postponement of the hearing date once, by submitting a written request, at least seven calendar days prior to the date set for the public hearing. If a postponement is requested, the applicant will bear the additional administrative charges (advertising and administrative costs). 
(Ord. of 7-13-2010) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 13, 2010, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence codification as § 66-1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 66-2—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ROAD ACCEPTANCE STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amend. of 2-23-2006, arts. 1—10 amended art. II its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 66-31—66-33, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Res. of 3-12-2002, §§ 1—3, Amend. of 8-13-2002 and Ord. of 1-27-2004. 
State Law reference— Regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 66-31. - Acceptance of roads by the county. 
(a)  The county will only accept a street/road that is/are within a subdivision development or a new road created to a subdivision development that are designed and created to the standards as set forth in this article, and paved to the standards of a residential subdivision as established by the Georgia Department of Transportation at the time the county is requested to accept said street/road as a part of the county's road system. Provided, however, a road to a subdivision development will not be considered a new road and within the provisions of this article if the principle portion of the road existed prior to the subdivision development which adjoins said road, should the county consent to or authorize a limited or minimal shifting or realignment of said road or the right-of-way thereof. 
(b)  The county will only accept an unpaved road/street that has been constructed in compliance with the design standards for an unpaved road/street as set forth in this article. 
(Amend. of 2-23-2006, art. 1) 
Sec. 66-32. - Definition of a subdivision development. 
A subdivision as referred to in this article shall be the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels of land or building sites. 
(Amend. of 2-23-2006, art. 2) 
Sec. 66-33. - Road/street right-of-way title transfer. 
(a)  The county will only accept the transfer/conveyance of ownership of the right-of-way for a new road/street by means of a warranty deed that names Brantley County, Georgia, as the grantee and properly describes the subject right-of-way of a road/street; and when the party desiring to transfer/convey the ownership of said right-of-way provides the county with a title opinion from an attorney licensed to practice law in the state, which states: i) that the offering party has good and marketable title to the said right-of-way property, ii) that all taxes have been paid on the property to the current year, and iii) that there are no liens, encumbrances, easements or leases affecting the subject property. 
(b)  In addition, any road or street for which acceptance by the county is sought, must be shown and delineated on a plat of survey prepared by a state registered land surveyor, and the plat must also have the following certification thereon signed and stamped by a state professional engineer, to-wit: 
Certification 
It is hereby certified that the public road/street infrastructure dedicated to Brantley County, Georgia, as shown and delineated on this plat was constructed in accordance with a design prepared by the undersigned following the principles and practices of sound engineering and for compliance with the road/street standards established by Brantley County; and that all road/street infrastructure shown hereon actually exist, unless clearly marked on the plat as "Future", and that the materials used in the construction of said road/street conform to the current Georgia Department of Transportation material specifications; and that all engineering and all permitting requirements of Brantley County and/or the State of Georgia have been complied with. 
This the ____________ day of ____________ , ____________ . 
;ul=_;;daterule; 
;ul=_;  Georgia P.E. No.: ____________ 
(c)  No deed to the county for the conveyance of road right-of-way shall be considered accepted by the county, and recorded among the deed records of the county by the clerk of court unless the deed has inscribed on the face thereof the following: "The road right-of-way described in this indenture was accepted by Brantley County, Georgia, by action of the board of commissioners in a meeting held on ____________ (date of the meeting)"; with the signature of the clerk of the board of commissioners being placed immediately below the aforestated acceptance statement. 
(Amend. of 2-23-2006, art. 3; Amend. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 66-34. - Continuance of existing street pattern. 
The arrangement of roads/streets in a subdivision development should provide for the alignment with, or the continuation of, or the appropriate projection of existing streets in the surrounding areas as shown on the county road map. All new roads/streets must be named in accordance with the Brantley County Addressing Ordinance. All road name signs and stop signs must be purchased by the party offering the right-of-way to the county and in place before a new road/street shall be made a part of the county's road system. 
(Amend. of 2-23-2006, art. 4) 
Sec. 66-35. - Minimum right-of-way requirements. 
(a)  The right-of-way for all new unpaved roads shall be a minimum of 80 feet, 40 feet right and left of the roadbed centerline; except a minor road shown not to have the potential to be upgraded to a collector road may have a minimum of 60 feet right-of-way, 30 feet right and left of the roadbed centerline. 
(b)  The right-of-way for any road/street in a subdivision development or required to be paved before same will be accepted by the county, shall have a minimum of 60-foot right-of-way, 30 feet right and left of the roadbed centerline. 
(Amend. of 2-23-2006, art. 5) 
Sec. 66-36. - Cul-de-sac requirements. 
Culs-de-sac, shall follow these minimum standards: 
(1)  A vehicular turnaround at the closed end of the road/street shall have an outside radius of: not less than 40 feet on a paved street and not less than 50 feet on a dirt street. 
(2)  A vehicular turnaround at the closed end of the road/street shall have an inside radius of: not less than 12 feet and not greater than 28 feet on a paved road. 
(3)  A vehicular turnaround at the closed end of the road/street shall have a right-of-way radius of not less than 55 feet with a roadside ditch that is less than one foot in depth, 60 feet with a one to two foot deep roadside ditch, 65 feet with a two to three foot deep roadside ditch and if there is a ditch of three feet or greater in depth the right-of-way radius is to be determined by the county road superintendent. 
(4)  Exception: Culs-de-sac designed with traffic islands shall have a maximum inside pavement radius of 36 feet and a minimum outside pavement radius of 50 feet. In no case shall the travel lane around the traffic island be less than 14 feet in width. The right-of-way radius shall be a minimum of 60 feet. 
(5)  Temporary dead-end streets: Temporary dead-end streets, which are stub streets designed to provide future access to proposed developments, require temporary easements for a turnaround of the nature described under culs-de-sac. 
(Amend. of 2-23-2006, art. 6) 
Sec. 66-37. - Design standards for unpaved street/road. 
All unpaved streets/roads shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following minimum specifications and standards: 
(1)  Minimum right-of-way required where roadside ditches are required shall be 80 feet, 40 feet right and left of the roadbed centerline. 
(2)  Roadbed width shall be a minimum of 30 feet, 15 feet right and left of the centerline with a minimum crown of six inches to centerline. Travel lanes shall have a minimum width of 22 feet, 11 feet right and left of the centerline with grassed shoulders with a maximum ratio of 6:1. Roadside ditches shall have a flat bottom with a minimum width of four feet. All back slopes where required will consist of a minimum slope ratio of 3:1. 
(3)  The top six inches of all travel lanes shall be compacted to a minimum 95 percent standard proctor density. The developer at the request of the county shall supply test reports. Also stabilization requirements of travel lanes shall be based on the county road superintendent's recommendation as to the type and amount. The recommendation shall be based on considering the type of soils, drainage, estimated traffic volumes and types and surrounding topography. 
(4)  Test for compaction shall be located no more than 500 feet apart and staggered to right and left and on centerline. 
(Amend. of 2-23-2006, art. 7) 
Sec. 66-38. - Drainage plans and requirement for subdivision developments. 
Curbs, inlets, swales, ditches, pipes, etc., shall be engineered and constructed as required to accommodate stormwater run-off quantities. The development engineer shall submit calculations and elevations, which support the proposed improvements to the county road superintendent for his approval. Material requirements for pipe culverts shall be: 
(1)  Reinforced concrete pipes or high-density polyethylene (HDPE) shall be required for all culverts. The use of HDPE shall require a minimum of one and one-half foot of cover. 
(2)  No metal culverts shall be allowed. 
(3)  The minimum diameter for pipe culverts shall be 15 inches. 
(4)  All material shall conform to the current Georgia Department of Transportation material specifications. 
(Amend. of 2-23-2006, art. 8) 
Sec. 66-39. - Culverts to be located for drainage along an unpaved road/streets. 
All culverts to be installed for drainage or to access property from an unpaved road/street that is to be a part of the county's road systems must be installed in compliance with the county's ordinance that requires the installation of property access culverts. 
(Amend. of 2-23-2006, art. 9) 
Sec. 66-40. - Requirement for any new road/street or property access driveway that joins a state highway. 
The Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) must approve all access roads or drives for property joining a state highway. The applicant/developer must comply with all requirements of the GDOT, and evidence of such approval must be submitted to the county with any offer of a new road to the county which intersects with a state highway. 
(Amend. of 2-23-2006, art. 10) 
Sec. 66-41. - Requirements for traffic control devices. 
Street name markers and such signs, signals and pavement markers, as needed for safety purposes as determined by the county manager and/or the county public works director, or their designated representative, shall be provided and installed in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, of the Georgia Department of Transportation. All traffic control devices shall be provided by the developer of the road and installed by the county's public works department prior to final inspection and acceptance of the road by the county. 
(Amend. of 6-10-2008, Art. 11) 
Secs. 66-42—66-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-61. - Prohibited acts. 
No person shall in any manner or way use any part or portion of the right-of-way of a county road for the purpose of fueling or refueling of aerial application fertilizers nor engage in any act related thereto. The use of a county road right-of-way for such a purpose is specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-8-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 66-62. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating this article, or any provision hereof, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00, and/or a sentence of one to 60 days in the county jail. The magistrate court shall have authority to permit the sentenced party to perform community service in lieu of payment of that portion of a fine imposed above $250.00 at the rate of $6.00 per hour; however, this would not include any statutory imposed fine add-ons. The performance of such community service shall be in compliance with such conditions as the magistrate may order. 
(b)  No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any person who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post bond for his future appearance. 
(c)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations which shall be issued to an alleged violator of any provisions of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the representative of the county who completes and serves it. The citation may be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(d)  Citations issued under this article may be tried without a prosecuting attorney; however, if the prosecuting attorney is needed, the county attorney shall serve as the prosecuting attorney. 
(e)  Violations of this chapter shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county, and shall be tried in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the board of commissioners from bringing any civil action for injunction, or other proceedings to abate any violation of this article or other state or federal law. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed in this section shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanctions, penalty or remedy provided by law. 
(g)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-8-2002, § 2) 
Secs. 66-63—66-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY ACCESS CULVERTS 

Sec. 66-76. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person, partnership, corporation or organization of any kind may proceed over, go through or across any road drainage structure, to specifically include a drainage ditch running parallel with the road, to gain access to his/her/its property situated adjacent to a county road, by way of any motorized vehicle, without having first installed in or across such drainage structure a property access culvert, also known as a driveway culvert, in compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(b)  No person, partnership, corporation or organization of any kind may install a property access culvert or place any object of any kind in the right-of-way of any county road, which includes a road's drainage system, in order to gain access to his/her/its property situated adjacent to a county road, without having first obtained from the county a permit for such installation in accordance with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2003, § 1; Ord. of 9-3-2015) 
Sec. 66-77. - Permit for installation of property access culvert in county road right-of-way. 
Upon application in compliance with the requirements of this division, the county shall issue a permit to any person, partnership, corporation or such other organization that is the owner of property situated adjacent to a county road for the placement of a property access culvert in the county's road right-of-way. No permit shall be issued except as expressly authorized under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2003, § 2; Ord. of 9-3-2015) 
Sec. 66-78. - Permit application, application fee and issuance of permit. 
(a)  Any person or legal entity desiring to obtain a permit to install a property access culvert shall make application to the county board of commissioners in the form as established by clerk of this board. 
(b)  The permit application shall contain, at a minimum, the name, address and telephone number of the applicant; the name and address of the owner of the property to be accessed, if different from the applicant; the property's tax map parcel number; the county road off which the subject property will be accessed; the anticipated use of the property to be accessed, i.e., private residence; multiple residences; commercial; industrial, etc.; the general location of where applicant desires to locate the access culvert with a drawing or sketch of the property and the date the use of the culvert will begin. 
(c)  The application shall be reviewed by the county, with such necessary inspection of the subject road and property, to determine the appropriate size, material and location for the property access culvert, so that same will accommodate proper drainage in order to avoid damage to the road structure and unnecessary flooding of surrounding properties. The county shall complete its review in a timely manner, and then a permit shall be issued which shall set forth the following: 
• The name(s) of the party to whom the permit is granted. 
• The location of where the property access culvert is to be installed. 
• The size (length and diameter) and material specifications of the culvert to be installed. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2003, § 3; Ord. of 9-3-2015) 
Sec. 66-79. - Minimum culvert specifications. 
No property access culvert shall be installed which is not at least 20 feet in length, 15 inches in diameter. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2003, § 4; Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 1; Amend. of 11-15-2005, § 1; Ord. of 9-3-2015) 
Sec. 66-80. - Installation of property access culverts on county roads. 
Property access culverts on the right-of-way of a road which is a part of the county's road system will be installed by the county. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2003, § 5; Ord. of 11-15-2005, § 1; Amend. of 11-15-2005, § 1; Ord. of 9-3-2015) 
Sec. 66-81. - Replacement of existing property access culverts on county roads. 
When, in the opinion of the county's road superintendent, it has been determined that an existing property access culvert located in the right-of-way of a county road has been damaged or otherwise worn to the extent that it is a danger to the motoring public or incapable of accommodating proper drainage in order to prevent damage to the road or flooding of surrounding properties, then the county shall replace such culverts. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2003, § 6; Ord. of 9-3-2015) 
Sec. 66-82. - Payment of cost for the installation of a property access culverts by the county. 
The cost of a culvert will be determined by the length and diameter of the pipe. The citizens will pay the county's actual cost of the culvert. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2003, § 8; Amend. of 11-15-2005, § 1; Ord. of 9-3-2015) 
Note— Formerly § 66-83. 
Sec. 66-83. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating this division, or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: 
By a fine of not less than $75.00 and not more than $250.00. The magistrate court shall have authority to permit the sentenced party to perform community service in payment of that portion of a fine imposed above $250.00 at the rate of $7.25 per hour; however, this would not include any statutory imposed fine add-ons. The performance of such community service shall be in compliance with such conditions as the magistrate may order. 
(b)  No person accused of violating this division shall be arrested prior to trial, but any person who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post bond for his future appearance. 
(c)  Violations of this division shall be tried upon citations which shall be issued to an alleged violator of any provisions of this division. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the representative of the county who completes and serves it. Said citation may be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(d)  Citations issued hereunder may be tried without a prosecuting attorney, however in the event the prosecuting attorney is needed the county attorney shall serve as the prosecuting attorney. 
(e)  Violations of this chapter shall be tried in the magistrate court of Brantley County, Georgia, and shall be tried in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia, Chapter 15-10. 
(f)  Nothing in this division shall prevent the county board of commissioners from bringing any civil action for injunction, or other proceedings to abate any violation of this division or other state or federal law. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed herein shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanctions, penalty or remedy provided by law. 
(g)  Each violation of this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2003, § 9; Amend. of 11-15-2005, § 1; Ord. of 9-3-2015) 
Note— Formerly § 66-84. 
Secs. 66-84—66-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MAILBOX LOCATIONS 

Sec. 66-101. - Prohibited acts. 
No person, partnership, corporation or organization of any kind, may use any portion of the right-of-way of any road that is a part of the county's road system to install or locate a receptacle (mail box) for receiving items delivered by the U.S. Postal Service (mail) unless same is located and installed in accordance with the county's approved mail box location plan. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 66-102. - The county's approved mail box location plan. 
The county's approved mail box location plan governing the location and use of the right-of-way of a county road to locate and install a receptacle for receiving items delivered by the U.S. Postal Service (mail) is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference, same being hereby adopted and established in Brantley County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2004, § 2) 
Sec. 66-103. - Replacement of an existing mail box located on the right-of-way of a county road that does not comply with the county's approved mail box location plan. 
When, in the opinion of the county's road superintendent, it has been determined that a mail box, which existed prior to the adoption of this division, that is situated in the right-of-way of a county road and was not located in accordance with the county's approved mail box location plan, is a danger to the motoring public or is interfering with the county's maintenance of said road, including the road's drainage system, then the owner of the property that receives mail in such mail box shall be notified, in writing, by registered mail and the posting of such notice on any occupied structure on the property, of the problem posed by the mail box, and given 30 days to relocate and install a mail box that is in compliance with the county's approved mail box location plan, at the property owner's expense. Should the property owner fail or refuse to remove the existing mail box after such 30 days, then the county shall cause the removal of the existing mail box from the county's right-of-way and notify the delivering post office of said action. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2004, § 3) 
Sec. 66-104. - U.S. mail delivery service not to be impeded. 
The implementation of the approved mail box location plan should not be done in a manner that impedes the delivery of mail by the United States Postal Service. The county, through its board of commissioners, recognizes the authority and obligation of the United States Postal Service in the delivery of mail, and this division shall not be construed in any manner to the contrary. 
(Amend. of 3-24-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 66-105. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating this division, or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: 
By a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00, and/or a sentence of one to 60 days in the county jail. The magistrate court shall have authority to permit the sentenced party to perform community service in lieu of payment of that portion of a fine imposed above $250.00 at the rate of $6.00 per hour; however, this would not include any statutory imposed fine add-ons. The performance of such community service shall be in compliance with such conditions as the magistrate may order. 
(b)  No person accused of violating this division shall be arrested prior to trial, but any person who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post bond for his future appearance. 
(c)  Violations of this division shall be tried upon citations which shall be issued to an alleged violator of any provisions of this division. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the representative of the county who completes and serves it. Said citation may be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(d)  Citations issued hereunder may be tried without a prosecuting attorney, however in the event the prosecuting attorney is needed the county attorney shall serve as the prosecuting attorney. 
(e)  Violations of this chapter shall be tried in the magistrate court of Brantley County, Georgia, and shall be tried in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia, Chapter 15-10. 
(f)  Nothing in this division shall prevent the county board of commissioners from bringing any civil action for injunction, or other proceedings to abate any violation of this division or other state or federal law. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed herein shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanctions, penalty or remedy provided by law. 
(g)  Each violation of this division shall constitute a separate offense. Every day a violation of this division occurs shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2004, § 4) 
Secs. 66-106—66-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADDRESSING 

Sec. 66-150. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as "The Brantley County Addressing Ordinance". 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 66-151. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following terms, words or phrases and their derivations shall have the meaning that is provided in the National Emergency Number Association (NENA) Standard Guidelines as reference by the United States Postal Service, which is incorporated herein by reference, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, to-wit: 
Address number shall mean the number assigned to consecutive intervals along a street or road pursuant to the number assignment formula contained herein. 
Display as used herein is the manner the numbers are affixed to a structure or otherwise displayed when affixing to a structure. 
Interval is defined as the distance along a roadway of 5.28 feet, there being 1,000 intervals per mile (5,280 feet). 
Non-compliance is any failure to comply with the provisions of this article including, but not limited to, by way of example: a number out of sequence, odd or even number on wrong side of street, rural box numbers in a 9-1-1 address area, numbers improperly affixed, numbers illegible, numbers unclear, numbers obstructed, numbers not visible, numbers not present, numbers of improper size, numbers not in contrast with immediate background, weatherworn numbers, wrong numbers, and non-approved numbers. 
Number assignment formula: The number assignment formula for Brantley County shall be as follows: 
Beginning from the point of origin a house number shall be assigned for each interval, with each interval on the right side of the roadway as one leaves the point of origin being assigned an even number, and each interval on the left side as one leaves the point of origin being assigned an odd number. Left and right shall be determined from the perspective of a traveler moving away from the road point of origin in a forward motion. The southern and western intersection or entry point of each road will be the point of origin. 
Occupant is any person, firm, entity, partnership, trust, corporation, association or other organization that is occupying or leasing a building or other property for a period exceeding 30 days. 
Owner is any and all persons, firms, entities, partnerships, trusts, corporation, associations, or other organizations that own the fee title to, or have an undivided interest in, any building or property, which is subject to the provisions of this article. 
Point of origin shall mean that end point of a road, which is the starting point for a numbering sequence. 
Primary structure shall include but not be limited to residential building, mobile home park, commercial building, industrial building, office building, public building, utility, communications tower. 
Road or street shall mean any public or private thoroughfare, used for vehicular traffic and/or any easement or right-of-way that provides sole access to more than two parcels or lots. This term shall be defined as the street suffix and shall include, but is not limited to; avenue, drive, way, boulevard, highway, lane, pike or similar street types. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 2; Ord. of 2-14-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 66-152. - Establishment of name of a street or road. 
(a)  The county addressing coordinator shall assign the names to all public streets or roads within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(b)  The county addressing coordinator, or his/her duly authorized agent, in consultation with the property owner(s), is hereby delegated the authority to assign or approve the name(s) for any private road or street, which provides access to four or more occupied residential or commercial structure, subject to review and approval by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The chairman of the board of commissioners, or his/her designee, is authorized and directed to cause the placement of a street name sign at street/road intersections presently existing within the county. The initial cost of such signs and the installation thereof shall be at the county's expense. 
(d)  The names assigned to streets and roads within the county and heretofore approved by the board of commissioners shall be compiled in alphabetical index form and same shall be and hereafter known as the "Brantley County Road Name Index". This listing, and as hereafter amended, shall be the official listing of names for streets and roads in Brantley County, Georgia. This listing shall be filed and maintained in the office of the county addressing coordinator. The county addressing coordinator will provide a copy of the county road name index to the office of the board of commissioners whenever changes or updates are made. 
(e)  The county addressing coordinator shall follow this article to assure an orderly, logical and efficient manner of hereafter assigning names to streets and roads, and assigning street address numbers for residential and commercial structures in the county, all in accord with the street addressing system herein set forth. In this matter and in strict accord with this article, the county addressing coordinator is delegated the authority to hereafter assign names to new streets and roads in the county, and to assign the street address to occupied structures located said streets and roads. 
(f)  Road names shall not duplicate road names already assigned, irrespective of road name prefixes or suffixes except for roads located within different corporations. The four cardinal points of the compass may be used as a prefix or suffix to designate portions of a continuous street. 
(g)  A street name shall not be differentiated using the same name by changing the street suffix such as a street or avenue except that those duplicate streets having different suffixes must be directly accessible from the street having the same name with the different suffix. An example would be Birch Court must be accessible from Birch Street. 
(h)  A street shall have only one name throughout its entire length unless approved as an exception by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 3; Ord. of 2-14-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 66-153. - Establishment of a street addressing system. 
(a)  All occupied residential and commercial structures located in the county shall be assigned a street address in accordance with the county number assignment formula. 
(b)  The combination of such an address number and the road or street name shall be the official address of such structure. 
(c)  An application for a building permit, an electrical hook-up, and/or a septic tank installation permit for a new building shall be considered an application for an address assignment. The county department of code enforcement shall coordinate with the county addressing office for the assignment of addresses. Addresses shall be assigned prior to the beginning of any site improvements or construction. The address shall be issued not later than 30 days following identification of address and installed on the structure prior to final inspection from the county department of code enforcement. 
(d)  No street currently shown on a subdivision plat filed with the county or otherwise shall be placed on the county road name index and implemented by a subdivision owner until such name has been submitted to and approved by the county addressing coordinator and added to the county road name index. The county addressing coordinator shall not approve any street or road name already in use, confusingly similar to a name already in use, deemed confusing for purposes of emergency response, or deemed inappropriate by the county addressing coordinator. Any street name that is not approved by the addressing coordinator is subject to appeal and review by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  No new street or road within the county shall be assigned a name on a subdivision plat or otherwise until such name is submitted to and approved by the county addressing coordinator, and added to the county road name index. The county addressing coordinator shall have the authority to refuse to approve any name already in use, confusingly similar to a name already in use, deemed confusing for purposes of emergency response, or deemed inappropriate by the county addressing coordinator. Any street name that is not approved by the addressing coordinator is subject to appeal and review by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 4) 
Sec. 66-154. - Placement and size of address number. 
(a)  Display of number—All structures. All existing structures in the county shall have their address numbers placed at the driveway location which serves the property. The number shall be mounted on a 4 × 4 wood post or a two-inch steel post at the driveway location serving the said property. The signage shall be six inches in height with four-inch Arial font numbers, white reflective in color on a blue background. See attached details showing the address number approved locations. 
(b)  Display of number—Residential structure. Each primary structure shall display the number of the address assigned to that address. The numbers shall be at least six inches in height, and of a durable and clearly visible material. The numbers shall be placed on, above, or at the side of the main entrance so the number is clearly visible from the public right-of-way. Address numbers are to be a contrasting color to the background on which they are mounted. 
(c)  Display of number—Commercial and industrial structure. Address numbers for commercial and industrial structures shall be at least six inches in height. The number shall be placed above or on the main entrance to the structure when possible. If such number is not clearly visible from the public right-of-way, the number shall be placed along a driveway or on a sign visible from the same. Address numbers are to be a contrasting color to the background on which they are mounted. 
(d)  Display of number—Apartments and similar. The address number assigned to a single building number shall be displayed on each assigned structure following the International Property Maintenance Code section 304.3. Numbers and/or letters for individual apartments or units within these complexes shall be displayed on, above, or to the side of the main doorway of each apartment or unit. 
(e)  Display of number—Manufactured home park, trailer park, recreational vehicle park and similar. The address number assigned to a unit within an organized park shall be one address number for the park with each trailer assigned a lot or space number. The lot or space number must be posted and permanently affixed to the lot identifying the lot or space number. The main address to the park must be posted at the entrance of the park. Address numbers are to be a contrasting color to the background on which they are mounted. 
(f)  All cost incurred by a property owner or occupant of a structure where an address number must be displayed to be in compliance with this article shall be at the sole expense of said party. 
(g)  The property owner, occupant or person in charge of any house, building, mobile home, or other structure to which a street number has been assigned in accordance with this article shall display the said street number as specified in this article within 30 days of receiving notification of such number. 
(h)  Whenever any house, building, or structure shall be erected or located after the initial establishment of the uniform street numbering system as provided for herein, then the owner, occupant or person in charge of same shall, within 30 days of receiving notification of the assigned address, display the street number assigned to said structure in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 5) 
Sec. 66-155. - Placement and size of street/road name signs. 
(a)  All new street signs erected within the county shall be in conformance with the specifications of this article, unless the Georgia Department of Transportation, Division of Highways or the county board of commissioners grants a variance. 
(b)  Sign specifications. All signs erected shall be in conformance to the Georgia Department of Transportation, Division of Highways as defined in the "Standards for the Design and Installation of Road Name Signing" published March 1999 (Appendix A). In all cases, the posted speed limit shall govern the specification of signs erected per Appendix A. 
(c)  The owner, creator or developer of any new residential or commercial subdivision or other like real estate development shall erect or cause to be erected street name signs in conformance with this article at any and all intersections within such subdivision or development upon construction of any street on or after the effective date of this article, unless, by specific vote of the board of commissioners, such responsibility is assumed by the county. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 6) 
Sec. 66-156. - Changing the name of a street or road. 
(a)  There shall be and same is hereby imposed a moratorium on the change of any street or road's name for a period of two years following the completion of the address conversion project as now underway in the county. The beginning date of said moratorium shall be established by act of the board of commissioner by way of an amendment to this article. 
(b)  After the moratorium for making any change of a street or road's name has expired, any person desiring to change the name of an existing street or road, shall file a petition with the board of commissioners requesting such a change, which petition must be join in with by the owners of 80 percent of the parcels on the subject street or road. However, such a petition shall not be filed or considered until the county addressing coordinator has confirmed the availability of the proposed name. 
When filing a petition for a street name change, documentation such as a tax bill or deed, showing the ownership of each signatory to the petition must accompany the petition at the time of filing. The tax assessor shall sign off to authenticate that ownerships match the application. 
No petition for a street name change as authorized herein shall be accepted or considered without the petitioner also tendering with the petition a non-refundable deposit in the amount of $250.00. Upon approval of the name change, the petitioner shall be obligated to pay to the county for the actual costs incurred by the name change, such as any legal advertisements, the purchase and installation of new street signs, etc. The cost shall be charged against the said deposit, and should the deposit be insufficient to cover all such cost, then the petitioner shall be liable to the county for such additional cost. 
(c)  If the name of any street or road is changed as herein provided, then, within ten days of such change, the county addressing coordinator shall send notice of such change to the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 7) 
Sec. 66-157. - Map of county roads and streets. 
All parcels of property within the county which shall be given a street number in accordance with this article may be identified and shown on maps maintained by the county addressing coordinator. The maps and explanatory matter thereon may be amended, modified, or changed at the direction of the county addressing coordinator. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 8) 
Sec. 66-158. - Appeals and amendments. 
(a)  During the initial stage assigning addresses under this article and prior to the completion of the project task, any request concerning road name changes and/or addressing complaints shall be first directed to the county addressing coordinator, which shall be made within 30 days from when the road name and/or address is assigned. If the complaining party and the addressing coordinator can not come to an agreed resolution of the issue, then the complaining party may appeal the decision of the county addressing coordinator to the county board of commissioners for a final disposition of the issue. Provided, however, all such appeals to the board of commissioners must be filed with the board within 30 days of the decision made by the addressing coordinator on the matter. In considering such an appeal, the board of commissioners may, at their discretion, consider oral comments on the matter from the appealing party and the addressing coordinator, or make a decision based solely upon written comments. All such appeals shall be decided by the board of commissioners within 30 days of receiving either the oral or written comments. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final, and same shall be in writing with a copy of same mailed by the clerk of the board to the appealing party. 
(b)  After the address conversion project has been implemented in the county, any concerns, problems or complaints of a property owner regarding the street naming and numbering system shall be handled on a case by case basis by the county addressing coordinator, subject to appeal to the board of commissioners as set forth in subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 9) 
Sec. 66-159. - Notice of violation of ordinance. 
Whenever the county addressing coordinator has reason to believe there exists a non-compliance (violation) of this article, then he/she shall give a written notice of such non-compliance to the person believed to be failing to comply with the article and direct such person to take such necessary action in order to eliminate the violation within 30 days from date of notification. If such person(s) fail to take the necessary action to eliminate the existing violation, then the matter shall be brought to the attention of the county code enforcement officer who shall issue the necessary citation(s) regarding such violations. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 10) 
Sec. 66-160. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating this article, or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: By a fine of not more than $500.00, and/or a sentence of one to 60 days in the county jail. 
(b)  No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any person who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post bond for his future appearance. 
(c)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations which shall be issued to an alleged violator of any provisions of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the representative of the county who completes and serves it. Said citation may be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(d)  Citations issued hereunder may be tried without a prosecuting attorney, however in the event the prosecuting attorney is needed the county attorney shall serve as the prosecuting attorney. 
(e)  Violations of this chapter shall be tried in the magistrate court of Brantley County, Georgia, and shall be tried in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia, Chapter 15-10. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the county board of commissioners from bringing any civil action for injunction, or other proceedings to present, correct, or abate any violation of this article or other state or federal law. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed herein shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanctions, penalty or remedy provided by law. 
(g)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 11) 
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 70-31. - Adoption. 
(a)  The board of commissioners does hereby authorize the adoption of the county solid waste management plan as submitted to and approved by the state department of community affairs June 22, 2006. The complete text is available in the offices of the city. 
(b)  The county commission adopts the solid waste management plan updates and accompanying short-term work program. 
(Res. of 9-14-1993; Res. of 3-9-1999; Res. of 6-22-2006; Res. of 6-15-2017) 
Secs. 70-32—70-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION AND LITTER CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

Sec. 70-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garbage means household or office waste, to include, paper, cardboard, tin cans, food waste, glass, plastic containers, cloth, fruit and vegetable refuse, and such other nondescript items of household waste as may be otherwise disposable after human use. 
Litter means all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, refuse, trash, debris, dead animals, furniture, appliances, garbage, or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
(Res. of 5-15-1991, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-62. - Use of waste receptacles. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Deposit, place or leave any items other than garbage in any receptacle (dumpster) provided by the county for the collection of garbage; 
(2)  Dump, deposit, throw, leave or cause the dumping, depositing, throwing, placing or leaving of garbage or litter in the immediate area of any garbage collection receptacle; 
(3)  Place, throw or deposit any animal carcass, or any live animal in any garbage collection receptacle; 
(4)  Place, throw or deposit any burning or smoldering material in any garbage collection receptacle; 
(5)  Set fire to the contents of any garbage collection receptacle; 
(6)  Deposit, place or leave any explosive or spontaneous combustible materials in any garbage collection receptacle; 
(7)  Sort through, scatter or remove any of the garbage which has been placed and left in a garbage collection receptacle. This subsection shall not apply to any county employee or agent who is in the performance of his official duties; 
(8)  Enter, climb in or on, or go into any garbage collection receptacles. This subsection shall not apply to any county employee or agent who is in the performance of his official duties; or 
(9)  Deposit, place or leave any items in a garbage collection receptacle unless that party is a resident of the county. However, this subsection shall not apply to a nonresident who is traveling through the county, and who has not entered the county for the purpose of disposing of garbage. 
(10)  Place, deposit, or leave or cause the placing, depositing or leaving of any motor vehicle tire in any garbage collection receptacle, or in the immediate area of any garbage collection receptacle. 
(Res. of 5-15-1991, § 3; Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 70-63. - Littering prohibited. 
(a)  No person, company or corporation shall dump, deposit, throw, or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter or garbage or tires on any property of the county, unless the property or location is designated for same, i.e., garbage collection receptacles, trash cans, and/or the county solid waste transfer site during operating hours, and only such items as are specifically approved for deposit at such locations. 
(b)  Motor vehicle tires may be deposited at the county's solid waste transfer station without being a violation of this section upon payment of the disposal fee as hereafter set forth: 

 
(c)  No person, company, or corporation shall, with intent, dump, deposit, throw or leave or cause or permit, the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving litter or garbage on private property. 
(d)  A reward of $1,000.00 shall be paid by the county commission to any person who provides information leading to the citation and conviction of any person(s) and/or entity violating this section. 
(Res. of 5-15-1991, § 4; Ord. of 3-12-2002, § 2; Amd. of 3-3-2016(2)) 
Sec. 70-64. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this article, or any provision thereof, upon conviction as heretofore provided in 70-65, Enforcement, the defendant shall be punished by a mandatory penalty of not less than 40, nor more than 100 hours of community service. However, in keeping with a defendant's health status, upon evidence submitted by the defendant, as an alternative punishment, shall be a mandatory fine of not less than $350.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(Res. of 5-15-1991, § 6; Ord. of 8-13-1998, § 2; Amend. of 1-13-2009; Amend. of 3-3-2016) 
Sec. 70-65. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The sheriff of the county, any deputies thereof, any agent of the county authorized by the board of commissioners to issue citations for the enforcement of county ordinances, and all other law enforcement officers shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provisions of this article. 
(b)  No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any person who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post bond for his future appearance. 
(c)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations which shall be issued to an alleged violator of any sections of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the representative of the county who completes and serves it. The citation may be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(d)  Citations issued under this article may be tried without a prosecuting attorney; however, if the prosecuting attorney is needed, the county attorney shall serve as the prosecuting attorney. 
(e)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county and shall be tried in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the board of commissioners from bringing any civil action for injunction, or other proceedings to present, correct, or abate any violation of this article or other state or federal law. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed in this article shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanctions, penalty or remedy provided by law. 
(Res. of 5-15-1991, § 5; Ord. of 8-13-1998, § 1) 
Secs. 70-66—70-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY SITING MORATORIUM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 12, 2005, §§ 1—3, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. IV, §§ 70-91—70-93, was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 70-91. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Brantley County Waste Disposal Facility Siting Moratorium Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 70-92. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms: 
Biomedical waste means any such matter, things or material as described and defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22 to such solid waste. 
Disposal facility means any such facility as described and defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(8) which code section is incorporated herein as if it were fully set out, and any amendments hereafter made to said code section shall also be made a part hereof. 
Materials recovery facility means a solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recoverable materials, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. 
Municipal solid waste means all such matter, things or material as described and defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(18) which code section is incorporated herein as if it were fully set out, and any amendments hereafter made to said code section shall also be made a part hereof. 
Person means those entities and people as described and defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(22) which code section is incorporated herein as if it were fully set out, and any amendments hereafter made to said code section shall also be made a part hereof. 
Solid waste means all such matter, things or material as described and defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(33) which code section is incorporated herein as if it were fully set out, and any amendments hereafter made to said code section shall also be made a part hereof. 
Solid waste handling facility means any such facility as described and defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(35) which code section is incorporated herein as if it were fully set out, and any amendments hereafter made to said code section shall also be made a part hereof. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, § 2) 
Sec. 70-93. - Facility siting moratorium. 
No person not presently operating a waste handling facility in Brantley County, Georgia, shall site, locate, operate or apply for any permits required by the State of Georgia or of an agency of the United States of America to site, locate or operate, any solid waste handling, storage or disposal facility; any municipal solid waste disposal facility; any biomedical waste treatment and/or disposal facility; any solid waste thermal treatment technology facility; any hazardous waste treatment handling, storage or disposal facility; any special solid waste handling, storage or disposal facility; or any recovered materials processing facility, for a period of one year from the effective date of this article or until such time as the board of commissioners of the county has adopted and the state has approved the county's revised and updated land use plan and solid waste management plan for the county, as required by the laws of the state, which ever occurs first. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, § 3) 
Chapter 74 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(2); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(14); any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(16); administration, ch. 2; board of tax assessors, § 2-81 et seq.; finance, § 2-141 et seq.; businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Revenue Bond Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.; county hotel/motel occupancy tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq.; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; county ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq.; ad valorem taxation of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.; freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2; landmark historic property tax abatement program, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.3; special county one percent sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; joint county and municipal sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-80 et seq.; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; providing funds or extending credit to private persons, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - [Waiver of penalties and interest—Ad valorem taxes.] 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-242, the board of commissioners may waive in whole or in part, the collection of any amount due to Brantley County, for penalties or interest assessed for failure to comply with the law governing assessment and collection of ad valorem taxes. The tax commissioner shall determine whether or not the default giving rise to the penalty or interest was due to a reasonable cause and not due to gross or willful neglect of the law or of regulations or instructions issued pursuant to law. The tax commissioner may recommend to the board of commissioners the waiver of penalties and interest, in whole or in part. 
(b)  The waiver of penalties or interest in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-242 and under the provision of this section shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Only interest that accrues on or after July 1, 2002 may be waived; 
(2)  The taxpayer shall provide a claim in writing, under oath, stating the specific reason for the taxpayer's failure to pay the ad valorem taxes in a timely manner; 
(3)  The tax commissioner advises the board of commissioners that the default giving rise to penalty or interest was not a result of: 
a.  Gross or willful negligence; 
b.  A disregard of law or regulations or instructions issued pursuant to law; 
c.  That the taxpayer has not been delinquent in the payment of other taxes owed to Brantley County or other counties; and 
d.  Taxes and penalties will impose a substantial hardship upon the taxpayer. 
(c)  The board of commissioners will make the final decision as to whether to waive the penalties and interest in whole or in part. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009, §§ 1—3) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 8, 2009, §§ 1—3, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 74-1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 74-2. - [Minimum acreage to qualify for bona fide conservation use assessment.] 
The requirements to qualify for the current use assessment concerning real properties in Brantley County may be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.4 et seq. 
(Res. of 4-13-2010; Res. of 12-13-2011) 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted April 13, 2010, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 74-2 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 74-3. - [Intergovernmental agreements.] 

 
Editor's note— At the request of the county, intergovernmental agreements have been added to the Code of Ordinances. At the discretion of the editor, these agreements have not been fully set out, but are listed as references only in § 74-3. 
Secs. 74-4—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL OPTION SALES TAX 

Sec. 74-31. - Tax imposed. 
There is imposed a one percent retail sales and use tax as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-8-82 for the Special District of Brantley County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 12-21-1982) 
Sec. 74-32. - [Special sales and use tax.] 
There shall be imposed in Brantley County, Georgia, commencing January 1, 2008, and continuing for a period of 20 consecutive calendar quarters or until the amount of $7,000,000.00 has been raised, a special one-percent sales tax for the purpose of financing the following capital projects, to wit: recreation facilities, to include land, structures and major equipment; a county jail facility; and for road, street and bridge improvement purposes, in the amounts so stated in the referendum question. 
There shall be imposed in Brantley County, Georgia, commencing January 1, 2013, and continuing for a period of 24 consecutive calendar quarters/six years or until the amount of $8,000,000.00 has been raised, a special one-percent sales tax for the purpose of financing the following capital projects, which includes: recreational facility, including irrigation systems, landscaping, parking, structures and major equipment; a county jail; and roads, streets and bridges repair and improvements, which repair and improvements may include sidewalks and bicycle paths. 
(Res. of 9-25-2007; Res. of 12-13-2011) 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Sept. 25, 2007, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 74-32 was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 74-33—74-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTION BUSINESS LICENSE TAX 

Sec. 74-61. - Annual business license tax. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. The term "gross receipts" means the same as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The term "depository financial institutions" means state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Res. of 1-1-1984(1), § 1) 
Sec. 74-62. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 74-61 shall be $1,000.00. 
(Res. of 1-1-1984(1), § 2) 
Sec. 74-63. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to an annual business license tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Res. of 1-1-1984(1), § 3) 
Sec. 74-64. - Due date of taxes. 
Annual business license taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 74-63 unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 1-1-1984(1), § 4) 
Secs. 74-65—74-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GROSS PREMIUMS TAX ON INSURERS 

Sec. 74-91. - Gross premiums tax on insurance other than life insurance. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4) and (5). The term "gross direct premiums" means the same as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Res. of 1-1-1984(2), §1) 
Secs. 74-92—74-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, the title of Art. V was changed from special tax districts to special districts to allow the inclusion of a new special fee district. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 74-121—74-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WAYNESVILLE SPECIAL FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-141. - Tax district created. 
(a)  There is hereby created a special fire tax district within Brantley County which shall be known and cited as the "Waynesville Special Fire Protection District", hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the district". 
(b)  Waynesville Special Fire Protection District shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the Northeast corner of Brantley County; then in a Southerly direction along the Easternmost line of Brantley County where it abuts Glynn County and later Camden County to the point where it intersects the Satilla River; thence in a Northerly direction along the Satilla River to the intersection with a straight line extrapolated from the Coffee County Road; thence Eastward along that line and on through the Coffee County Road to State Highway 110 North and the intersection with the Western boundary of Georgia Militia District #334; thence in a Northeasterly direction along the Western boundary of the Georgia Militia District #334 to the point where it abuts the Wayne County line; thence in a Westerly direction along the Northern line of the Georgia Militia District #334 where is abuts the Wayne county line back to the point of origin at the Northeast corner of Brantley County. 
(Res. of 5-8-1990, § 2; Res. of 9-14-2010, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 74-142. - Additional ad valorem tax. 
All properties, both real and personal, located and situated within the boundaries of the district shall be subject to an additional ad valorem tax levy as set annually hereafter by the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County. 
(Res. of 5-8-1990, § 3; Res. of 9-14-2010, § 3) 
Sec. 74-143. - Use of taxes. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes collected from the additional levy within the district shall be used and appropriated only, to pay the cost of providing additional fire protection services within the district; to construct and maintain facilities for housing fire equipment and personnel within the district; to purchase equipment to be located and used within the district; to pay the cost of training for persons who provide fire protection services within the district; to pay the cost of materials and supplies used for training firefighters assigned to the district; to pay the cost of insurance provided on real and/or personal property located within the district; to pay for such other costs and expenses as may be deemed appropriate and needed for the fire protection services within the district. 
(b)  All properties, both real and personal, purchased from ad valorem tax revenue within the district shall be acquired in the name of "Brantley County, for the benefit of the Waynesville Fire Protection District". All proceeds derived from the sale of any such acquired property, shall be used in the same manner as the taxes levied within the district. 
(Res. of 5-8-1990, §§ 4, 6; Res. of 9-14-2010, §§ 4, 6) 
Sec. 74-144. - Additional tax levy. 
Nothing herein shall require an additional tax levy within the district, as the resolution is permissive and not mandatory. However, should a tax be levied by the board of commissioners within the district, funds collected must be used only for providing fire protection services within the district. Same must be used only for providing fire protection services in addition to such services as then being provided by the board of commissioners in the county which lies outside the district and not in any other special district. 
(Res. of 5-9-1990, § 7; Res. of 9-14-2010, § 7) 
Sec. 74-145. - Fire protection services. 
The providing of the fire protection services as herein contemplated within the district may at the discretion of the board of commissioners, be performed by the Waynesville Volunteer Fire Department Inc., a nonprofit Georgia Corporation, or such other party or parties as may be selected by the board of commissioners from time to time, under such terms and conditions as established by the board of commissioners. Any such services arrangement shall be set forth in a contractual agreement and approved by the board of commissioners. The board shall review the manner in which any such contracted services are being performed on an annual basis when considering the levy to be made within the district. No contract shall be continued with any party not providing the required service which meets the expectation of the Brantley County Commission. 
(Res. of 5-8-1990, § 5; Res. of 9-14-2010, § 5) 
Secs. 74-146—74-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CALVARY SPECIAL FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-171. - Tax district created. 
(a)  Calvary Special Fire Protection District. There was on August 2, 1977, and is hereby created a special tax district within the county which shall be known and cited as the "Calvary Special Fire Protection District," sometimes referred to in this division as "the district." 
(b)  Boundaries. The boundaries of the Calvary Special Fire Protection District shall be as follows: 
Beginning at a point where the Brantley County-Ware County line joins the Satilla River; thence in an easterly direction along the southern bank of the Satilla River to the point where it joins Big Creek; thence in a southerly direction along Big Creek to a point where it intersects state route 82 (Corridor Z); thence in a westerly direction along state route 82 to the point where it joins the Ware County-Brantley County line; thence in a northerly direction along the Ware County-Brantley County line to the point where it joins the Satilla River. 
(Res. of 2-13-1990, § 2) 
Sec. 74-172. - Additional ad valorem tax. 
All properties, both real and personal, located and situated within the boundaries of the district shall be subject to an additional ad valorem tax levy as set annually by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 2-13-1990, § 3) 
Sec. 74-173. - Use of additional taxes. 
(a)  All taxes collected from the additional levy within the district shall be used and appropriated only, to pay the cost of providing additional fire protection services within the district: 
(1)  Construct and maintain facilities for housing fire equipment and personnel within the district; 
(2)  Purchase equipment to be located and used within the district; 
(3)  Pay the cost of training for persons who provide fire protection services within the district; 
(4)  Pay the cost of materials and supplies used for training firefighters assigned to the district; 
(5)  Pay the cost of insurance provided on real and/or personal property located within the district and used to provide fire protection within the district; 
(6)  Pay for such other cost and expenses as may be deemed appropriate and needed for fire protection services within the district. 
(b)  All properties, both real and personal, purchased from taxes collected within the district shall be acquired in the name of the county, for the benefit of the various fire departments located within the district. All proceeds derived from the sale of any such acquired property shall be used in the same manner as the taxes levied within the district. 
(Res. of 2-13-1990, § 4, 6) 
Sec. 74-174. - Additional tax levy. 
Nothing in this division shall require an additional tax levy within the district, as this division is permissive and not mandatory. However, should a tax be levied by the board of commissioners within the district, then the tax must be used only for providing fire protection services in addition to such services as then being provided by the board of commissioners in the county which lie outside the district and not in any other special district. 
(Res. of 2-13-1990, § 7) 
Sec. 74-175. - Fire protection services. 
The providing of the fire protection services, as contemplated in this division, within the district may, at the discretion of the board of commissioners, be performed by the Calvary Volunteer Fire Department, Inc., a nonprofit state corporation, or such other party as may be selected by the board of commissioners from time to time, under such terms and conditions as established by the board of commissioners. Any such services arrangement shall be set forth in a contractual agreement and approved by the board of commissioners. The board shall review the manner in which any such contracted services are being performed on an annual basis when considering the levy to be made within the district. No contract shall be continued with any party not providing the required services. 
(Res. of 2-13-1990, § 5) 
Secs. 74-176—74-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COUNTY SPECIAL FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-201. - Tax district created. 
(a)  County Special Fire Protection District. There is hereby created a special tax district within the county which shall be known and cited as the "County Special Fire Protection District." 
(b)  Boundaries. The boundaries of the County Special Fire Protection District shall be as follows: 
That certain area of the county described and identified as follows: Beginning at the point where the southernmost point of the 334th General Militia District line intersects with the county boundary line; thence run in south and west directions along the county boundary line to U.S. Highway 82; thence run east along U.S. Highway 82 to Big Creek; thence run northerly along Big Creek to the county line; thence run in east and north directions along the county line to the Satilla River; then run north along the Satilla River to a point where, if extended, County Road 151 would intersect with the Satilla River; thence run along the extended line and then along County Road 151 to its intersection with Georgia Highway 110; thence run south along such Highway 110 to a point where County Road 166 intersects with the county line; thence run southerly along County Road 166 to the point where the road intersects with County Road 167; thence run in a southerly direction along County Road 167 to where the road intersects with Georgia Highway 32; thence run westerly along Georgia Highway 32 to the point where it intersects with the 334th General Militia District line; thence run southerly along the General Militia District line to a point where it intersects with Georgia Highway 110; thence continue in a southerly direction along such General Militia District line to the county line and the point or place of beginning, excluding and excepting all areas located within the incorporated area of the City of Nahunta and the City of Hoboken; this area being presently designated as district 3 on the records of the board of tax assessors of the county. 
(Res. of 9-25-2000, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 74-202. - Additional ad valorem tax. 
All properties, both real and personal, located and situated within the boundaries of the district shall be subject to an additional ad valorem tax levy as set annually by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 9-25-2000, § 3) 
Sec. 74-203. - Use of additional taxes. 
(a)  All taxes collected from the additional levy within the district shall be used and appropriated only, to pay the cost of providing additional fire protection services within the district: 
(1)  Construct and maintain facilities for housing fire equipment and personnel within the district; 
(2)  Purchase equipment to be located and used within the district; 
(3)  Pay the cost of training for persons who provide fire protection services within the district; 
(4)  Pay the cost of materials and supplies used for training firefighters assigned to the district; 
(5)  Pay the cost of insurance provided on real and/or personal property located within the district and used to provide fire protection within the district; 
(6)  Pay for such other cost and expenses as may be deemed appropriate and needed for fire protection services within the district. 
(b)  All properties, both real and personal, purchased from taxes collected within the district shall be acquired in the name of the county, for the benefit of the various fire departments located within the district. All proceeds derived from the sale of any such acquired property, shall be used in the same manner as the taxes levied within the district. 
(Res. of 9-25-2000, § 4, 6) 
Sec. 74-204. - Additional tax levy. 
Nothing in this division shall require an additional tax levy within the district, as this division is permissive and not mandatory. However, should a tax be levied by the board of commissioners within the district, then the tax must be used only for providing fire protection services in addition to such services as then being provided by the board of commissioners in the county which lie outside the district and not in any other special district. 
(Res. of 9-25-2000, § 7) 
Sec. 74-205. - Fire protection services. 
The providing of the fire protection services, as contemplated in this division, within the district may, at the discretion of the board of commissioners, be performed by certain volunteer fire departments located within the district, or such other party as may be selected by the board of commissioners from time to time, under such terms and conditions as established by the board of commissioners. Any such services arrangement shall be set forth in a contractual agreement and approved by the board of commissioners. The board shall review the manner in which any such contracted services are being performed on an annual basis when considering the levy to be made within the district. No contract shall be continued with any party not providing the required services. 
(Res. of 9-25-2000, § 5) 
Secs. 74-206—74-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL TAX DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-231. - Tax district created. 
(a)  Brantley County Solid Waste Disposal Tax District. There is hereby created a special tax district within the county, which shall be known and cited as the "Brantley County Solid Waste Disposal Tax District," sometimes referred to in this division as "the district." 
(b)  Boundaries. The boundaries of the Brantley County Solid Waste Disposal Tax District shall be as follows: 
All of the real property and nonhomestead mobile homes situated, located, lying and being within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Res. of 11-19-1991, §§ 1, 2; Amend. of 10-8-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 74-232. - Solid waste disposal fee. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Residential unit capable of being occupied by humans means a structure that has electrical hookup for any part of the year and is enclosed on four sides and has sewage disposal facilities. Provided, however, a structure being exclusively used for agricultural storage (hay storage, etc.), that is without sewage disposal facilities, shall be an exempt residential or commercial unit. 
(b)  Fee imposed. All real property and nonhomestead mobile homes located and situated within the boundaries of the district shall be subject to the imposition of a solid waste disposal fee. The fee shall be set annually by the board of commissioners and shall be a part of the annual county tax notice when possible or otherwise a supplement thereto. The solid waste disposal fee for the year 2002 on each residential unit capable of being occupied by humans on real property in the district, including each homestead mobile home, shall be in the amount of $85.00; and for the year 2003 on nonhomestead mobile homes located in the district which are capable of being occupied by humans, in the amount of $85.00; and in the amount of $85.00 for each commercial unit (a structure presently being used for or capable of being used for commercial/business operations) located on real property within the district, that has not contracted with some permitted solid waste disposal company for a period of 12 months covering the succeeding year (2003), for the disposal of solid waste from such commercial establishment (upon providing proof of such contracted disposal service, the fee shall be removed from such commercial unit). 
(c)  Exemption. A mobile home park (a defined area of land that is owned by an individual, husband and wife, partnership or corporation where at least 12 mobile homes are located and the park owner has obtained a business license from the county for a mobile home park business) shall be considered a commercial unit for exemption purposes as to all mobile homes located in the park, if such mobile home park has provided a solid waste collection container (dumpster) of at least six cubic yards for 12 mobile homes and an additional yard capacity for each additional two mobile homes. 
(Res. of 11-19-1991, § 3; Amend. of 12-3-2002, § 3) 
Sec. 74-233. - Use of fees. 
All fees collected from the solid waste disposal fee within the district shall be used and appropriated only, to pay the cost of disposal of solid waste generated within the county, and the necessary incidental related matters associated therewith, to include but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The purchase of garbage disposal dumpsters; 
(2)  The purchase, maintenance and operation of equipment for the collection of solid waste from solid waste dumpsters (this specifically does not include door-to-door collection); 
(3)  Transportation cost to the disposal site or transfer site; 
(4)  Any charges by way of a tipping fee for the disposal of solid waste; and 
(5)  For such other cost and expenses as may be deemed needed and appropriate from time to time by the board of commissioners in order to collect and dispose of the solid waste generated within the county. 
(Res. of 11-19-1991, § 4) 
Sec. 74-234. - Fee levy. 
Nothing in this division shall require a fee to be levied within the district as this division is permissive and not mandatory. However, should a fee be levied by the board of commissioners within the district, the fee must be used only for providing sanitation disposal services within the district as specifically set forth in this division, and none of the fees collected may be appropriated for any other purposes. 
(Res. of 11-19-1991, § 6) 
Sec. 74-235. - Solid waste disposal services. 
In order to provide the solid waste disposal service, as contemplated in this division, within the district, the board of commissioners may, at the discretion of the board of commissioners, enter into a contract with other parties who will receive the solid waste generated within the county and dispose of the solid waste in accordance with the appropriate laws and regulations, and charge the county for such disposal. Any such solid waste disposal arrangements shall be set forth in a contractual agreement and approved by the board of commissioners. The board shall review the expenses incurred for the disposal of solid waste within the county on an annual basis when considering the annual fee to be imposed within the district. 
(Res. of 11-19-1991, § 5) 
Sec. 74-236. - Fees due. 
All fees imposed within the district, as contemplated by the terms of this division, shall be due and payable on the same date as ad valorem taxes assessed in the county become due, and such fees shall be a lien against the nonhomestead mobile home and/or the real property upon which the residential or commercial unit is physically located, as provided for by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-2-56 and 12-8-39.3. Further, it is provided that the tax commissioner of the county shall be the officer charged with the enforcement and collection of any and all fees imposed under this division. 
(Res. of 11-19-1991, § 7; Amend. of 10-8-2002, § 7) 
Secs. 74-237—74-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - NAHUNTA SPECIAL FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-241. - Tax district created. 
(a)  There is hereby created a special fire tax district within Brantley County which shall be known and cited as the "Nahunta Special Fire Protection District", hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the district". 
(b)  The boundaries of Nahunta Special Fire Protection District shall include all unincorporated areas of Brantley County as defined by the following border: 
Beginning at the Northwest corner of the District where the Satilla River intersects with Georgia Militia District #1565 which is a point on the Satilla River due North of the intersection of Petty Crossing and Raybon Rock Road West; thence traveling West and later South along the Satilla River to a point where it intersects the Charlton County Border at the intersection of Georgia Militia District #1354; thence Westerly along the Northern border of Georgia Militia District #1354 to its intersection with Georgia Militia District #1534; thence to the North along the Eastern border of Georgia Militia District #1534 until it intersects the Satilla River which was the point of origin. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(1), §§ 1, 2; Res. of 9-14-2010, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 74-242. - Additional ad valorem tax. 
All properties, both real and personal, located and situated within the boundaries of the district shall be subject to an additional ad valorem tax levy as set annually hereafter by the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(1), § 3; Res. of 9-14-2010, § 3) 
Sec. 74-243. - Use of tax revenue. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes collected from the additional levy within the district shall be used and appropriated only, to pay the cost of providing additional fire protection services within the district; to construct and maintain facilities for housing fire equipment and personnel within the district; to purchase equipment to be located and used within the district; to pay the cost of training for persons who provide fire protection services within the district; to pay the cost of materials and supplies used for training firefighters assigned to the district; to pay the cost of insurance provided on real and/or personal property located within the district; to pay for such other costs and expenses as may be deemed appropriate and needed for the fire protection services within the district. 
(b)  All properties, both real and personal, purchased from ad valorem tax revenue within the district shall be acquired in the name of "Brantley County, for the benefit of the Nahunta Fire Protection District". All proceeds derived from the sale of any such acquired property, shall be used in the same manner as the taxes levied within the district. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(1), §§ 4, 6; Res. of 9-14-2010, §§ 4, 6) 
Sec. 74-244. - Additional tax levy. 
Nothing herein shall require an additional tax levy within the district, as the resolution is permissive and not mandatory. However, should a tax be levied by the board of commissioners within the district, funds collected must be used only for providing fire protection services within the district. Same must be used only for providing fire protection services in addition to such services as then being provided by the board of commissioners in the county which lies outside the district and not in any other special district. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(1), § 7; Res. of 9-14-2010, § 7) 
Sec. 74-245. - Fire protection services. 
The providing of the fire protection services as herein contemplated within the district may at the discretion of the board of commissioners, be performed by the Nahunta Volunteer Fire Department Inc., a nonprofit Georgia Corporation, or such other party or parties as may be selected by the board of commissioners from time to time, under such terms and conditions as established by the board of commissioners. Any such services arrangement shall be set forth in a contractual agreement and approved by the board of commissioners. The board shall review the manner in which any such contracted services are being performed on an annual basis when considering the levy to be made within the district. No contract shall be continued with any party not providing the required service which meets the expectation of the Brantley County Commission. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(1), § 5; Res. of 9-14-2010, § 5) 
Secs. 74-246—74-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - HOBOKEN SPECIAL FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-251. - Tax district created. 
(a)  There is hereby created a special fire tax district within Brantley County which shall be known and cited as the "Hoboken Special Fire Protection District", hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the district". 
(b)  The boundaries of Hoboken Special Fire Protection District shall include all unincorporated areas of Brantley County as defined by the following border: 
Beginning at the Eastern corner of the District where the Brantley County line abuts the Ware County line on Highway 82; thence East along Highway 82 to the Big Creek bridge on Highway 82; thence North and East along Big Creek until it meets the Satilla River; thence East along the Satilla river until it intersects with the Eastern border of Georgia Militia district #1534 which is a point on the Satilla River due North of the intersection of Petty Crossing and Raybon Rock Road West; thence traveling South along Georgia Militia district #1534 to its Southern most point; thence West along Georgia Militia district #1534 to a point where it abuts Highway US #1 and abuts Ware County; thence North and West along the Ware County border back to the point of origin at Highway 82 just West of Schlatterville. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(2), §§ 1, 2; Res. of 9-14-2010, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 74-252. - Additional ad valorem tax. 
All properties, both real and personal, located and situated within the boundaries of the district shall be subject to an additional ad valorem tax levy as set annually hereafter by the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(2), § 3; Res. of 9-14-2010,§ 3) 
Sec. 74-253. - Use of tax revenue. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes collected from the additional levy within the district shall be used and appropriated only, to pay the cost of providing additional fire protection services within the district; to construct and maintain facilities for housing fire equipment and personnel within the district; to purchase equipment to be located and used within the district; to pay the cost of training for persons who provide fire protection services within the district; to pay the cost of materials and supplies used for training firefighters assigned to the district; to pay the cost of insurance provided on real and/or personal property located within the district; to pay for such other costs and expenses as may be deemed appropriate and needed for the fire protection services within the district. 
(b)  All properties, both real and personal, purchased from ad valorem tax revenue within the district shall be acquired in the name of "Brantley County, for the benefit of the Hoboken Fire Protection District". All proceeds derived from the sale of any such acquired property, shall be used in the same manner as the taxes levied within the district. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(2), §§ 4, 6; Res. of 9-14-2010, §§ 4, 6) 
Sec. 74-254. - Additional tax levy. 
Nothing herein shall require an additional tax levy within the district, as the resolution is permissive and not mandatory. However, should a tax be levied by the board of commissioners within the district, funds collected must be used only for providing fire protection services within the district. Same must be used only for providing fire protection services in addition to such services as then being provided by the board of commissioners in the county which lies outside the district and not in any other special district. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(2), § 7; Res. of 9-14-2010, § 7) 
Sec. 74-255. - Fire protection services. 
The providing of the fire protection services as herein contemplated within the district may at the discretion of the board of commissioners, be performed by the Hoboken Volunteer Fire Department Inc., a nonprofit Georgia Corporation, or such other party or parties as may be selected by the board of commissioners from time to time, under such terms and conditions as established by the board of commissioners. Any such services arrangement shall be set forth in a contractual agreement and approved by the board of commissioners. The board shall review the manner in which any such contracted services are being performed on an annual basis when considering the levy to be made within the district. No contract shall be continued with any party not providing the required service which meets the expectation of the Brantley County Commission. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(2), § 5; Res. of 9-14-2010, § 5) 
Secs. 74-256—74-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ATKINSON SPECIAL FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-261. - Tax district created. 
(a)  There is hereby created a special tax district within Brantley County which shall be known and cited as the "Atkinson Special Fire Protection District". 
(b)  The boundaries of the Atkinson Special Fire Protection District shall be as follows: 
That certain area of Brantley County described and identified as follows: Beginning at the point where the southern most point of the 334 th G.M. District line intersects with the County boundary line, thence run in a south and then west directions along the County boundary line to the Satilla River; then run North along the Satilla River to a point where, if extended, County Road 151 would intersect with the Satilla River; thence run along said extended line and then along County Road 151 to its intersection with Georgia Highway 110; thence run South along said Highway 110 to a point where the centerline of said Highway intersects with the 334 th G.M. District line; thence run South along the 334 th G.M. District line to its southern point and the POINT OR PLACE OF BEGINNING. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 74-262. - Additional ad valorem tax. 
All properties, both real and personal, located and situated within the boundaries of the district shall be subject to an additional ad valorem tax levy as set annually hereafter by the county board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(3), § 3) 
Sec. 74-263. - Use of tax revenue. 
(a)  All taxes collected from the additional levy within the district shall be used and appropriated only, to pay the cost of providing additional fire protection services within the district; to construct and maintain facilities for housing fire equipment and personnel within the district; to purchase equipment to be located and used within the district; to pay the cost of training for persons who provide fire protection services within the district; to pay the cost of materials and supplies used for training firefighters assigned to the district; to pay the cost of insurance provided on real and/or personal property located within the district and used to provide fire protection within the district; to pay for such other cost, and expenses as may be deemed appropriate and needed for fire protection services within the district. 
(b)  All properties, both real and personal, purchased from taxes collected within the District shall be acquired in the name of "Brantley County, Georgia, for the benefit of the Atkinson Fire Protection District". All proceeds derived from the sale of any such acquired property, shall be used in the same manner as the taxes levied within the district. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(3), §§ 4, 6) 
Sec. 74-264. - Additional tax levy. 
Nothing herein shall require an additional tax levy within the district, as this resolution is permissive and not mandatory. However, should a tax be levied by the board of commissioners within the district, then same must be used only for providing fire protection services in addition to such services as then being provided by the board of commissioners in the county which lies outside the district and not in any other special district. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(3), § 7) 
Sec. 74-265. - Fire protection services. 
The providing of the fire protection services as herein contemplated within the district may, at the discretion of the board of commissioners, be performed by the Atkinson Volunteer Fire Department, Inc., a non-profit Georgia Corporation, or such other party or parties as may be selected by the board of commissioners from time to time, under such terms and conditions as established by the board of commissioners. Any such services arrangement shall be set forth in a contractual agreement and approved by the board of commissioners. The board shall review the manner in which any such contracted services are being performed on an annual basis when considering the levy to be made within the district. No contract shall be continued with any party not providing the required services. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(3), § 5) 
Secs. 74-266—74-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - HORTENSE SPECIAL FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-271. - Tax district created. 
(a)  There is hereby created a special fire tax district within Brantley County which shall be known and cited as the "Hortense Special Fire Protection District", hereinafter sometimes referred to as "the district". 
(b)  The boundaries of Hortense Special Fire Protection District shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the Northeast corner of the District where Brantley County intersects the Georgia Militia District #334; then in a Southerly direction along the Westernmost line of the Georgia Militia District #334 to the point where it intersects highway 110; thence in a Westerly direction the Coffee County Road and along a line extrapolated to the West from the end of the Coffee County Road to the Satilla River; thence North and West along the Satilla River to the Pierce County line; thence in a Northwesterly direction along the Brantley County Pierce County border to that intersect with the Wayne County border; thence in a Westerly direction along the Brantley County where it abuts the Wayne county line back to the point of origin at the Northeast corner of District. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(4), §§ 1, 2; Res. of 9-14-2010, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 74-272. - Additional ad valorem tax. 
All properties, both real and personal, located and situated within the boundaries of the district shall be subject to an additional ad valorem tax levy as set annually hereafter by the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(4), § 3; Res. of 9-14-2010, § 3) 
Sec. 74-273. - Use of additional taxes. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes collected from the additional levy within the district shall be used and appropriated only, to pay the cost of providing additional fire protection services within the district; to construct and maintain facilities for housing fire equipment and personnel within the district; to purchase equipment to be located and used within the district; to pay the cost of training for persons who provide fire protection services within the district; to pay the cost of materials and supplies used for training firefighters assigned to the district; to pay the cost of insurance provided on real and/or personal property located within the district; to pay for such other costs and expenses as may be deemed appropriate and needed for the fire protection services within the district. 
(b)  All properties, both real and personal, purchased from ad valorem tax revenue within the district shall be acquired in the name of "Brantley County, for the benefit of the Hortense Fire Protection District". All proceeds derived from the sale of any such acquired property, shall be used in the same manner as the taxes levied within the district. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(4), §§ 4, 6; Res. of 9-14-2010, §§ 4, 6) 
Sec. 74-274. - Additional tax levy. 
Nothing herein shall require an additional tax levy within the district, as the resolution is permissive and not mandatory. However, should a tax be levied by the board of commissioners within the district, funds collected must be used only for providing fire protection services within the district. Same must be used only for providing fire protection services in addition to such services as then being provided by the board of commissioners in the county which lies outside the district and not in any other special district. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(4), § 7; Res. of 9-14-2010, § 7) 
Sec. 74-275. - Fire protection services. 
The providing of the fire protection services as herein contemplated within the district may at the discretion of the board of commissioners, be performed by the Hortense Volunteer Fire Department Inc., a nonprofit Georgia Corporation, or such other party or parties as may be selected by the board of commissioners from time to time, under such terms and conditions as established by the board of commissioners. Any such services arrangement shall be set forth in a contractual agreement and approved by the board of commissioners. The board shall review the manner in which any such contracted services are being performed on an annual basis when considering the levy to be made within the district. No contract shall be continued with any party not providing the required service which meets the expectation of the Brantley County Commission. 
(Res. of 5-13-2003(4), § 5; Res. of 9-14-2010, § 5) 
Secs. 74-276—74-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE SPECIAL FEE DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-281. - Creation. 
(a)  There is hereby created a special fee district within the county, which shall be known as the "county emergency medical service operation and maintenance special fee district", hereafter sometimes referred to as "the District". 
(b)  The boundaries of the "county emergency medical service operation and maintenance special fee district" shall be as follows: 
All of the real property lying, being and situate within the county wide geographical boundaries of Brantley County, Georgia, which shall include the incorporated and the unincorporated areas. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2012; Amend. of 8-8-2013, § 1, 2) 
Sec. 74-282. - Fees. 
All parcels of real property (excluding cemeteries) located and situated within the boundaries of the district, every residential structure being used as a residence or capable of being used as a residence which would include utilities, every commercial structure being used as a business or capable of being used as a business, or being used for storage or capable of being used for storage, every mobile home or mobile device or structure being used as a residence or capable of being used as a residence which would include utilities, and every parcel of 25 acres or more with no improvements thereon, shall be subject to the levying of an emergency medical operation and maintenance fee. The fee shall be set annually by the board of commissioners of the county and shall be a part of the annual the county real property and personal property tax notice from the office of the county tax commissioner, when possible or otherwise a supplement thereto. The initial emergency medical service operation and maintenance fee shall be as follows: for the year 2012 shall be $20.53 for every parcel in the district (excluding cemeteries); a fee of $75.70 for every commercial structure; a fee of $75.70 for every mobile home or mobile device or structure being used as a residence; and a fee of $75.70 for every parcel of 25 acres or more without any improvements thereon. 
All fees collected from the county emergency medical service operation and maintenance fee within the district shall be used and appropriated only, to pay for county operation and maintenance needs relating to the emergency medical service to the county's citizens within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2012; Amend. of 8-8-2013, §§ 3, 4) 
Sec. 74-283. - Contracts. 
The board of commissioners may, at the discretion of the board, upon a majority vote, enter into valid contracts with such entities that may provide technical assistance and/or services relating to the operation and maintenance of the emergency medical service in accordance with appropriate laws and regulations, and shall be able to charge the county for said technical assistance and/or services. Any such contract shall be set forth in a contractual written agreement, approved by a majority vote of the board of commissioners in a public meeting of the said board. The board of commissioners shall review the emergency medical service operation and maintenance needs on an annual basis when considering the annual fee to be imposed within the district. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2012; Amend. of 8-8-2013, § 5) 
Sec. 74-284. - Additional fees. 
Nothing herein shall require a fee to be levied within the district as this article allows the board of commissioners to set a fee on an annual basis for the categories of properties set out in section 74-283. However, should a fee be levied by the board on an annual basis within the district, the same must be used only for the operation and maintenance of the emergency medical service within the district as specifically set forth herein, and none of the fees collected may be appropriated for any other purposes. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2012; Amend. of 8-8-2013, § 6) 
Sec. 74-285. - Additional ad valorem tax. 
Any fees imposed within the district as contemplated by the terms of this article shall be due and payable on the same date as ad valorem taxes on real property and personal property taxes assessed in the county become due. If said fee or fees as may be applicable to a residential taxpayer, is not paid as to any of the particular categories heretofore set forth, the following shall be applicable: 
(1)  In the event that a taxpayer contends that the taxpayer's property does not meet the classification assignment of the respective fee at the time the taxpayer pays the real property taxes and/or personal property taxes to the office of the county tax commissioner, then at that time, the office of the county tax commissioner shall inform the taxpayer by a written notice that the taxpayer shall have 15 days from the date of the receipt of the written notice from the office of the county tax commissioner as provided in this paragraph, to file a written appeal to the county manager setting forth the particular basis of the taxpayer's objection to the payment of the fee or fees as the case may be. The notice form shall provide for written receipt signed by the taxpayer of the notice of the right to appeal the taxpayer's contention with regard to the property classification to the county manager. 
(2)  The county manager, upon receipt of a timely written appeal, shall review the written appeal, and within 15 days after the receipt of the said written appeal as measured from the county's date stamp reflecting the date of receipt of the written appeal, notify in writing the taxpayer by first class mail at the taxpayer's last known address, as to whether the appeal is allowed or denied. 
(3)  If the appeal is allowed, the taxpayer shall be relieved of the payment of the fee or fees as the case may be. 
(4)  If the appeal is denied, the written notice to the taxpayer as set out in paragraph (2) shall notify the taxpayer that the taxpayer shall have the right to request to meet with the county manager to review the taxpayer's appeal, which meeting shall be recorded for the record. At the end of the meeting with the county manager, the county manager shall, within five days of the said meeting, advise the taxpayer in writing by first class mail to the taxpayer's last known address of the county manager's decision as to the appeal. 
(5)  In the event the county manager shall determine, either initially upon the receipt of a written appeal or after the hearing as heretofore provided, that the taxpayer's appeal is denied and the fee or fees is payable, and if the taxpayer refuses to pay the fee or fees as are applicable, the county manager shall notify the county magistrate court of the taxpayer's refusal to pay and the taxpayer shall be fined the sum of $200.00 plus the payment of the court costs. The magistrate court shall notify the taxpayer in writing by first class mail at the taxpayer's last known address that if the fee or fees as may be applicable are not paid within ten days of the date of the notice, that the taxpayer shall be summoned to the magistrate court and subject to being fined the sum of $200.00) plus the court costs for the failure to pay the fee or applicable fees as provided pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2012; Amend. of 8-8-2013, § 7) 
Secs. 74-286—74-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENERGY EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 74-301. - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance, the terms: "dealer;" "energy;" "local sales and use tax;" and "purchaser" shall have the same meanings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 74-302. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-111, an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage, or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 74-303. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
(a)  Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the governing authority of Brantley County pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114 and as provided in this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rate of such excise tax shall be phased in over a four-year period as follows: 
(1)  For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 25 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 50 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)  For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 75 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)  On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 100 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2 (c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (b) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016 limitation in that paragraph (4). 
(d)  (1)  Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of Brantley County shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two percent. 
(2)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two percent to one percent, the rate of the excise tax under this ordinance shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(3)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one percent to two percent, the rate of the excise tax under this ordinance shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 74-304. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. §48-13-112(c), such excise tax shall be: 
(1)  Imposed only at the time sales and use tax on the sale or use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  Due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., except as other provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; 
(3)  A debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
(4)  Remitted to the governing authority of Brantley County by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
(5)  A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 74-305. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)  The governing authority of Brantley County, or the collecting officer appointed under section 74-308 of this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this ordinance. 
(b)  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. No penalty shall attach to such provider for failure to collect the excise tax under this ordinance when it has properly collected and remitted local sales and use taxes on such energy where the purchaser would have qualified for the uniform exemption certificate but failed to apply for such certificate or where the purchaser received such certificate but failed to file it with the energy provider. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 74-306. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this ordinance shall become effective on January 1, 2013, and shall be due and payable to the governing authority of Brantley County monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this ordinance during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 74-307. - Allocation, distribution, and expenditure of proceeds. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114 (b), the excise tax proceeds shall be allocated and distributed by the governing authority of Brantley County at the end of each calendar month. An amount equal to one percent of such proceeds collected by Brantley County shall be paid into the general fund of Brantley County to defray the costs of collection and administration. 
(b)  The remainder shall be distributed in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement as required under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114 (b) and (c). Within 30 days following the end of each calendar month, the remainder shall be distributed to the general fund of Brantley County and the general fund of each participating municipality in accordance with the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114 (c)(1) or (2) as follows: 
(1)  If two local sales and use taxes are in effect in the special district, an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds shall be distributed to the general fund of Brantley County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the first local sales and use tax and an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Brantley County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in such county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the second local sales and use tax; or 
(2)  If only one such local sales and use tax is in effect in the special district, then the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Brantley County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the local sales and use tax. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, proceeds of the excise tax deposited in the general fund of Brantley County may be expended for any lawful purpose as determined by the governing authority of Brantley County. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2012) 
Sec. 74-308. - Administrative provisions; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
(a)  The governing authority of Brantley County shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this ordinance. 
(b)  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this ordinance, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer, or the designee of the collecting officer, is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment,, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this ordinance. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2012) 
Chapter 78 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1—78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems by local governments, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq.; municipalities prohibited from granting franchise for cable television within unincorporated area of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3; avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-31. - Franchise necessary to operate business. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, to operate or attempt to operate any business or undertaking for the transmission by cable and distribution of television energy in the county without first obtaining a franchise from the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 78-32. - Granting of nonexclusive franchise. 
Any grant to a nonexclusive franchise to erect, maintain and operate in, over, along, across and upon the streets, roads, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges, highways and other public ways or appurtenance or portions thereof, together with any and all extensions and additions thereto, for the sole purpose of transmission of cable and distribution of television energy for sale to the inhabitants of the county, shall be substantially in the form set forth in division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1989, § 2) 
DIVISION 2. - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE FORM[3] 
Cable Television Franchise 
This Franchise Agreement made and entered into this ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ , by and between BRANTLEY COUNTY, GEORGIA, acting by and through its Board of Commissioners, hereinafter referred to as Franchiser, and ____________ its successors and assigns, hereinafter referred to as Franchise. 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the cable television franchise form which was adopted as part of the ordinance of 3-14-1989 which regulates cable television operations in the county. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. In order to facilitate indexing, catchlines have been added by the editor. 

Sec. 1. - Granting of rights. 
That for and in consideration of the faithful performance and observation of the conditions and reservations hereinafter specified, the right is hereby granted to Franchisee, its successors, assigns, designees, to erect, maintain and operate television transmission and distribution facilities and additions thereto in, under, over, along, across and upon the roads, streets, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges and other public rights-of-way in that portion of Brantley County, Georgia, set forth herein as the "Franchise area," which area is described in Schedule "A" attached hereto, for the purpose of transmission and distribution of television impulses and television energy for a period of twenty (20) years from the date hereof, with the right of Franchisee to renew this franchise for an additional ten (10) year term. 
Sec. 2. - Definition. 
Whenever used herein, the word television shall mean a system for transmission of audio signals and visual images by means of electrical impulses. 
Sec. 3. - Approval of proposal. 
As a condition precedent for the granting of this franchise, Franchisee shall present for approval by the County Commission, in a public meeting following notification of such meeting, its proposal for providing cable television service within the franchise area as well as documentation of its legal character, financial and technical qualifications for providing such service. 
Sec. 4. - Pole erection and maintenance. 
The poles used for Franchisee's distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by Georgia Power Company, Okefenokee Rural Electric Membership Corporation, and Southern Bell Telephone Company, when and where practicable. Provided mutually satisfactory rental agreements cannot be entered into with said companies following a good faith effort on the part of Franchisee to obtain such agreements, Franchisee shall have the right to erect and maintain its own poles as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the television distribution system, with the approval of locating such poles retained by the County Commission. Further, the Franchisee shall have the right to run its transmission cable underground along the roads, streets, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, and other such public rights-of-way of Brantley. 
Sec. 5. - Transmission and distribution equipment and appurtenances; location; erection; maintenance. 
Franchisee's transmission and distribution system poles, wires, and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so as not to interfere with the lives of persons or to interfere with new improvements this County may deem proper to make, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the roads, streets, alleys, bridges, and other public property. The removal of poles to avoid such interference will be at Franchisee's expense. Construction and maintenance of the transmission and distribution system, including house connections, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code, as amended, and such applicable laws, ordinances and regulations of the United States of America, State of Georgia, or the County of Brantley, affecting same, which may be presently in effect or hereafter made. 
Sec. 6. - Installation of house drop hardware. 
Installation of house drop hardware shall be uniform throughout the County except that Franchisee shall be free to change its hardware and installation procedure as the art progresses. 
Sec. 7. - Underground service wires. 
In those areas where telephone-electric service wires are underground, Franchisee shall place its cable and services lines underground. 
Sec. 8. - Consideration of public in maintenance and operation. 
In the maintenance and operation of its television transmission and distribution system in the roads, streets, alleys, and other public places and in the course of any new construction of any new construction of additions to its facilities, Franchisee shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public; any opening or obstruction in the roads, streets, or other public places made by Franchisee in the course of its operations shall be made only after having obtained prior written permission from the County to do so and shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences, or boardings, the bounds of which during period of dusk and darkness shall be clearly designated by appropriate warning lights. 
Sec. 9. - County-owned and/or County-controlled property. 
All work in any way necessitated by the business of Franchisee which may involve the opening, breaking or tearing up a portion of a road, street, sidewalk, or other part of County-owned or County-controlled property shall be done and repaired in the manner approved by the County Commission and may be done by the County at the expense of the cable operator if mutually agreed upon by the County Commission and Franchisee. 
Sec. 10. - Existing television reception. 
Installation shall be maintained so as not to interfere with television reception in existence. 
Sec. 11. - Forfeiture. 
The distribution system of Franchisee to be hereinafter installed shall not be abandoned, transferred or assigned, either in whole or in part, without the consent of the County Commissioners. In the event of the failure of Franchisee to commence construction of its cable system within 180 days after the granting of this franchise, or in the event of the failure of Franchisee to render cable television service (in this case, cable television service shall mean thirty (30%) percent of that portion of the county within the Franchise area, is receiving cable television on a regular basis) to the Franchise area and the inhabitants thereof as contemplated and provided for by this Franchise within a period of one year from the date construction begins, the County Commission may, after giving ninety (90) days notice to Franchisee, declare this franchise forfeited and/or require Franchisee to forfeit the surety bond required by Section 15 of this franchise agreement. Failure to comply by reason of circumstances beyond the reasonable control of Franchisee, which circumstances could not be anticipated at the time of acceptance of these terms shall not be sufficient grounds for the County to declare a forfeiture. 
Sec. 12. - Renewal at termination of franchise period. 
In the event Franchisee fails to renew its option at the termination of the franchise period, or in the event the franchise is forfeited due to the failure of Franchisee to fully comply with all terms and conditions of this agreement, or upon transfer or assignment of the franchise, the distribution system of Franchisee shall be placed up for sale at fair market value and the County of Brantley shall have first option of refusal on the purchase of the system. 
Sec. 13. - Protection; liabilities. 
Franchisee shall indemnify, protect and save harmless the County from and against all losses, physical damage to property, and bodily injury or death to persons including payments made under any worker's compensation law which may arise out of or be caused by the erection, maintenance, presence, use or removal of attachments on poles within the County of Brantley by any act of Franchisee. Franchisee shall carry insurance to protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities which may arise or result directly or indirectly from or by reason of such loss, injury, or damage. The amounts for such insurance against liability due to physical damage to property shall not be less than One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) as to any one accident and against liability due to bodily injury or to death of persons not less than Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00) as to any one accident. Franchisee shall also carry such insurance as is deemed necessary to protect it from all claims under any worker's compensation laws as may be applicable to Franchisee. All insurance required by this agreement shall be and remain in full force and effect for the entire life of this agreement. Said policy or policies of insurance or a certified copy thereof shall be submitted for approval by the County attorney and then kept on file by the County Clerk with a signed copy of this Franchise. 
Sec. 14. - County's use of poles. 
Franchisee hereby grants to the County free of any expense joint use of any and all poles owned by Franchisee for any legal County purpose insofar as it may be done without interfering with free use and enjoyment of Franchisee's own wires and fixtures and County shall hold Franchisee harmless from any and all action, causes of action or damage directly caused by the County's use of the poles of Franchisee. 
Sec. 15. - Surety bond. 
At the time this franchise becomes effective, Franchisee shall furnish a bond to the County in the amount of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) in such form with surety as shall be acceptable to the County, guaranteeing payment of all sums which may at any time become due from Franchisee to the County under the terms of this franchise (except such sums as are covered by the insurance provided in Section 13) and further guaranteeing the faithful performance of all the obligations of Franchisee under the terms of this franchise. 
Sec. 16. - Single outlet furnished to county; no charge. 
In consideration of the granting of this franchise to Franchisee as aforesaid, Franchisee will furnish without installation charge or monthly service fee a single outlet to the County, the specific location to be designated by the Commissioners within the Franchise area. 
Sec. 17. - Franchise fee. 
In further consideration of the granting of this franchise to Franchisee, Franchisee shall pay to Brantley County, no later than the 1st day of March each year following initiation of service, during the first ten (10) years of the Franchise an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the gross of all cable service revenues and 4 percent (4%) during the next ten (10) years of the franchise. Should Franchisee desire to exercise an option for renewal of additional years, then the franchise fee will be negotiated at that time. Revenues to include but not limited to subscriber revenues, advertising, pay cable, lease channel revenues, installation fees, disconnect and reconnect fees, and equipment rental of Franchisee derived from cable television operations within the Franchise area of Brantley County during the previous months. The County Commissioners shall have the right to inspect the records of Franchisee at any reasonable time for the purpose of ascertaining accurately what the actual gross receipts of Franchisee may have been for cable television service for past years and/or for the present year. 
Sec. 18. - Condition of installations. 
All installations by Franchisee shall be made in good, substantial and safe condition and shall be maintained in such condition at all times. Franchisee shall during each year of this agreement submit to the Board of Commissioners an annual performance report which shall be sufficient to ascertain Franchisee's compliance with F.C.C. technical standards and the quality of Franchisee's overall performance. Such report shall summarize all subscriber complaints and their resolution and said report shall be submitted to the County Commissioners on or before the regular Board of Commissioners meeting for the month of March of each year. 
Sec. 19. - Refusal of renewal; poor service. 
In the event such reports indicate that Franchisee is not providing a quality service consistent with F.C.C. rules or that subscriber complaints are so numerous or unresolved as to indicate a poor quality service, the County Commissioners may refuse to renew this Franchise with Franchisee. 
Sec. 20. - Annual financial report. 
Franchisee shall, during each year of this agreement, submit to the Board of Commissioners an annual financial report which shall be sufficient to ascertain the financial condition of Franchisee. Such report shall be submitted to the County Commissioners on or before the first day of June of each year. 
Sec. 21. - Compliance with regulations. 
Franchisee shall at all times be in full compliance with all F.C.C. regulations as amended pertaining to cable television systems. Franchisee shall furthermore at all times be in full compliance with all existing federal, state and local laws, ordinances, statutes as are applicable to the operation of a cable television system. No part of this agreement shall be construed as a waiver of any local, state or federal law or as a limit of liability. 
Sec. 22. - Proposal; compliance with terms. 
In addition to all rights, duties, obligations, and agreements contained in this franchise, Franchisee shall provide the Board of Commissioners with its cable service proposal which shall be attached to this agreement and Franchisee shall comply with each and every term and condition of the proposal in addition to the terms of this agreement, provided said terms of the proposal are not in conflict with provisions of this Franchise. Said proposal shall be incorporated herein by reference thereto and is expressly made a part hereof. 
APPROVED, ACCEPTED AND AGREED TO THIS ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 

 
SCHEDULE "A" 
The description of the geographical area of Brantley County in which the franchise is granted. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, Brantley County, Georgia, has caused its official hands and seal to be placed hereon the day and year first above written. 

 
Chapter 82 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, report of disposition, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; Parking Law for Persons with Disabilities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq.; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; sirens, whistles and bells prohibited on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70(b); responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in the O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
Sec. 82-2. - Speed detection devices. 
The board of commissioners approve and desire the procurement of and use of appropriate vehicle speed detection devices by the county sheriff's department. 
(Res. of 2-12-1985) 
Secs. 82-3—82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED ZONES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 82-31. - Schedule of speed zones. 
Any ordinance providing for a schedule of speed zones in the county is not repealed. 
Secs. 82-32—82-60. - Reserved. 
APPENDIX A - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the subdivision regulations of the county, as adopted by an ordinance of Sept. 14, 2010. Said ordinance of Sept. 14, 2010, repealed the subdivision ordinance adopted June 12, 2007, as amended by an ordinance adopted Feb. 12, 2008; an ordinance adopted June 10, 2008; an ordinance adopted July 8, 2008; and the former subdivision ordinance adopted Feb. 23, 2009. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; planning, ch. 32. 

ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Regulations of Brantley County, Georgia." 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
ARTICLE II. - AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT 
Article IX of The Constitution of the State of Georgia, 1976, grants authority to the governing body of each county and municipality to regulate subdivisions and land development. The Commissioners of Brantley County, pursuant to the authority conferred above, do ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
ARTICLE III. - JURISDICTION AND APPLICATION 
The jurisdiction of this Ordinance shall apply to all that unincorporated area within the boundaries of Brantley County and these regulations shall apply (except as specifically exempt herein) to the following forms of land subdivision: 
a)  The division of land into two (2) or more parcels, lots or tracts; any part which when subdivided shall contain less than three (3) acres in area, excluding burial plots in a cemetery. 
b)  The dedication, vacation, reservation or improvement of any public or private access easement or right-of-way through any tract of land regardless of the area involved. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
ARTICLE IV. - PURPOSES 
The various articles and sections of the Ordinance are adopted for the following purposes, among others: 
a)  To help conserve and protect the natural, economic, and scenic resources of Brantley County. 
b)  To help prevent and reduce the traffic congestion and traffic hazards which result from narrow or poorly aligned streets, and which result from excessive entrance and exit points along major traffic arteries. 
c)  To help eliminate the costly maintenance problems which develop when streets and lots are laid out without proper consideration being given to the drainage characteristics of the tract of land at the time the land is being subdivided into streets and lots. 
d)  To help insure that residential lots will be of such design, area, and width as will prevent health and sanitation problems from developing in those subdivisions with lots to be served by individual water supply and waste disposal systems. 
e)  To help insure that all building lots will be accessible to firefighting equipment, and other emergency and service vehicles. 
f)  To help protect the investments of the buyers of subdivision lots. 
g)  To help promote the health, safety, prosperity, and welfare of the citizens of Brantley County, and for other purposes. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
ARTICLE V. - DEFINITION OF TERMS 

Sec. 501. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows. 
Interpretation of Words - words used in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
Average Daily Traffic (ADT): The number of trips generated during a twenty-four hour period by the total number of residential units having access to the street. Ten (10) trips per day per residential unit shall be used for design purposes in this Ordinance. 
Bonds: Any form of security including a cash deposit, security bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Brantley County Board of Commissioners. (All instruments of surety shall be reviewed by the County Attorney and approved by the Board of Commissioners wherever a bond is required by these regulations.) 
Buffer: Land area used to visibly separate one use from another or to shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. 
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
Building Official: The person designated by the Brantley County Board of Commissioners to enforce the Brantley County Subdivision Regulations, and at such time as the Commissioners adopt Zoning Ordinance. 
Central Sewage System: A community sewage system including collection and treatment facilities serving more than one (1) lot in a subdivision. Central Water System: A community water system including treatment and distribution facilities serving more than one (1) lot in a subdivision. 
Commercial Development: any land development activity except development intended solely for residential or industrial use. 
Planning Director: The person charged with administrative leadership by Brantley County regarding this, and other development related laws, by whatever name he/she is called or designee. 
County: The governing authority of Brantley County that is the Brantley County Board of Commissioners or any duly authorized representative, Delegate, or appointee thereof 
County Attorney: The licensed attorney designated by the Brantley County Board of Commissioners to furnish legal assistance for the administration of these regulations. 
County Engineer: A qualified designee of the Brantley County Board of Commissioners. 
Development: The performance of any building or mining operation, the making of any material change in the use of any structure or land, or the division of land into two (2) or more parcels, lots, building sites or units. 
Easement: A grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specified purpose or purposes for the general public, corporation or a certain person(s). 
Engineer: A professional engineer properly registered to practice in the State of Georgia. 
Final Plat: A complete and exact subdivision plat prepared for official recording of that subdivision in accordance with the Plat Laws of the State of Georgia. 
Flag Lot: A lot fronting on a public or private street which is reached via an access strip having a minimum frontage and width of twenty five feet (25'). A flag lot shall meet all requirements of these regulations. 
Health Department: The agency designated by the State of Georgia and the Brantley County Board of Commissioners to administer the health regulations of Brantley County. 
Improvements: Those physical additions and changes to the land that may be necessary to produce useable and desirable lots. 
Individual Sewage Disposal System: A septic tank and seepage tile sewage disposal system or any other approved sewage treatment device for one (1) lot. 
Land Surveyor: A land surveyor properly registered to practice in the State of Georgia. 
Land-disturbing Activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices. 
Lot: A portion of a subdivision intended as a unit for transfer or for development, or both. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel". All lots must have a minimum road frontage of at least forty (40) feet. 
Lot, Double Frontage: A lot with frontage on two (2) streets, at a point other than at their intersection, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot Width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the required minimum front setback line in that district provided that on a curve in the street the lot width measured along the minimum setback line is not less than 80% of the required lot width in the district. In the case of lots on the turning circle of a cul-de-sac, the width shall not be less than 60% of the required lot width in the district. See Section 603.1 (e) for lot width requirements for flag lots. 
Master Plan: A comprehensive plan for development. 
Mobile Home: A transportable, single-family structure intended for permanent occupancy contained in one unit, or if two units designed to be joined into one integral unit, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor assembly, and constructed so that it may be used with or without a permanent foundation. For the purposes of the Ordinance, a distinction is made between a double-wide unit mounted on a permanent foundation and a single-wide. 
Mobile Home Park: An undivided parcel of land under single management which is used or intended to be used for the rental or lease of spaces or lots and the provision of services for two or more mobile homes. Also as defined by existing ordinances of the county. 
Mobile Home Space: A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home. 
Mobile Home Subdivision: A subdivision for mobile homes. 
Person: The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, or partnership. 
Plat: A map or drawing upon which the plan of the subdivision is presented for approval. 
Preliminary Plat: A tentative subdivision plat, indicating approximate proposed layout of a subdivision submitted with supporting documentation for consideration and approval prior to preparation of the final plat. 
Private Sewage System: A sewage system including collection and treatment facilities that is owned, maintained and operated by a community corporation, landowners association, or the developer serving more than one (1) lot and approved by the Environmental Protection Division, Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Private Water System: A water system including treatment and distribution facilities owned, maintained and operated by a community corporation, landowners association, or the developer serving more than one (1) lot and approved by the Environmental Protection Division, Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Public Sewage System: A sewage system including collection and treatment facilities that is owned, maintained and operated by the County or a municipality and serving more than one (1) lot and approved by the Environmental Protection Division, Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Public Water System: A water system including treatment and distribution facilities that is owned, maintained and operated by the County or a municipality serving more than one lot and approved by the Environmental Protection Division, Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Reserved Strip: A small strip of land between the terminus of a platted street right-of-way and the plat boundary where ownership could be retained by the subdivider which would prevent the extension of said street into adjacent property. 
Right-of-Way: Access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose or purposes. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
Right-of-Way Line: The outside boundaries of a highway or street right-of-way, which are established by recorded easement, deed, or dedication and official acceptance. 
Screening. A strip of densely planted shrubs or trees at least three feet (3') wide and three feet (3') in height at the time of planting, or a ten foot (10) wide naturally vegetated buffer strip, or an opaque wall or barrier of uniform material at least six feet (6) in height. Screening should be maintenance free or set back from the property line to allow access for maintenance. 
Shall: The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
Street: An opened and improved public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street(s), Private: Any street, road, lane, way or thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property and has not been formally dedicated to and is not maintained by Brantley County. Private streets shall meet minimum standards for public streets. 
Street(s), Public: Any street, road, lane, way or thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property and which has been formally dedicated to and accepted by the Brantley County Board of Commissioners. Maintenance in the form of upkeep, grading, usage or assumption of said road is not assumed unless such road is shown on an official Brantley County Public Road Map or other such catalog of public streets. 
Street(s), Arterial: Those streets which are designated as arterials on the major thoroughfare plan and which are used or intended primarily for fast or heavy traffic. 
Street(s), Collector: Those streets which carry traffic from minor or sub collector streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways and those streets serving commercial and industrial areas. Collector streets should be designed to have limited residential frontage. 
Street, Lane(s): Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Street(s), Marginal Access: Those minor and sub collector streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties, and protection from through traffic. 
Street(s), Minor: Those streets which are used primarily for access to abutting residential property and are designed to carry no more traffic than that which is generated on the street itself. Minor streets should be designed to convey an average daily traffic (ADT) volume not greater than 250 for cul-de-sacs and 500 for loop streets. 
Street(s), Subcollector: Those streets which are used for access to abutting residential property and also conduct traffic from minor streets that intersect it. Subcollector streets should be designed to convey an average daily traffic (ADT) volume not greater than 1,500. Residential streets that can be used as through streets between collector and arterial streets shall be classified as collector streets. 
Street Centerline: That line surveyed and monumented by the governing body shall be the centerline of a street, or in the event that no centerline has been so determined, it shall be that line running midway between, and parallel to the general direction of the outside right-of-way lines of such streets. 
Subdivider: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his designated representative. Written consent shall be required from the legal owner(s) of the property. 
Subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of immediate or future sale, legacy, gift, or building development; all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets. The term includes the resubdivision of land and when appropriate to the context relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
Utility Manager: The person charged with administrative leadership regarding utilities by whatever name he/she is called or designee thereof. 
Waterbody: Any natural or artificial waterway, stream, lake, slough, pond, channel, swamp, or marsh in which water stands or flows either continuously or intermittently including any adjacent bank which is subject to inundation by reason of overflow or pond water. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
ARTICLE VI. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 601. - Minimum design standards and improvements. 
In order that the various purposes of this Ordinance may be accomplished, all subdivisions hereafter established and all proposed public improvements in existing subdivisions shall be developed and improved in accordance with the minimum design standards set forth in this article. Final approval shall not be given to a subdivision until all appropriate design standards have been met and until all appropriate required improvements have either been installed or an appropriate bond, certified check, or contract (performance) bond has been posted to secure the installation of such improvements. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 602. - Streets. 
All streets which shall hereafter be established in connection with the development of a subdivision as defined by this Ordinance or unopened streets or rights-of-way within a previously established subdivision shall comply with the following design standards. 
602.1 Address Numbering System. All subdivision plats shall be provided with an address numbering system suitable for use by the U. S. Postal Service and which is compatible with any other system in the surrounding area. This system shall be reviewed and approved by the County and placed on a reproducible mylar copy of the final plat before final plat approval. 
602.2 General Provisions. The following general provisions shall apply to all streets hereafter established in a subdivision. 
a)  Continuance of Existing Street Pattern. The arrangement of streets in a subdivision should provide for the alignment with, or the continuation of, or the appropriate projection of existing major streets in surrounding areas as shown on the Brantley County road classification map. 
b)  Street Jogs. Street jogs, or center-line offsets in the horizontal alignment of streets across intersections of less than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be prohibited. 
c)  Intersections. The center-line of no more than two (2) street rights-of-way shall intersect at any one point. Streets shall be laid out so as the right-of-way center-lines will intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and not less than eighty degrees (80) for a minimum distance of seventy-five feet (75'). 
d)  Distances Between Intersections. New street entrances on streets designated or classified as arterial streets shall not be less than six hundred sixty feet (660') apart from any other new or existing street intersecting with the arterial street from either side. In the case of divided arterial streets, this distance requirement will not apply to streets on opposite sides if a median cut is not included. New street entrances on streets designated or classified as collector streets shall not be less than four hundred fifty feet (450') apart from any other new or existing street intersecting with the collector street from either side. Distances between street intersections shall be measured between right-of-way center-lines. 
e)  Subdivisions on Arterial Streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the County may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property lines, deep lots with rear service lanes, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
f)  Minimum Curb and Edge of Pavement Radius. Minimum curb or edge of pavement radius shall be determined prior to preliminary plat approval according to the specifications for the street of higher classification at the intersection as specified as below: Minor Street 20 Feet; Sub-collector Street 25 Feet; Collector Street 25 Feet & Higher Order Streets As determined by the County Engineer. 
g)  Permanent Dead-End Streets. Dead-end streets, designed to be permanent cul-de-sacs, shall not be longer than one thousand two hundred (1,200) linear feet measured from the center-line of the nearest intersecting street to the center of the turnaround. Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside paving edge radius of not less than forty feet (40') and an inside paving edge radius of not less than twelve feet (12') and not greater than twenty-eight feet (28'), and a right-of-way radius of not less than fifty feet (50') with a roadside ditch that is less than 1 foot in depth, fifty-five feet (55) with a 1 -2 foot deep roadside ditch, sixty feet (60') with a 2-3 foot deep roadside ditch and if there is a ditch of three feet (3') or greater in depth the right-of-way radius is to be determined by the County Engineer, except where such street serves two (2) lots or less. The paving edge equivalent for unpaved streets is eleven feet (11') right and left of the roadbed centerline. Exception: Cut-de-sacs designed with traffic islands shall have a maximum inside pavement radius of thirty-six feet (36') and a minimum outside pavement radius of fifty feet (50'). In no case shall the travel lane around the traffic island be less than 14' in width. The right-of-way radius shall be a minimum of sixty feet (60'). 
h)  Temporary Dead-End Streets. Temporary dead-end streets shall meet the requirements of the County for design, maintenance and removal. 
i)  Half-Streets. Half-streets or streets with a right-of-way less than fifty feet (50') shall not be permitted within a subdivision. 
j)  Interior Streets. Interior streets within subdivisions shall be so laid out and designed that their use by through traffic and speeding traffic will be discouraged. 
k)  Street Names. All streets within a subdivision hereafter established shall be named in compliance with the existing addressing ordinance. 
l)  Additional Right-of-Way. Any proposed subdivision or public improvement that includes a platted street that does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of this Ordinance shall provide for the dedication of additional right-of-way along either one or both sides of said street so that the minimum right-of-way required by the Ordinance can be established. If the proposed subdivision abuts only one side of said street, then a minimum of one-half of the required extra right-of-way shall be dedicated or reserved by such subdivision. 
m)  Traffic Control Devices. Street name markers and such signs, signals and pavement markers, as needed for safety purposes and as determined by the County, shall be provided in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Georgia Department of Transportation. All traffic control devices shall be provided by the developers and installed by the County Public Works Department prior to final inspection and approval by the County Engineer for all improvements. 
n)  Major Thoroughfare Plan. When the major thoroughfare plan of the community shows proposed arterial streets and collector streets within a proposed subdivision, the subdividers shall design the street system within such subdivision to conform with the location and arrangement of such arterial and collector streets. 
o)  Distance Between Reverse Curves. Major Arterial 100 Feet; Minor Arterial 100 Feet; Collector Street 100 Feet; Sub-collector Street 75 Feet and Minor Street zero (0) Feet. 
p)  Drainage. Curbs, inlets, swales, ditches, pipes, etc., shall be engineered and constructed as required within the County Stormwater Management Ordinance and Local Design Manual. (Effective September 14, 2010) 
q)  Removal of Trees. Trees may be retained in the right-of-way provided that the nearest edge of the trunk is not closer than eight feet (8) from the paving edge or nineteen feet (19) from the center-line of an unpaved street provided additional right-of-way or easement shall be provided if needed to allow the construction and maintenance of proper ditches. Exceptions from the eight foot (8) or nineteen foot (19) requirement may be made for specimen or unique trees as determined by the County Engineer. Vertical clearance of all limbs shall be sixteen feet (16) above the roadbed surface. Where the right-of-way width is enlarged or widened to accommodate landscaping, screening or specimen trees, the amount of excess of the required right-of-way may be used in the computation of open space in that subdivision. 
r)  Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. Any development subject to the provisions of the NPDES Construction Permits shall submit a copy of the approved Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan and Notice of Intent for coverage as a part of the filing of the construction plans or the site plans when they are required. 
s)  Subdivision of Property Along State Highways. The Department of Transportation must approve all access roads or drives for property fronting on a State Highway, when the property is subdivided for any reason whatsoever. Two (2) copies of the proposed subdivision plat shall be submitted, by the applicant to the Department of Transportation prior to the plat being submitted to the Planning Commission. No action shall be taken by the County until the Department of Transportation has granted approval of the access and has submitted such approval in writing to the County. 
602.3 Design Standards for Unpaved Minor Streets. all unpaved minor streets which require roadside ditches for proper drainage (see h, below for streets that do not require roadside ditches) shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following minimum specifications and standards. Brantley County shall not accept any right-of-way for unpaved streets, and any unpaved streets shall remain in private ownership until such time as they are paved in accordance with the standards of this ordinance. (Effective September 14, 2010) 
a)  Shall meet all requirements of Section 902. 
b)  Minimum right-of-way required where roadside ditches are required shall be sixty feet (60'), thirty feet (30') right and left of the roadbed center-line. 
c)  Roadbed width shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30'), fifteen feet (15') right and left of the center-line with a minimum crown of ¼" per foot to center-line. Travel lanes shall have a minimum width of twenty-two feet (22'), eleven feet (11') right and left of the center-line with grassed shoulders with a minimum ratio of 3:1. Roadside ditches shall have a flat bottom with a minimum width of twenty-four inches (24"). All back slopes where required will consist of a minimum slope ratio of 2:1. 
d)  Stabilization requirements of travel lanes shall be based on the County Engineer's recommendation as to the type and amount. The recommendation shall be based on the consideration of the type of soils, drainage, estimated traffic volumes and types and surrounding topography, 
e)  All drainage culverts for unpaved county streets shall be of material specifications according to the Department of Transportation, State of Georgia. This is required due to ditch maintenance activity. Also a minimum of 1' - 0" cover on all pipes. 
f)  The grassing requirement will be determined by the County Engineer or as otherwise required. 
g)  All unpaved County streets that tie into paved streets shall require ramp paving of a minimum of twenty-two feet (22') in width and twenty-four feet (24') in length in accordance with minimum paving requirements of this Ordinance. 
h)  Other streets that do not require roadside ditches shall comply with all requirements except that of ditch widths and back slope regulations. 
602.4 Design Standards for Paved Streets. All paved streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following minimum specifications and standards: 
a)  Minimum Right-of-Way Width. 

 
* At the discretion of the County Engineer, the minimum right-of-way width for collector, sub-collector and minor streets may be reduced by ten feet (10) by providing curb and gutter on each side of the paving edge or an equally acceptable engineering design method with a proper design and installation of catch basins, drop inlets and pipe culverts to provide for storm water run-off. 
b)  Minimum Pavement Width. 

 
** The developer will be required to pave only 2 lanes unless the increasing design traffic volumes generated by the development will exceed the 2-lane capacity within one year. Acceleration, deceleration, and turning lanes will be required where it is determined to be necessary by the County Engineer. 

 
c)  Width of Shoulder. 

 
d)  County-Wide Minimum Paving Requirements (Asphalt). 
Stabilized Subgrade —The top twelve inches (12") of the subgrade shall be compacted to one hundred percent (100%) standard proctor density. All embankments shall be placed in six inch (6") layers. Tests for compaction shall be located no more than five hundred feet (500') apart and staggered to the right and left and on the center-line. Test reports shall be supplied by the developer to the County Engineer. 
Pavement Structure Design —The pavement structure shall be specified in accordance with the following requirements: 
Base Course. Minimum thickness six inches (6") of crushed limerock or graded aggregate, or a sufficient thickness of other material to provide an equivalent total structural capacity, shall be required for all streets. Also the required compaction of base course is ninety-eight percent (98%) standard proctor density. Tests for thickness and compaction to be located no more than five hundred feet (500') apart staggered to right and left and on center-line. 
Prime. All bases shall be primed with a suitable grade of bituminous prime at the rate of 0.15 or 0.30 gallon per square yard and cured a minimum of three (3) days under traffic before the surface course is placed. Areas subject to picking-up shall be sanded with a blotter sand before traffic is allowed on it. Prime is not required if surface course is placed within three (3) days after the base course is in place. 
Surface Course. Flexible asphaltic concrete type pavements minimum thickness one and one-half inches (1.5") (GA DOT 9.5mm or 12.5mm Mix). 
Note: All materials and construction to conform with Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, the latest edition. Brantley County reserves the right to require a thicker base & paving section if traffic or field conditions warrant. 
e)  County-Wide Minimum Paving Requirements (Concrete). 
Stabilized Subgrade —The top twelve inches (12") of the subgrade shall be compacted to one hundred percent (100%) standard proctor density. All embankment shall be placed in six inch (6") layers. Tests for compaction shall be located no more than five hundred feet (500') apart and staggered to the right and left and on the center-line. Test reports shall be supplied to the County Engineer. Composition requirements of the subgrade are to be determined by the soil survey and DOT specifications. 
Pavement Structure Design —All materials including cement, concrete aggregates, expansion joint material, curing compound, air-entraining admixtures and others shall conform to the latest revised standard specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). Concrete shall also be manufactured and delivered in accordance with ASTM standards. If it can be shown that adequate strength, surface finish, and durability can be obtained on a consistent basis with mix designs other than those specified by ASTM, such designs can be used upon approval from the County Engineer. 
Surface Course. Concrete shall be placed, struck oft, consolidated, finished to grade, jointed and properly cured as specified by the County Engineer. Minimum thickness for minor streets shall be five inches (5"). Thickness of other street classifications shall be based on anticipated traffic volumes and be approved by the County Engineer. 
Open To Traffic. The pavement shall be closed to passenger car traffic for at least three (3) full days or until such time that the minimum compressive strength of the concrete is at least 75% of its design strength. Traffic shall be restricted to passenger cars and light trucks for at least seven (7) days after concrete is placed. In all cases approval shall be obtained from the County Engineer prior to opening of the pavement to traffic. 
Note: Detailed specifications will be submitted by the developer to the County Engineer for consideration. 
602.5 Private Streets. Private streets are permitted within the County under the following conditions: 
a)  Private streets shall meet the procedural requirements of this Ordinance regarding preliminary and final plat. 
b)  Private streets in subdivisions shall be opened and improved according to the design standards established for public streets. 
c)  All private streets and street name markers shall be maintained by the owners of the property within such subdivisions and the County have no responsibility whatsoever for their maintenance and repair until and unless improved to County street standards and dedicated and accepted by the County Commission. 
d)  Private streets shall always provide access to police, fire, ambulance, and other vehicles of all government agencies. 
602.6 Private Access Easements. Private access easements serving six (6) lots or less (excluding those serving a lot split) shall meet the following minimum design standards: 
a)  Minimum easement width shall be wide enough to contour the entire road cross section from back of ditch to back of ditch - round up to next five feet (5'). 
b)  Maintained roadbed with a minimum width of twenty feet (20'); and 
c)  Well drained. 
602.7 Lanes. Service lanes shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the County may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. Such lanes shall conform to the following specifications: 
a)  The width of a lane shall be twenty feet (20'). 
b)  Dead-end lanes shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable a dead-end lane shall be provided with a turn-around having a diameter of not less than eighty feet (80'). 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 603. - Lots. 
All lots which shall hereafter be established within a subdivision shall comply with the following design standards: 
603.1 General Provisions. The following general requirements shall apply to all lots hereafter established within a subdivision. 
a)  Orientation of Lot Lines. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street right-of-way lines, or radial to street right-of-way curves or cul-de-sac turnarounds. 
b)  Corner Lots. Corner lots for residential use shall be provided with sufficient width and depth to permit the establishment of appropriate building setback lines from both streets. 
c)  Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots shall only be permitted where it shall be found necessary to separate a development from major arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages to topography and orientation. 
d)  Minimum Lot Elevation. Elevations of lots within flood prone areas as defined officially by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and Brantley County shall conform to the requirements established for development within the established boundaries. 
e)  Flag Lots. Flag lots shall be permitted under the following conditions: 
1.  Location in New Minor Subdivisions (Section 801.1, 1. and 3. of these regulations) and not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total number of created lots. 
2.  Located in New Major Subdivisions and not to Exceed 10% of the total number of created lots. 
3.  Where the flag lot makes it possible to better utilize irregularly shaped properties or areas with resource limitations. 
4.  Access strips having a minimum frontage of twenty-five feet (25') on an approved public or private right-of-way. 
5.  Minimum lot size, excluding the area of the access strip, to be the minimum lot size requirement of the Brantley County Minimum lot size ordinance. 
6.  No building shall be permitted in the access strip. 
7.  Lot width, front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the Brantley County Ordinance to be met on that portion of the lot excluding the access strip. 
8.  Where flag lots are used to eliminate and not substantially increase the number of access points to collector or arterial streets. 
9.  Where flag lots would front on State owned highways the proposed subdivision shall be approved by Georgia DOT for the increase in curb cuts prior to being submitted to the County. 
10.  Where flag lots would front on County owned streets the proposed subdivision shall be reviewed by the County Traffic Safety Engineer to determine if there is any potential hazard created by an increase in the number of access points on County streets. 
603.2 Lot Width and Lot Area Requirements. Lots hereafter established within subdivisions shall conform to the lot area and lot width requirements set forth in the following schedule, which are subject to approval by the Brantley County Health Department or the Environmental Protection Division, but cannot be less than the following: 

 
Minimum Lot width shall be where dwelling and/or septic system are located. Where a central water system or central sewage system is proposed, approval by the appropriate regulatory body, either the Brantley County Health Department or the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, will be required. 
603.3 Building Lines. Building setbacks shall be provided on lots and shall conform to any applicable ordinance of the county, but in no case shall be less than 25' from a public or private street and 10' from back and sides lines. Setback lines shall be shown on odd shaped lots. 
603.4 Debris and Waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, expiration of the performance bond or acceptance of public improvements, whichever occurs first. 
603.5 Natural Waterbodies and Watercourses. If a tract being subdivided contains a waterbody, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the waterbody among the adjacent lots. The County may approve an alternate plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the waterbody is to be placed that it will not become a County responsibility. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert, bridge, or other structure of a design approved by the County Engineer. 
603.6 Building Permits. No building permits shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot created following the enactment of this Ordinance which does not comply with the requirements established herein and unless the street giving access to the lot upon which the building is proposed to be placed has been accepted, opened as, or shall have otherwise received the status of a public street or an officially approved private recorded easement. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 604. - Blocks. 
All blocks hereafter established within a subdivision shall conform to the following design standards: 
604.1 Block Lengths. In order that there may be convenient access between various parts of a subdivision and between the subdivision and surrounding areas in order to help prevent traffic congestion and traffic hazards, the length of blocks on a straightaway where feasible shall not exceed one thousand eight hundred feet (1,800') in length. 
604.2 Crosswalks. Rights-of-way for pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided when in the opinion of the Planning Commission crosswalks are necessary to give a direct pedestrian approach to schools, local shopping centers, and parks. Said rights-of-way shall not be less than ten feet (10') in width. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 605. - Easements. 
The following easements shall be required within subdivisions: 
605.1 Utility Easements. A ten foot (10') utility easement shall be provided on both sides of street rights-of-way within a subdivision. This easement area shall only be used for water, sewer, electric, telephone and television cable lines where there is not sufficient area within the right-of-way. The easement area shall be kept free of fences, screens or other permanent structures. Refer to Figure 5 in Appendix A for placement of utilities. 
605.2 Drainage. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose of drainage and maintenance, taking into account possible future development of higher land in the same drainage area. No fences, screens, or permanent structures shall be erected or placed on or within any drainage easement. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 606. - Utilities. 
All utilities shall conform to the following requirements: 
606.1 (Reserved). 
606.2 Private or Individual Water and Sewer Systems. Where either public water or public sewers or both are determined by the County Commission not available to a subdivision, and a subdivider shall decide to establish a private water supply system and a private sewer system or allow individual systems then plans and specifications for such private or individual water and sewage systems shall be approved by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or the Brantley County Health Department, where appropriate, and shall be so installed as to simplify later connection to public utility systems, where determined to be appropriate by the County Commission or its designee. 
606.3 Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions to be served by a public water system, and when determined by the County Engineer for subdivisions served by private water systems. As required by the International Fire Code and as adopted by the Brantley County Board of Commissioners, fire hydrants shall be located no more than five hundred feet (500') apart and within five hundred feet (500') of any structure and shall be on an minimum six inch (6") water line main with a residual pressure of 20 psi. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all other supply improvements shall be installed and approved by the County Engineer before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat. Do you want a requirement for dry hydrants? 
606.4 Tracer Wire. Tracer wire or tape, as approved by the County Engineer, shall be placed with all buried nonmetallic utility lines (trunk lines and lateral service lines) and underground irrigation systems. 
606.5 Street Lighting. Street lights shall be required at new street entrances on streets designated or classified as arterial streets where the ADT generated by the new street is two hundred (200) or more. Street lights shall also be required at new street entrances on streets designated or classified as collector streets where the ADT generated by the new street is nine hundred (900) or more. Street lights shall be provided by the developer and installed by the developer in accordance with design and specification standards approved by the County Traffic Safety Engineer. Street lights shall be in place prior to final inspection and approval by the County Engineer for all improvements. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 607. - Subdivision corner tie. 
All subdivision plats shall show the direction and distance from a point of reference to a point on the boundary of the subdivision as per the Georgia Plat Act. If a National Geodetic Survey monument is within two thousand feet (2,000') of any point of the subdivision boundary or any point of reference shown thereon, at least two (2) permanent monuments within the subdivision shall show State Plane Coordinates. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 608. - Property pins. 
One-half inch (½") iron pins shall be placed at all block intersection points, points of curvature, points of tangency of all rights-of-way, and at all angle points of the subdivision boundary. Iron pins shall be placed at all other lot concerns. Monuments shall be installed following completion of all improvements and shall be identified on the final plat. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 609. - Benchmarks. 
At least two (2) permanent benchmarks shall be established within a subdivision or in each phase of a subdivision and located so that no lot is more than one thousand feet (1,000') from a benchmark. Permanent benchmarks shall be placed in the following locations: 
a.  In paved streets, offset from the center-line approximately halfway between the center-line and the pavement edge in a cast iron "water main valve" type box with an adjustable cover flush to the pavement (refer to Figure 6 in Appendix A). 
b.  In permanent open space areas or parks. 
c.  Other locations as approved by the County Engineer. 
All benchmarks shall be identified on the final plat with location, elevations and reference to the source of original elevation with all pertinent data. If the final plat is approved and recorded prior to the completion of all improvements, a reproducible mylar copy of the final plat shall be submitted to the County with the benchmark data following the completion of all improvements which will maintain the same. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 610. - Civic space. 
Civic space is defined as any portion of a subdivision, outside of the road and utility right-of-way) that has been set aside for the common use of the residents of the development, or for the use of the community as a whole if so designated. Common uses may include stormwater facilities, recreational amenities, or open space. If Civic Space is included within a development, it shall be in single ownership, and shall not be divided among the constituent lots of the subdivision. (Effective September 14, 2010) 
610.1 Maintenance of Civic Space. The applicant shall develop a plan for ongoing maintenance any Civic Space. Such plan shall be approved by the County and filed with the Final Plat of the subdivision. The Maintenance Plan is intended to ensure the long-term maintenance of civic space and common facilities installed on a development site. This section should be used to: 1) ensure that maintenance agreements are recorded, 2) ensure that easements for maintenance and access are platted, and 3) establish maintenance requirements. The plan shall include the following information: 
A.  Identification of a party responsible for the ongoing ownership and maintenance of the civic space. 
B.  Maintenance activities for the civic space and all facilities contained therein that are part of the common elements of the development site; 
C.  If the responsible party is a homeowners association, the plan shall state that membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners or unit owners of the development site and their successors and the plan shall be included as part of the Covenants of that development; 
D.  An estimate of the potential cost of the maintenance activities; 
E.  A statement that, to the extent permitted by law, the responsible party shall not abandoned the site or enter into voluntary dissolution (if a homeowners association) unless responsibility for the civic space is transferred to an appropriate successor. 
In lieu of a maintenance plan, Brantley County may accept the dedication of any existing or future civic space for maintenance, provided that such space meets all of the requirements of this ordinance and all other applicable ordinances, is in proper working order at the time of dedication and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area for access and regular maintenance. Such adequate and perpetual access shall be accomplished by granting of an easement to Brantley County or through a fee simple dedication to Brantley County. (Effective September 14, 2010) 
610.2 Failure to Maintain. If the responsible party fails or refuses to meet the terms and conditions of an approved maintenance plan and/or the requirements of this ordinance, Brantley County, after thirty (30) days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation by performing the work necessary to place the civic space in proper working condition. Brantley County may assess the responsible party for the cost of the repair work, which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes by Brantley County. (Effective September 14, 2010) 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
ARTICLE VII. - SUBDIVISION PLATS 

Sec. 701. - General contents of plats and plans. 
The Subdivision Preliminary Plat, the Subdivision Construction Plan and the Subdivision Final Plat along with the supporting documentation constitute the legal and technical data required to confirm compliance with the County Ordinances and to allow recording of land ownership information. Plats are prepared to describe the layout of the property, including but not limited to parcel boundaries, rights-of-way, easements, setbacks, and buffers as well as to identify the current property owner. The construction plan is prepared to describe the physical improvements, including pavements, utilities and storm drainage facilities which will be needed to support the proposed subdivision or land development. Preliminary Plats, Construction Plans and Final Plats shall be submitted as separate documents. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 702. - Preliminary plat. 
The Subdivider shall submit five copies of a Preliminary Plat. Submittal and review shall be as provided in the Development Procedures Manual. The following documentation shall accompany said Preliminary Plat: (0-2002-13, 7/18/2002) 
1.  A completed preliminary plat application form and checklist. 
2.  Documentation and confirmation of property ownership. 
3.  Site Analysis Map (Effective September 14, 2010). 
4.  A copy of the submitted plat in the eleven inch by seventeen-inch (11 " X 17") format. Scale may be reduced as necessary to fit this format. As an alternative 20 copies of the final revision of the Preliminary Plat may be submitted. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 703. - Preliminary plat requirements. 
The Preliminary Plat shall consist of a map or maps, drawn at a scale of not less than one inch in two hundred feet, depicting the following: 
1.  The proposed name of the subdivision and proposed street names which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate phonetically the name of other subdivisions or streets in Brantley County. If shown to the contrary, the County or Geographic Information System (GIS) office may refuse to accept such subdivision and street names. Must indicate whether the streets are to be public or private. 
2.  Name and address and telephone number of the owner of record. 
3.  Name, address, and telephone number of the Subdivider. 
4.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of data, date of plat drawing, and space for revision dates. 
5.  Preliminary Plat Certificates and Statements as follows: 
a)  Certificate of Preliminary Design. 
I hereby certify that the preliminary plat and layout of the proposed lots, blocks, streets, and other features included in this proposed Preliminary Plat have been prepared by me or under my direct supervision. 
By: ____________ Land Surveyor No. _____ 
  
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
b)  Certificate of Preliminary Plat Approval. 
All requirements of the Brantley County Subdivision Regulations relative to the preparation and submittal of Preliminary Plat have been fulfilled, approval of this plat is hereby granted, subject to further provisions of said regulations. 
This Certificate shall expire ____________ / ____________ / ____________ (date). 
  
____________ / ____________ / ____________  Date of Approval 
  

 
PRELIMINARY PLAT DO NOT RECORD 
6.  A vicinity map locating the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well known landmarks such as major streets and thoroughfares, rail road rights-of-way, rivers, streams and other named bodies water. Vicinity maps may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not smaller than one inch to one mile. 
7.  Name of former subdivision(s), if any, 
8.  Exact boundary lines of the tract or parcel to be subdivided, indicated by a heavy line giving length and bearings, and total subdivision land area in acres. The boundary lines shall apply to the entire tract to be subdivided. 
9.  Site Analysis Map: The site analysis map shall include the entire parcel to be subdivided and any surrounding areas as necessary to illustrate the required features below. The site analysis map shall be professionally drawn at the same scale as the Preliminary Plat. The approach to preparing the site analysis map should be consistent with site fingerprinting, as described in Chapter 1 - Green Growth Guidelines, and should include the following features: (Effective September 14, 2010). 
a.  Property boundaries; 
b.  All hydrologic features including: streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands, riparian buffers, estuaries, marshlands, 100-year floodplains, FEMA flood zones, beaches, groundwater recharge areas, areas with elevated or perched groundwater tables; 
c.  Topographic contours of no less than 3-foot intervals; 
d.  Existing drainage pathways; 
e.  General vegetation characteristics; 
f.  Historic, cultural, and archeological resources; 
g.  Agricultural land; 
h.  Recreational land; 
i.  Future land use or Character Area designations (if current); 
j.  Existing water access; 
k.  Existing roads and structures; and 
l.  A delineation of proposed buildable area. 
10.  Land use features within the proposed subdivision, including rights-of-way widths, and names of existing and proposed streets and alleys, existing structures and use of said structures, existing easements, buildings, city and county lines, other significant information and at such time as the Commissioners adopt zoning districts and boundaries. 
11.  Proposed layout including lot lines with rough dimensions, lot numbers, block letters, street and alley lines, sites reserved through covenants, dedication or otherwise for public uses. 
12.  Location of existing water and sewer utilities, if a connection to these public systems is proposed. 
13.  Description and location of any proposed private utilities. 
14.  Proposed unit division or stage of development, if any, by the subdivider. 
15.  The names of owners of record and characteristics of land adjacent to the tract to be subdivided. 
16.  FIRM Panel Number and flood zone designation 
17.  Building setback information as required including setback lines on odd shaped lots. 
18.  If required, a copy of the Stormwater Management Concept Plan application. The Stormwater Management Concept Plan must be approved by the County Engineer prior to approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Planning Commission. 
19.  If required, approved copy of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan and Notice of Intent Application. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 704. - Preliminary plat review and approval procedures. 
Submittal and review of revised plans shall be as provided in the Development Procedures Manual. Once certified by the Planning Director that the Preliminary Plat meets County Codes and Ordinances, the Director shall forward the plat to the Planning Commission for action. The Planning Commission shall: 
1.  Approve the Preliminary Plat; or 
2.  Approve the Preliminary Plat, subject to any necessary modifications the nature of which shall be indicated on the Preliminary Plat or attached to it in writing; or 
3.  Disapprove the Preliminary Plat or any portion thereof in which case the County shall so notify the applicant in writing, stating the reasons therefore. Time Limit on Preliminary Plat Approval - If streets have not been opened or a final plat filed for a subdivision which has been granted Preliminary Plat approval within five (5) years of such approval then the plat is void and must be resubmitted for approval by the Planning Director. A two (2) year extension of the Preliminary Plat may be filed if any permanent infrastructure improvements or roadbed construction have been made on the tract to be subdivided. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 704.1 - Consultation meeting. 
In the event that a Preliminary Plat is disapproved or approved with conditions, the developer of the proposed subdivision or County Manager or his designee may request a Consultation Meeting to discuss the project, any proposed conditions or changes, or alternative development scenarios. (Effective September 14, 2010) 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 705. - Construction plan. 
Upon approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Planning Commission, the Subdivider shall proceed with preparation of the Construction Plans to describe, in detail, any physical improvements related to streets, drainage and utilities. If required by Brantley County Ordinance, tree save information shall also be provided at this stage. Then ten (10) copies or lesser number if accepted, of the Construction Plans shall be submitted to the County for review. This submittal shall consist of the Construction Plans and the following supporting documentation. 
1.  Completed Construction Plan Application. 
2.  Completed Construction Plan Checklist. 
3.  If required, an copy of an approved Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. 
4.  If required, an copy of the Stormwater Management Design Plan application. The Stormwater Management Design Plan must be approved by the County Engineer prior to approval of the Construction Plans. 
5.  A copy of the approved Preliminary Plat. 
6.  If wells and/or septic systems are proposed, a copy of the application approved by the Brantley County Environmental Health Department. 
7.  If private utility systems are proposed, a copy of the permit from EPD or approval of the Brantley County Environmental Health Department. 
8.  If the development includes connections to existing utility systems, approval from the utility provider must be included. 
9.  Copies of any required regulatory permits including, but not limited to: 404 permits and NPDES Construction permits. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 706. - Construction plan requirements. 
The Construction Plans shall consist of a map or maps, drawn at a scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet, depicting the following: 
1.  Name and address of the owner of record. 
2.  Name, address and phone number of the Subdivider and Engineer responsible for preparation of the plans. 
3.  A written summary of the proposal on the cover sheet of the construction plans giving information as to the overall types of the structures, number and size of units, types of businesses or industry and other data as useful to determine the overall scope of the project. 
4.  Contour lines based on sea level datum. These shall be drawn at intervals of no more than one Foot (1') or sufficient spot elevations or contours that depict existing drainage patterns of the site. 
5.  Exact boundary lines of the subdivision by bearings and distances, and a scaled layout of lots and blocks with number and letter designations. 
6.  Location of existing buildings and other structures on the tract and any natural features. Show trees on County rights-of-way and adjacent to the tract to be subdivided and within county rights-of-way affected by utility or other construction. 
7.  Date of the drawing, north point, graphic scale, and space for revision dates. 
8.  Stormwater Management Design Plan, including: 
a.  Flood zone statement based on the FEMA Flood Inventory Maps (FIRM) 
b.  A Hydrology Report, as required by the County Engineer; prepared by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Georgia. 
c.  The location of any bodies of water, drainage ways and other watercourses which exist on the property. 
d.  If the property contains or impacts wetlands, the surveyed wetland delineation shall be provided. 
e.  The direction of drainage flow in streams, storm sewers, gutters, sub-drains and the like. 
f.  The location of known springs either within the right-of-way or draining to the right-of-way. 
g.  The location of storm sewers and appurtenances, including: 
1)  Catch basins with proposed elevations for tops and inverts. 
2)  Road crossings. 
3)  Out-falls of storm sewers. 
h.  Storm sewer profiles, as follows: 
1)  Profile of existing ground at centerline of the proposed storm sewer, 
2)  Profile of the proposed finished grade. 
3)  Percent of grade of the proposed storm sewer. 
i.  All existing and proposed drainage easements. 
j.  The size and type or class of drainage pipe to be installed in conjunction with the project. 
k.  Proposed drainage ditches for the full length of all easements. 
l.  A copy of the Erosion Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan, a copy of the NOI for the NPDES Construction Permit shall be submitted with the plan. 
9.  Streets and appurtenances including the following information: 
a.  Route number of any state of federal highway to which connection is to be made. 
b.  Existing and proposed streets within the subdivision or its immediate vicinity including: 
1)  Location. 
2)  Name. 
3)  Location of pavement edge, together with any existing or required surface water drainage pipes or other appurtenances. 
4)  Right-of-way with its location measured from the pavement centerline to the edge of the right-of-way. 
5)  Radius of all returns. 
6)  Stations at every one hundred (100) feet on the street centerlines and stations at points of curvature and tangency and at the beginning and the end of all returns, at centerline intersections and at subdivision or construction limits. 
c.  Cul-de-sac grade profiles, design elevations around the entire turnaround. 
d.  The profile of proposed street construction. 
e.  Existing roads proposed to remain in use, which traverse or abut the subdivision. 
f.  When a street temporarily ends in a cul-de-sac turnaround but is to be extended at a later date, the existing and proposed profiles shall be extended beyond the temporary cul-de-sac end, a sufficient distance to show the feasibility of the future extension of the street. 
g.  When a proposed street intersects, extends or joins an existing street, both edges of the pavement surface of the existing street shall be shown in plan and profile for a sufficient distance (300 feet minimum) to show a smooth transition will exist. 
h.  Where a proposed street is shown near an existing body of water show the profiles of the top of the bank, computed water elevations and the flow-line of any stream or open drainage way. Show the relationship of the proposed street grade to the profiles of the body of water. 
i.  If proposed by the Subdivider and/or when required by zoning, easements for pedestrian access across blocks. 
j.  If proposed by the Subdivider and/or when required by zoning, plan and profile of pedestrian and/or bicycle ways or path system. 
10.  The following information, if applicable, related to the Water System shall be shown on the plans: 
a.  An overall project map showing location of all waterlines, valves, fire hydrants and other appurtenances relative to streets, lot lines, lot elevations, channels, structures and other project features significant to proposed water system improvements. 
b.  Plan of water mains and appurtenances showing. 
1)  Size, and type or class of pipe and valves 
2)  Distance from back of curb and or edge of pavement or right-of-way 
3)  Water line easements 
4)  The location (above or below) of storm sewers 
5)  Location in relation to any parallel or crossing sanitary sewers 
6)  Location of any booster pumping station, pressure reducing station, back flow prevention equipment, or water storage tank 
11.  The following information, if applicable, related to the Sanitary Sewerage System shall be shown on the plans: 
a.  An overall project map showing location of all sewer lines, if any, relative to streets, lot lines, lot elevations, channels, structures and other project features significant to proposed sewer lines. 
b.  Plan and profile of sanitary sewers and appurtenances showing: 
1)  Size of proposed pipes and structure. Design data and velocity profile of sewer lines ten (10) inches or larger diameter. 
2)  Manholes with proposed elevations for tops and inverts to the nearest hundredth of a foot. 
3)  All stream crossings. 
4)  Profile of existing ground and finished ground at the centerline of the pipe together with invert and crown lines of the pipe. 
5)  Distance and percent grade between manholes. 
6)  All existing or proposed sewer line easements. 
7)  The size class and type of pipe to be installed. 
8)  The location of all storm sewers as required to demonstrate freedom of conflict between sanitary and storm sewers. 
9)  All locations and typical detail of sanitary sewer service stubouts. 
10)  Station and deflection angle at each manhole. 
11)  Location and details of any proposed lift stations or grinder pumps including detailed design data. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 707. - Construction plan review and approval procedure. 
Once certified by the County Engineer that the submittal is complete, (see Section 705 and 706 of this Ordinance for a list of requirements) copies of the Construction Plans shall be distributed to the divisions, departments and offices for review and comment in accordance with the Development Procedures Manual. 
The County Engineer shall review, comment, and/or approve the Construction Plans in accordance with the Development Procedures Manual. When applicable, the applicant shall insure that three (3) copies of stamped and sealed construction plans, reflecting all review comments, are submitted to the Planning Director for final certified approval, prior to E.P.D. submittal for approval. 
No work shall commence on the installation of the proposed infrastructure improvements (water, sewer, street, and drainage infrastructure) as shown on the subdivision Construction Plans until: 
1.  Construction Plan approval by Brantley County; and 
2.  The filing of a copy of the County and State EPD approved Construction Plans and specifications with the County Engineer for any water or sewer infrastructure construction (if applicable); and 
3.  Construction Plan approval by the Brantley County Environmental Health Department (if applicable). 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 708. - Final plat. 
Before a Final Plat of a subdivision, other than a minor subdivision, is recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court of Brantley County and title of the lots thereon are conveyed, ten (10) prints of a final plat showing the final design of a subdivision shall be submitted to the Planning Department for review. Such submittal shall be made as provided in the Development Procedures Manual. The following documentation shall accompany said Final Plat: 
1.  A completed Final Plat application form and checklist. 
2.  Bond or letter of credit in the amount prescribed by the project engineer and approved by the county engineer and Planning Director for the cost of completing the project improvements. 
3.  A copy of the submitted plat in the eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" X 17") format. Scale may be reduced as necessary to fit this format. 
4.  If available, a copy of the plan in computer file, DXF format. 
5.  Record drawings of which water and sewer system as well as storm water management facilities shall bear the seal and signature of a Surveyor registered in the State of Georgia. 
6.  Conveyances of right-of-way deeds, utility and storm drainage facilities and easements. 
7.  Results of tests and inspections required for construction. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 709. - Final plat requirements. 
The Final Plat may be presented for one or more phases of a multi-phase development, provided that the portion presented for approval conforms with the staging approved in the Preliminary Plat submittal. The Final Plat must be drawn at a scale of not less than 1 inch = 100 feet, with a sheet size no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches (24" X 36") and no smaller than 8½ inches by 11 inches (8.5" X 11"), and shall meet the Georgia Plat Act as well as include the following: 
1.  Name of the subdivision and street(s). 
2.  Names and addresses of the owner of record and of the subdivider. 
3.  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north point, notation as to the reference of bearings to magnetic, true north, or grid north. 
4.  Location of tract, acres, and number of lots. Name of former subdivision if any or all of the final plat has been previously subdivided. 
5.  Vicinity Map. 
6.  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street intersections or benchmarks related to NGB datum or other recognized permanent monuments. 
7.  Exact boundary lines of the tract giving distances to the nearest 1/100th foot and angles to the nearest 10 seconds which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed 1 to 10,000. The error of closure shall be stated. Tract boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the field. 
8.  Municipality or County, lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse the subdivision. 
9.  Exact location, widths, and names of all streets, public or private, and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat and the exact location and widths of all crosswalks. 
10.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest 1 to 100th foot, necessary internal arcs and chords, and tangent or radii of rounded corners. 
11.  Any required building setback dimensions shall be on the plat. Setback lines must be shown graphically on corner lots and lots with more than four (4) sides and/or odd angles. 
12.  When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than 90 degrees, the lot width at the building line shall be shown. 
13.  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks numbered alphabetically. 
14.  Location, dimensions, and purpose of all significant water courses and drainage easements, including slope easements, if required, and public service utility right-of-way lines, and any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners. 
15.  Civic Space Maintenance Plan, approved by the Planning Director. 
16.  A statement of the private covenants, if they are brief enough to be shown directly on the plat; otherwise, a statement as follows: "This Plat is subject to covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto dated ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , which hereby become(s) a part of this plat", recorded on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ (date), and signed by the owner. 
17.  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. 
18.  All Special Flood Hazard Areas inundated by 100-year flood boundaries, including the flood zone elevation, as interpreted from a current Flood Insurance Rate Map shall be delineated on the final. For subdivisions containing property within a Special Flood Hazard Area the following statement shall appear on the plat: 
"Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Map (Community Number 13049C, Panel Number ____________ , Suffix ____________ , Index Dated ____________ ) indicates this property to be in Zone ____________ , required elevation ____________ , which is in a Special Flood Hazard Area inundated by 100-year flood." 
If the limits of the subdivision are contained within one (1) Special Flood Hazard Area, only the flood zone statement will be required. If more than one (1) zone is involved, provide zone boundary lines on plat. 
19.  Certificates and Statements, as follows, if applicable: 
Certificate of Ownership and Dedication 
It is hereby certified that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we) hereby dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, rights-of-way, easements and other sites to the use of the public forever or for private use as noted. 
This the ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ . 
____________ / ____________ / ____________  Owner(s) 
Certificate of Accuracy 
It is hereby certified that this Plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision in conformity with the minimum standards and requirements of law, 
This the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 

 
Certificate of Approval by Environmental Health 
The Brantley County Health Department approves this subdivision for on-site sewerage disposal and municipal water supply. A permit for on-site sewage disposal systems will be issued upon property owner's application. One combined area, equal to twice the area needed to install the original on-site sewage disposal system must be left on property free of building, concrete pads and major trees to accommodate original system and future repairs. 
This the ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ . 

 
Or 
Certificate of Approval by Environmental Health 
The Brantley County Health Department approves this subdivision for on-site sewage disposal and individual water wells. A permit for on-site sewage disposal systems will be issued upon property owner's application. One combined area, equal to twice the area needed to install the original on-site sewage disposal system must be left on property free of building, concrete pads and major trees to accommodate original system and future repairs. 
This the ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ . 

 
Or 
Certificate of Approval by Environmental Health 
The Brantley County Health Department approves this plat for on-site sewage disposal and community well service. A permit for on-site sewage disposal systems will be issued upon property owner's application. One combined area, equal to twice the area needed to install the original on-site sewage disposal system must be left on property free of buildings, concrete pads, and major trees to accommodate the original system and future repairing. If at any time the number of connections or individuals being served by this water system exceed GA-EPD limits, the owner/operator of the water system is required to notify GA-EPD. 
This the ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ . 

 
Certificate of Approval by the Planning Commission 
Pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of Brantley County, Georgia, all requirements have been fulfilled and this plat is recommended for approval. 
This the ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ . 

 
Certificate of Compliance and Approval of Required 
Improvements and/or Performance Bond It is hereby certified that I, as Engineer for Brantley County, Georgia, have examined this plat and that it complies in form with the requirements of the Ordinance to regulate the making of surveys and filing for record of plats of subdivisions within the County of Brantley, Georgia. Furthermore, it is hereby certified that streets, utilities and other required improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to County specifications and standards of the Subdivision regulations, and/or that the posted performance bond is in an amount sufficient to guarantee the required improvements. 
This the ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ . 

 
Certificate of Approval by the Board of Commissioners 
It is hereby certified that the Board of Commissioners, Brantley County, Georgia has officially approved this plat. 
This the ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ . 

 
Note: Subdivisions having unpaved streets shall include in the Certificate of Approval by the Board of Commissioners the statement that - "The Brantley County Board of Commissioners will not assume any obligation for paving or surfacing any unpaved minor streets shown on this Plat and the paving of any street in the subdivision will be at the abutting property owner or owners expense". 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 710. - Final plat approval. 
At the time for Final Plat approval the Subdivider shall be required to submit Certifications from the County Engineer that the streets, utilities and other required improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to the specifications and standards of these regulations and other ordinances. The County Engineer shall have five (5) working days from notification of completion by the Subdivider to perform an inspection of the improvements and notify the Planning Director of the results. If the required improvements have not been completed the applicant may upon the approval of the Planning Director, post a bond, certified check, or appropriate letter of credit, herein after called a "bond". Such bond amount shall be estimated by the applicant's registered engineer and be approved by the County Engineer as sufficient to secure to Brantley County the satisfactory installation of all required improvements or the uncompleted portion thereof. Performance bonds shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the County Attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution as set forth in these regulations. Only base paving, grassing & Miscellaneous items can be bonded. Clearing, grading, drainage, water, and sewer ( if applicable) must be complete. Such bonds shall be approved by the County Commission as to amount and surety and other conditions deemed satisfactory to the County Commission. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the County Commission in the resolution approving the final plat and shall be incorporated in the bond and shall not exceed two (2) years from the date of final approval. The County Engineer may upon proof of difficulty recommend to the County Commission at a public meeting, extension of the completion date set forth in such bond for a maximum period of one (1) additional year. The County may at any time during the period of such bond accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the bond upon recommendation of the County Engineer, and County Attorney. The above bond agreement shall be included in the contract between the County and the developer. 
Once certified by the Planning Director that the Final Plat meets County Codes and Ordinances, the Director shall forward the Plat to the County Commission for action. 
Upon approval of the final plat by the County Commission, the Planning Director shall have the plat signed by the appropriate county officials and have a full-size positive copy of the original made and submit the original and full-size positive copy to the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Brantley County for recording. The original final plat shall be returned to the land surveyor that certified the plat. 
Inspection of Improvements for Benefit of Applicant. Where a bond has been posted the County Commission shall provide upon the applicant's request an inspection of required improvements during construction to insure their satisfactory completion and to reduce the bond. In this event, the applicant shall pay to the County an inspection fee of cost plus 10%. Once all construction is certified complete by the County engineer, the contractor or developer shall warranty the work for one year covering materials and workmanship. Fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the County and no certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. If the County Engineer finds upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the County's standards and specifications, the applicants shall be responsible for completing the improvements. Wherever the cost of installing improvements is covered by a bond, the applicant and the bonding company shall be individually and jointly liable for completing the improvements according to specifications. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
ARTICLE VIII. - MINOR SUBDIVISIONS, RESUBDIVISIONS OF LAND AND VACATION OF PLATS 

Sec. 801. - Minor subdivisions. 
A copy of the Level 3 Soil Survey showing the approval of the Brantley County Health Department and if applicable, a copy of a submitted Notice of Intent, filed with the Georgia EPD, shall be submitted with plat application. (Effective 6/1/2010). 
Minor Subdivisions include the following: 
1.  The subdivision of an unplatted tract of land into six (6) or less lots each being in compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and fronting on an existing public or private street with a minimum right-of-way of sixty feet (60'). Some roads may require additional right-of-way depending on drainage and/or Georgia Department of Transportation/Brantley County Contract participation requirements. (Effective 6/1/2010). 
2.  Subdivisions with six (6) lots or less having direct access to an existing public or private street with a minimum right-of-way of sixty feet (60') by way of private access easement which shall have a minimum width of sixty feet (60') and which is improved according to design standards established in Section 602.6. All lots shall meet applicable minimum lot widths along the easement except the lot at which the easement terminates which shall meet the lot width requirements at the required setback from the property line abutting the easement. The plat and/or legal instrument which conveys such lots shall contain the following language, "The property (# of lots) herein described abuts a private access easement which shall not be maintained by the County." Private access easements shall not be identified by a street marker. No more than six (6) lots may be served by a private access easement. 
3.  A lot split of an unplatted lot in which each resultant lot fronts on an existing public or private street with a minimum right-of-way of sixty feet (60'), or a lot split in which one lot fronts on the existing street and the other is served by a private access easement which shall have a minimum width of thirty feet (30'). Each lot must meet applicable minimum requirements. If a minimum of sixty feet (60') does not exist then the developer shall grant sufficient easement on their property to provide a thirty [foot] (30') right-of-way from centerline of the road. 
801.1 Procedural Requirements. Minor Subdivisions shall be permitted under the following procedures: 
a)  An accurate plat or survey meeting the requirements of the Georgia Plat Act, prepared by a registered land surveyor (bearing his seal and signature), depicting the tract and/or lots and the proposed division thereof shall be submitted to the County. This plat shall also include a general location map, identification of adjoining property owners, statement as to whether the property is within the 100 year Flood Hazard Boundary Area and identification of any required (by County Engineer) drainage easements. The plat shall be accompanied by a completed application, ownership certification and agent authorization form and a minimum fee in the amount of $50.00, plus $10.00 per lot involved over two lots. 
b)  The staff shall within a reasonable time review the proposed division of property for compliance with the design and improvement standards required by these regulations and any minimum requirements. If such standards are met, the survey shall be certified by the signature of the Planning Director. If the Director determines that the standards are not satisfied by the proposed division of property, the plat or survey shall not be certified and the reasons shall be stated in writing. The applicant, if he so desires, shall be given the opportunity for a hearing at the next regular meeting of the County. 
c)  Whenever land, easements, or other improvements are to be dedicated, the action of the Planning Director shall be forwarded to the County Commission for its approval and acceptance of dedications. 
d)  For all other types of land divisions classified as minor subdivisions, the action of the Planning Director shall be final, except for access to the Brantley County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 802. - Resubdivision of land. 
For any change in an approved and recorded subdivision plat or any map or plat legally recorded prior to or subsequent to the adoption of these Subdivision Regulations, if such change affects any street layout, right-of-way, easement, improvement, area reserved for public use or any lot line shown on such plat, such change shall be approved as provided below: 
1.  Proposed revisions to a recorded plat which modify in any way the location of subdivision improvements (i.e., streets, drainage, water, and sewer facilities) shall be submitted for approval by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with A VII hereof. 
2.  Proposed revisions to a recorded plat which modify the boundaries of land for public use, or changes the location of rights-of-way or easements but does not change the existing location of the subdivision improvements themselves (i.e., streets, drainage, water, and sewer facilities) shall be submitted for final plat approval by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with Article VII of these regulations. Where the change involves changing the location of an easement or right-of-way to correctly reflect the actual location of a subdivision improvement, the resubdivision plat and associated deeds may be approved with or without abandoning the incorrect or unused portion or portions of the easement or right-of-way as provided in the abandonment procedures. 
3.  Proposed revisions to a recorded plat which significantly alters or changes any lot(s) or lot line(s) in which each resultant lot meets any minimum requirements shall be submitted under Section 802.1 of these regulations. 
4.  A lot split of a platted lot in which each resultant lot meets applicable minimum requirements. No lot split shall be permitted in a recorded subdivision zoned single-family residential if the lot to be split has an area of less than one (1) acre. This one-acre requirement shall not apply to resubdivisions under Paragraph 5 of this Section. Lot splits shall be submitted by the procedures outlined in Section 802.1 of these regulations. 
5.  A Resubdivision of two or more existing lots of record to form one or more resulting lots shall be approved if each of the resulting lots has greater area and the same or greater width than the original lots. Resulting lots resubdivided under this provision need not meet the minimum area or width requirements, which would otherwise be applicable but must meet all other requirements of these Subdivision Regulations and any other Brantley County Ordinances or state laws. Resubdivisions under this paragraph shall be submitted by the procedures outlined in Section 802.1 of these regulations. 
802.1 Procedural Requirements. 
a.  An accurate plat or survey meeting the requirements of the Georgia Plat Act, prepared by a registered land surveyor (bearing his seal and signature), depicting the lot and/or lots affected by the proposed redivision thereof shall be submitted to the County. This plat shall also include a general location map, identification of adjoining property owners, statement as to whether the property is within the 100 year Flood Hazard Boundary Area and identification of any required (by County Engineer) drainage easements. The plat shall be accompanied by a completed application, ownership certification and agent authorization form and a minimum fee in the amount of $50.00, plus $10.00 per lot involved over two lots. 
b.  The staff shall within a reasonable time review the proposed redivision of property for compliance with these regulations. If all requirements are met, the survey shall be certified by the signature of the Planning Director. If the Director determines that the standards are not satisfied by the proposed division of property, the plat or survey shall not be certified and the reasons shall be stated in writing. Where the Planning Director determines that the proposed resubdivision does not meet the provision of these Regulations, the applicant may request review by the Planning Commission. Such review shall state the specific reason or reasons that the decision of the Planning Director is in error as it relates to the application of these Regulations. The review shall be heard by the Planning Commission within 30 days after receipt of a complete submittal. In considering any such review, the Planning Commission shall apply the standards and requirements of these Regulations and may uphold the decision of the Planning Director or may determine that the proposed resubdivision meets the standards and requirements of these Regulations and approve the resubdivision. In making a determination that the proposed resubdivision meets these Regulations, the Planning Commission may require modifications to the proposal and/or may grant variances as provided in Article IX. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 803. - Vacation of plats. 
1.  Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein by filing a written instrument to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated, accompanied by a fee in the amount of $25.00. Submittal and review of the application shall be as provided in the Development Procedures Manual. 
2.  Such an instrument shall be approved by the County in like manner as plats of subdivisions. The County Commission may reject any such instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys. 
3.  Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and recorded or filed, in like manner as plats or subdivision; and being duly recorded or filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys, and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat. 
4.  When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner therein provided by all the owners of lots in such plat joining in the execution of such writing. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
ARTICLE IX. - VARIANCES AND EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 901. - Variances. 
Variances shall be permitted as follows: 
1)  General: When a peculiar shape, or the topography of a tract of land, or other unusual condition, makes it impractical for a subdivider to comply with the literal interpretations of the design requirements of this Ordinance, the Planning Commission shall be authorized to vary such requirements, provided, however that in so doing the intent and purposes of this Ordinance are not violated. 
2)  Conditions: In approving variances, the Planning Commission may require such conditions that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards and requirements of these regulations. 
3)  Procedures: A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration of the Planning Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 902. - Exemptions from paving requirements. 
Subdivisions containing not more than six (6) residential lots or units may be exempt from the paving requirements of this Ordinance provided the following conditions are met: 
1)  Minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre and lot width shall be 150 feet; where dwelling and/or septic systems are located. 
2)  The subdivision shall be restricted from further subdivision or extension until the street is paved in accordance with County design standards; 
3)  The paving of any street in the subdivision will be at the abutting property owners' expense; and 
4)  The road exempted under the provisions of this Ordinance, is not longer than 2,000 feet including the cul-de-sac. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 903. - Exemptions. 
The following activities are specifically exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance: 
1)  All public utilities lots directly associated with the provision of potable water and removal of sewerage are hereby exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance, and the creation of such a public utility lot shall not require approval under Section 802 of this Ordinance. Said utility lots shall include those for water and sewer lines, pump stations, water towers and wells. 
2)  Subdivision of one (1) additional lot on a parcel of property not previously subdivided under the provisions of this ordinance provided the lot has sufficient area to obtain a septic tank and private water supply permit as required by the State Health Department. 
This exemption shall not include private wells and septic systems on individual residential or commercial lots. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
ARTICLE X. - ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 1001. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the Building Official to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the County Attorney any violations or lack of compliance herewith. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 1002. - Violations and penalties. 
The owner(s) or agent for the owner(s) of any land to be subdivided within the County who transfer or sells or agrees to sell or negotiate to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land before such plat has been approved by the Planning Commission and when applicable the County Commission and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Brantley County; or uses metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale or transfer of land with the intent of evading these regulations; or any person violating any other provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor by law for other misdemeanors. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 1003. - Other penalties. 
Unless a subdivision hereafter established shall be designed, developed, and recorded in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, then: 
1)  The County shall not accept the dedication of any street within such subdivision, nor shall the County improve, maintain, grade, pave, or light any street within such subdivision unless such street or streets shall have received the status of public streets prior to the adoption of this Ordinance. 
2)  The County shall not assume any responsibility for drainage problems within such subdivision unless County owned and maintained drainage structures already exist in such subdivision. 
3)  The County shall not issue a building permit within such subdivision. 
4)  No unit of local government shall be authorized to extend any publicly operated service or utility into such subdivision. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 1004. - Development procedures manual. 
The Planning Commission may recommend and the Board of Commissioners may adopt and from time to time amend a Development Procedures Manual to present detailed information on procedures associated with development review under these Regulations. The provisions of the Development Procedures Manual shall be consistent with these Regulations. 
Prior to making a recommendation for the adoption or amendment of a Development Procedures Manual, the County shall conduct a public hearing at a regular or called meeting. 
Notice of such hearing shall be published at least fourteen days prior to the meeting. In addition, copies of the proposed amendment shall be sent by regular mail to persons and organizations involved in the development industry within Brantley County, and to persons or organizations that have placed their names on a mailing list to receive such amendments. Failure to notify such a person or organization shall not be cause for finding that the notice was defective provided that the newspaper advertising requirement is met. 
Prior to the adoption or amendment of a Development Procedures Manual, the Board of Commissioners shall conduct a public hearing at a regular or called meeting. Notice of such hearing shall be published at least fourteen days prior to the meeting. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
ARTICLE XI. - AMENDMENTS 
This Ordinance may be amended, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have been submitted to the Brantley County Planning Commission for review and recommendation. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any amendment to these regulations, notice of which shall be published at least fourteen (14) days prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Brantley County. The Planning Commission shall submit its recommendation to the Commissioners of Brantley County. Before enacting an amendment to these regulations, the Commissioners of Brantley County shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be published at least fourteen (14) days prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Brantley County. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
ARTICLE XII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1201. - Validity. 
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 1202. - Effective date. 
This Ordinance shall take effect on April 1, 2009, and be enforced from and after its adoption. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
[Sec.] 1203. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All Ordinances and parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010) 
APPENDIX B - LAND USE ORDINANCE 
SECTION 1. - ENACTMENT, SHORT TITLE, JURISDICTION, PURPOSE 

1-1 - Enactment Clause. 
The Board of Commissioners of Brantley County, Georgia, under the authority of Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs I and IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the amendments thereto, hereby ordains and enacts into law the following sections. 
1-2 - Long Title. 
An ordinance regulating within the unincorporated area of Brantley County, Georgia, the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; and the uses of buildings, structures, and the land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other purposes, creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof; defining certain terms used herein; providing for the methods of administration and amendment; providing penalties for violations; repealing conflicting ordinances; and for other purposes. 
1-3 - Short Title. 
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Ordinance for Brantley County, Georgia." 
1-4 - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall govern the use of all land and the developments thereof within the unincorporated area of Brantley County, Georgia. 
1-5 - Purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations shall be to promote the proper location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of open spaces, the density and distribution of population, and the uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other purposes so as to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote the public health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population, to prevent urban sprawl; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; to promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; to protect property against blight and depreciation; to secure economy in governmental expenditures; to conserve the value of buildings and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and structures throughout Brantley County, Georgia; and for other purposes. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. A) 
SECTION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of these regulations, certain terms or words used herein shall be defined as follows: 

2-1 - Interpretation of Certain Terms and Words. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
The word "person" includes a firm, partnership, company, corporation or association. 
The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel". 
The word "building" includes the word "structure". 
The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely discretionary. 
The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied". 
Accessory Building. A detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to, customarily associated with, and related to the principal structure or use of the land; and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use, including residential swimming pools. 
Administrator, Land Use. The person, officer, or official authorized County Manager or their designee representative, whom the County Commission has designated as its agent for the administration of these regulations. 
Adult Entertainment. Performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are characterized by the display or exposure of anatomical areas. 
Adult Entertainment Establishments. A commercial establishment, which has as its primary purposes or business the offer for sale, rent, or distribution of any book, publication, tape, CD, DVD, or any media that depicts nudity, or sexual conduct or engages in services such as bath houses, massage parlors, wrestling parlors or like activity, including a night club, restaurant, cabaret, lounge, or other establishment which features adult entertainment. 
Agriculture. The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease or personal use, of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops, grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products, poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, goats, or any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and grazing of any or all such animals; bees and apiary products, fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program. Retail selling of products raised on the premises shall be considered a normal accessory activity provided that space adequate for the parking of customers' vehicles shall be provided off the public right-of-way. 
Ambulatory. In respect to a person, the ability to move from place to place by walking, either unaided or aided by prosthesis, brace, crutches or hand rails, or by propelling a wheelchair; and can recognize an emergency situation or condition, whether caused by fire or otherwise and escape without human assistance, using the normal means of egress. 
Boarding or Rooming House. A building dedicated to the lodging or feeding or both of five or more non-transient persons or separate families as defined herein for compensation. 
Buffer Area; Buffer Strip. That portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established as landscaped open space for the purposes of screening and separating properties with incompatible land uses, the width of which is measured from the common property line and extends to the developed portion of the common property line. A buffer consists of trees, shrubs, and other natural vegetation undisturbed by grading or site development and replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access and utility crossings. 
Building. Any structure, except a manufactured home or mobile home, which has a roof and which is for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building Height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building. 
Care Home. An orphanage, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, or similar use established to render domiciliary care, but not including facilities for the care of mental patients, alcoholics, drug addicts and not including nursery schools. 
Church. A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
Club, or Lodge, Private. An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
Comprehensive Plan. The 2016 Greater Brantley Comprehensive Plan, as duly adopted and subsequently amended by the respective member governments of Brantley County. This plan includes Future Land Use Plans and Short-Term Work Programs for each respective local government, including Brantley County. 
Curb Cut. The providing of ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
Density. The overall intensity of land use for the total project. When referring to residential areas, density is defined as the number of housing units permitted per acre in the respective Land Use district involved in accordance with the terms of this Land Use ordinance or as authorized under the development standards of this ordinance. 
District. Within the concept of Land Use, a delineated section or sections of Brantley County for which the Land Use regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards and the intensity of use are uniform. 
Dwelling, Single Family. A detached building used and either designed or constructed for one dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, Manufactured Home. A manufactured home is a detached structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. For the purpose of the administration of this ordinance, the term manufactured home shall not be interpreted to include mobile homes. 
Dwelling, Manufactured Housing Park. An area, under single ownership and not subdivided into customary lots planned for individual ownership, containing three or more manufactured homes used as living facilities having a defined space, or an area containing three or more spaces designed or intended for parking of manufactured homes to be used as living facilities for rent or lease. 
Dwelling, Mobile Home. A manufactured home built before June 15, 1976. They do not meet current building codes. 
Dwelling, Two Family, or Duplex. A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for two adjoining dwelling units that are connected by a fire rated common wall and/or if two stories in height by a fire rated common floor. 
Dwelling Unit. An enclosure of one (1) or more rooms, including kitchen and bathroom facilities, designed or constructed as a unit for residential occupancy by one (1) family. 
Family. One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel, or fraternity or sorority house. 
Farm. A tract of land devoted to agricultural purposes. 
Farmer's Market. A public market place, designed to serve area farmers, where provisions are sold at retail and wholesale. 
Flea Market. An outdoor and/or indoor facility established for the purpose of selling at retail such new or used items as household goods, tools, crafts or any other combination of new or used goods. These markets, sales and displays are those that occur continuously or frequently, and specifically more than two times per year, normally at a fixed location where a proprietor, partnership, or corporation leases to vendors a booth, commercial staff or designated area from which the vendor markets these goods. 
Floor Area, Gross. The total number of square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of walls, excluding basement areas, attics, porches, carports, and garages. 
Good Moral Character. A person is of good moral character if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five (5) years. 
Guest or Servant Quarters. A detached, subordinate building, located within the rear yard, designed to provide living accommodations for either domestic help in the employment of the property owner, or for guest facilities. Guest or servant quarters shall not exceed seventy-five percent (75%) of the required minimum gross floor area per dwelling unit for the respective Land the district in which they are allowed. 
Home Occupation/Home Based Business/Rural Home Occupation. An occupation for gain or support customarily conducted on the premises by a person or family residing therein. These uses are governed by the requirements of Sections 9-1, 9-2 and 9-3. Home occupations/Home Based Business/Rural Home Occupations are permitted uses as a matter of right in certain districts pursuant to the schedules of use under Section 5-1.1 and are permitted in other districts only after special review and approval by the Board of County Commissioners as Special Exceptions (See Sections 9-1, 9-2 and 9-3). 
Hospital. Any institution receiving in-patients, or public institution receiving outpatients, and authorized under Georgia law to render medical, surgical, and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of senile psychotics or drug addicts, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry. 
Industrialized Building. Industrialized building describes certain manufactured buildings, which are regulated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Georgia law defines an Industrialized Building as any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the Industrialized Buildings Act, at Georgia Law 1982 (Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 8, Chapter 2, Article 2, Part 1). An industrialized building must meet all requirements of the District in which it is located. Industrialized buildings designed for residential uses are often referred to as modular homes. For the purposes of enforcement of this ordinance, industrialized residential homes shall be subject to the same standards as site built homes. 
Junk Yard. Use of property for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking, and structural steel materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. For the purposes of enforcement of this ordinance, junkyard means anywhere three (3) or more vehicles not in running condition, no insurance, tag or the parts thereof, or household appliances are stored in the open or in open buildings. Buffers are required for all junkyards. (See Section 9-8) 
Kennel. Any location where boarding, caring for, and keeping of more than a total of three dogs or cats, or other small animals or combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on for compensation, and also raising, breeding, caring for, or boarding of dogs, cats, or other small animals for commercial purposes. 
Kennel, Non-Commercial. Any location where the boarding, caring for and keeping of more than three but not more than ten dogs, or cats or other small animals or combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on, not for commercial purpose, but as a hobby such as the raising of show and hunting dogs. 
Licensed Day Care Center. A day care center licensed by the State of Georgia and/or Brantley County that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for children under fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to an owner or operator of the facility. 
Lot. A lot of record, held in a single ownership by one person, or in common ownership by more than one, which has both usable lot area and lot dimensions equal to or greater than the lot width and lot area requirements established by this ordinance for the Land Use district in which such tract of land is located and for the use proposed for the tract of land. (See Sections 3-20 and 3-21) 
Lot, Corner. A lot having frontage on two (2) or more public streets at their intersection. 
Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Brantley County, or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to 11-1-10 adoption of the Brantley County Subdivision Regulations. 
Lot, Through. A lot other than a corner lot, having frontage on more than one (1) intersecting street; or a corner lot having frontage on three (3) or more streets. 
Lot Width. The distance between the side lot lines, measured along the front yard setback line as established by this ordinance, or if no setback line is established, the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the street right-of-way line. 
Minor. Any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Newspaper or Periodical Production, Sales, and Distribution. The operation of newspaper or periodical business including the production, sales, and distribution thereof, including all necessary presswork. Such term includes but is broader than newspaper or periodical publishing. 
Night Club (Lounge). A place of entertainment, open at night, usually serving food and alcoholic beverages and providing music and space for dancing. 
Non-Conforming. A building, structure, or use of land existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Nursery School. An agency, organization, or individual providing daytime care of seven or more children, where a State license is required, not related by blood or marriage or not the legal wards or foster children of the attendant adult. 
Open Space. That required portion of a lot at ground level, unoccupied by enclosed buildings and available to all occupants of the project. This space shall not be devoted to driveways or off-street parking but shall be usable for green space, recreational use and other leisure activities normally carried on outdoors. 
Owner(s). If a sole proprietorship, the proprietor, if a partnership, all partners (general and limited); if a corporation, all officers, directors and persons holding at least ten percent (10%) of the outstanding shares. Single-Owner shall include individual, corporation, Limited Liability Company or limited partnership. 
Personal Care Home. A building or group of buildings, a facility or place in which is provided two or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals and personal care for non-family ambulatory adults for compensation. 
a)  "Family Personal Care Home" means a home for adults in a family-type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons. 
b)  "Group Personal Care Home" means a home for adult persons in a residence or other type building(s), non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven through fifteen persons. 
c)  "Congregate Personal Care Home" means a home for adults, which offers care to sixteen or more persons. 
Planning Commission. As utilized in this ordinance, the Planning Commission shall mean the Greater Brantley Planning Commission as duly appointed by the member governments of Brantley County, Georgia. 
Prescriptive Easement. Is an easement upon another's real property acquired by continued use without permission of the owner for a legally defined period. State Law, which varies by state, defines the time period required to acquire a prescriptive easement. 
Principal Building. The building containing or to contain the principal use of a lot. 
Principal Use. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied, or maintained. 
Public Street. Right-of-way dedicated to the city, county, state or federal government or owned by the city, county, state or federal government for public street purposes, also prescriptive easements. 
Residential. Pertaining to the use of land, means premises such as homes, town homes, patio homes, manufactured homes, duplexes, condominiums or apartment complexes or single room rental units, which contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein. 
School. A facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education including any playgrounds, stadiums, or other structures and grounds used in conjunction therewith. This shall include but not be limited to public and private schools used for primary, secondary, or post-secondary education. 
Setback. Front, Side and Rear. The shortest distance between the front yard line and the principal building or structure on a lot. 
Shopping Center. Two (2) or more commercial establishments planned and managed as a single unit with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property. 
Solid Waste, Inert. Means a disposal facility accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. 
Solid Waste, Sanitary, Waste Energy. Means any solid waste disposal area, volume reduction plant, transfer station, materials recovery facility, or other facility, the purpose of which is resource recovery or the disposal, recycling, processing, or storage of solid waste. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, solid waste landfills, scrap tire processing, gas recovery/cogeneration plants, recovered materials processing facilities, solid waste transfer stations, waste incineration facilities, salvage operations and junkyards. Solid waste means any garbage or refuse, sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility and other discarded material, resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and community activities. 
Special Exception. A special exception is a use which within certain districts specified by this ordinance is not permitted as a matter of right but may be permitted within these districts by the Brantley County Commission after the Planning Commission and County Commission have: (1) reviewed the proposed site plans for the use, its location within the county, its arrangement and design, its relationship to neighboring property and other conditions peculiar to the particular proposal which would determine its desirability or undesirability; (2) has found the proposal not to be contrary to the intent of this ordinance; and (3) has approved the use as specified. 
Street. A thoroughfare which affords traffic circulation and principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare except an alley. A PUBLIC STREET is a street accepted by dedication or otherwise by the governing body. A PRIVATE STREET is a street not so accepted. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, manufactured homes, billboards, swimming pools, and fall-out shelters but do not include walls or fences. 
Tourist Home (Bed and Breakfast). A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided or offered to transient visitors for compensation. 
Trailer, Travel Type. A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation uses, which is identified on the unit by the manufacturer as a "camper" or "travel" trailer, which shall also include motorized recreation vehicles. 
Variance. A variance is a relaxation of the dimensional and/or development standards of the Land Use ordinance that will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the intentional actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Yard, Front. That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way line and the principal building of the lot and extending across the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. 
Yard, Rear. That area of a lot extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building on the lot. 
Yard, Side. That area of a lot between the side lot line and the principal building on the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. A) 
SECTION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

3-1 - Interpretations and Application. 
In interpreting and applying these regulations, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of these regulations. Except as hereinafter provided, these regulations shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul, or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants, or otherwise agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of these regulations impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of a lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, or any covenants or other agreements between parties, then the provisions of these regulations shall govern. 
3-2 - Land Use Affects All Land and Buildings. 
No buildings, structures, or land shall be used or occupied; and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of this Ordinance. 
3-3 - Every Use must be Upon a Lot. 
No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this ordinance except as provided in Section 3-20. 
3-4 - Only One Principal Building Per Lot. 
Except as herein provided (see Section 9-6), there shall be no more than one (1) principal building or structure upon any lot other than within MHP, B-R, C-H, L- I, HI and AG. 
3-5 - Open Space Not to be Encroached Upon. 
No open space shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, setback, off-street parking space requirements, and such other regulations required by this ordinance for the district in which such building is located. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and planted buffer strips shall be interpreted not to be encroachments of yards. (See Section 3-23) 
3-6 - Required Open Space May Not be Used by Another Building. 
No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building, structure, or use by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space for any other building, structure, or use except as provided in Section 7-6. 
3-7 - Reduction of Yards or Lot Area. 
Except as provided in Section 3-20, no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use. 
3-8 - Encroachment on Public Rights-of-Way. 
No building, structure, nor any mandated buffer requirements, service area, or required off-street parking and loading facility, except driveways, shall be permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
3-9 - Location of Accessory Buildings or Uses. 
Accessory buildings on residential lots, when located within a front or side yard, shall be located no closer to property lines than would be allowed for a principal building. Within a rear yard, an accessory building on a residential lot shall be located at least five (5) feet from all rear property lines and eight (8) feet from all other property lines, except that in the case of corner lots, accessory buildings shall be set back from the property line of an abutting street right-of-way a distance equal to three-fourths (3/4) the front yard setback established for the Land Use district in which the accessory buildings are located. In the case of a through lot (see Section 3-11) accessory buildings shall conform to front yard setbacks on both streets. Accessory buildings or uses on non-residential lots shall comply with front, side, and rear yard requirements established for the Land Use district in which such buildings or uses are located. 
3-9.1  Accessory Building on Separate Lot: An accessory building may be permitted, as a Special Exception by the County Commission, on a separate lot from the lot of the principal building provided that: (a) the lot upon which the accessory building is to be located shall be within 400 feet of the principal use; and (b) all requirements, including use restrictions, established for the Land Use district in which such accessory building is to be located shall be complied with; and (c) any structure or building erected shall meet the requirements of the Georgia State Building Code and shall be approved by the building inspector. In addition to the above requirements, the County Commission may require design features such as buffer strips, screening, etc., as may be found necessary to protect the purposes of this ordinance. 
3-9.2  Swimming Pools: Swimming pools accessory to residences or commercial uses shall be enclosed by steel mesh security fence or other substantial building material affording equal or better access control. (As per the SBCCI Code) 
3-9.3  Separation from Principal Use: Any accessory building of more than eight (8) feet in height shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the principal building. 
3-10 - Every Lot Shall Abut a Street. 
No building shall be erected on a lot that does not abut an open public street (or an approved private street meeting current county development standards). Lots of record prior to the 11-1-10 adoption of the Brantley County Subdivision Regulations shall not be subject to this provision 
3-11 - Lots with Multiple Frontage. 
In the case of a corner lot, side yard setback requirements from the centerline of the street right-of-way shall equal to seventy-five percent (75%) of that required for the front yard setback for the respective Land Use district. On a corner lot where the main entrance into a residence is facing a side yard, it shall be permissible for purposes of this ordinance to interpret the residence to be fronting on the street other than that street which said entrance faces, and side and rear yard requirements may be provided accordingly. If a building is constructed on a through lot having frontage on two (2) or more roads not at an intersection, a setback from each road shall be provided equal to the front yard requirement for the district in which the lot is located. 
3-12 - Visibility at Intersections. 
On corner lots within all Land Use districts, no fence, shrubbery or other obstruction to the traffic sight vision, except utility poles or light or sign standards, shall exceed a height of three (3) feet within a triangular area formed by the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two (2) streets or a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way line, and a diagonal line which intersects the right-of-way lines at two (2) points, each twenty (20) feet distance from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, or, in the case of a rounded corner, from the point of intersection of their tangents; provided, however, signs, lights, or similar objects which are totally located at least twelve (12) feet above the finished grade shall be permitted. 
3-13 - Uses Prohibited. 
If either a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as being permitted in a district, either as a matter of right, or as a Special Exception, then such use, class of use, or structures for such uses, shall be prohibited in such district. 
3-14 - Land Use Regulations to Apply When Lot is Divided by District Boundary Line. 
In the event that a district boundary line on the Land Use districts map divides a lot of record held in one (1) ownership on the date of passage of this ordinance, each part of the lot so divided shall be used in conformity with the regulations established by this ordinance for the district in which such parcel is located; except, however, that if the property owner of such a lot so desires, he may extend a use allowed on either portion of said lot fifty (50) feet beyond the district boundary line in accordance with setbacks and yard requirements of the district into which he is encroaching. 
3-15 - Height Limitations of Walls and Fences. 
Within any residential district, no wall or fence shall exceed eight (8) feet in height within or along a boundary of a rear or side yard. Within the front yard, all fences shall have a height limit of four (4) feet. 
3-16 - Required Buffers in BR, CA, CH, HI, LI Districts. 
In these districts, where a lot abuts any residential district, a six (6) foot wide buffer the entire length of the lot abutting the residential property shall be provided with screening as specified in Section 3-18, Off-street parking associated with such uses shall be governed by this same provision. 
3-17 - Screening of Service Areas within One Hundred Fifty (150) Feet of Public Street. 
Any service area, loading area, refuse, or storage area between a principal building and a public street being visible from said street and lying within one hundred fifty (150) feet of said street shall be screened from view from the public street as specified. 
3-18 - Screening Required. 
Wherever screening is required by this ordinance, a durable masonry wall, or fence and hedge of sufficient opacity to provide a visual blind, designed to be compatible with the character of adjoining properties, shall be provided and maintained by the owner and his successors and assigns. Such fences and walls shall be at least six (6) feet in height, but no greater than eight (8) feet in height, measured from the ground along the common lot line of the adjoining properties. Hedges or comparable natural plantings shall be of such variety that an average height of at least six (6) feet could be expected by normal growth within no later than three (3) years from the time of planting. 
3-19 - Side and Rear Yards Not Required Next to Railroad. 
Within any non-residential district, side yards and rear yards shall not be required adjacent to railroad rights-of-way. 
3-20 - Substandard Lots of Record. 
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance which has an area or a width which is less than that required by this ordinance may be used as a building site for a structure or use permitted in that zone; provided, however, that the same yard, setback, open space, and other dimensional requirements are met that would be required for a standard lot, except for those properties deemed unacceptable for development by the Brantley County Health Department. 
3-21 - Permitted Modification of Setback Requirement. 
When a building is proposed on a lot and when on either or both lots which adjoin such lot at the street right-of-way line there exists a principal building which does not conform to the setback requirements of this ordinance, the required setback for such building shall be as follows: (1) where only one said adjoining lot contains a principal building with a non-conforming setback the setback shall be the computed average of (a) the normal setback requirement with (b) the nonconforming setback, or (2) where both adjoining lots contain a principal building each with a non-conforming setback, the minimum setback shall be the computed average of the two non-conforming setbacks. 
3-22 - Structures Permitted Above the Height Limit. 
The height limits of these regulations shall not apply to a church spire, belfry, cupola, dome, or ornamental tower not intended for human occupancy, monument, water tower, observation tower, transmission tower, chimney, smoke stack, conveyor, flag pole, radio or television tower, mast or aerial, parapet wall not extending more than four (4) feet above the roofline of the building, and necessary mechanical appurtenances. (See Section 3-25) 
3-23 - Permitted Encroachments of Yards and Setbacks. 
Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters, and fire escapes may project not more than three (3) feet beyond any required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways which are or may be used for access for service and/or emergency vehicles; provided, however, that in the case of automobile service stations, motels, and similar uses which serve the motoring public, canopies shall be allowed over a driveway or walkways within the front yard not to extend from the principal building to a point any closer than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line. 
3-24 - Modification of Side Yard Requirements. 
When a lot of record has a width less than the frontage required in the district in which it is located, then the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) shall be authorized to reduce the side yard requirements for such lot; provided, however, that there shall not be less than a 5-foot side yard. 
3-25 - Variances to Height Requirements. 
Chimneys, water, fire, radio and television towers, church spires, domes, cupolas, stage towers, and scenery lofts, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, smokestacks, flag poles, parapet walls, silos, granaries, windmills, and similar structures and their necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected above the height limits herein established after a proper variance has been obtained from the Board of Commissioners. 
3-26 - Prohibited Uses in All Residential Districts. 
A)  It shall be a prohibited use in all residential districts and residential lots to park or store in the open, wrecked or junked vehicles, power driven construction equipment, used lumber, metal or rubbish, or any other miscellaneous scrap or salvageable material. 
B)  Tractor-trailer combinations, (tractors or trailers) shall not be stored in residential Districts for more than 72 hours. 
C)  Commercial Kennels. 
3-27 - Mobile Homes. 
No mobile homes, defined as units constructed prior to June 15, 1976, shall be allowed within the unincorporated area of Brantley County. Only manufactured homes constructed to the Federal Manufactured Horne Construction and Safety Standards governed by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et. seq. shall be permitted within unincorporated Brantley County. 
3-28 - Recreational Vehicles. 
Recreational vehicles shall not be utilized as a permanent dwelling in any Land Use district. Occupancy exceeding 30 days shall be considered permanent. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. A) 
SECTION 4. - LAND USE DISTRICTS 

4-1 - Establishment of Districts. 
In order that the purposes of this ordinance as defined in Section 1 may be accomplished, there are hereby established within Brantley County, Georgia, Land Use districts identified as follows: 
4-1.1  A-G Agricultural Use: The purpose of this district is to permit agricultural uses, to encourage the maintenance of the rural countryside, to preserve forests and other undeveloped lands away from areas of population growth, and to allow residents to retain their traditional ways of life. The preferred land use in the district is agricultural, either active in the form of crops, or passive in the form of forest management or pasturelands. The A-G district should be utilized as a land use designation where a more intensive use of the land is unlikely to occur in the near future. The requirements of the district are designed to encourage the maintenance of Brantley County's rural character until more intensive development is mandated by growth demands. 
4-1.2  R-R Rural Residential: The purpose of this district shall be to allow for residential development with minimum lot size of one acre in appropriate areas designated in the Comprehensive Plan in unincorporated Brantley County. With Health Department approval, such districts may use individual water supply and sewerage disposal systems. All small lot development will be encouraged to locate in the counties identified Residential and Developing Subdivisions Character Areas as identified in the 2016 Greater Brantley County Comprehensive Plan. 
4-1.3  R-1 Single-Family Residential: The purpose of this district is to provide single family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of one acre, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of these uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. To be considered for this district all residential dwellings must be site built. With Health Department approval, such districts may use individual water supply and sewerage disposal systems. 
4-1.4  R-22 Single Family Residential: The purpose of this district is to provide for single-family residential areas with minimum lot size of 1/2 acre, said areas being protected from the effects of higher density development and the encroachment of those uses, which are incompatible to a low density residential development. To be considered for this district all residential dwellings must be site built. Developments in this district must be served by either public water or public sewer or a community water or community sewage disposal system. 
4-1.5  DR-22-M Residential: The purpose of this district is to create an area that, in addition to conventional one and two-family dwellings, as a matter of right in a conventional subdivision. Lots in this district must have a minimum lot size of IA. acre for single-family homes and 30,000 square feet for duplex uses with both a public water and public sewer system. 
4-1.6  M-R Multiple Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide for the orderly development of higher density residential areas with a maximum density of 12 units per acre. Any developments in this district shall be served by either a public water and sewer system or a community water and sewer system. To be considered for this Land Use district, property must directly about a major thoroughfare roadway as designated on the Official Road Classification Map of Brantley County and must have a gross minimum lot size of (3) acres. 
4-1.7  M-11-P Manufactured Housing Park: The purpose of this district is to provide for the development of property that is appropriately located and planned for manufactured housing park use. Property developed in this district is to remain in single ownership, individual corporation or limited liability company or limited partnership for rental or leasing purposes only. To be considered for this Land Use classification, a site plan meeting the requirements of this ordinance must be submitted with any Land Use petition. Manufactured housing parks shall be developed only in strict accordance with the Manufacturing Housing Park provisions of this ordinance. In order to be considered for this Land Use classification, any property must directly abut a paved collector thoroughfare roadway as designated on the Official Road Classification Map of Brantley County and must have a gross minimum lot size of three (3) acres. 
4-1.8  B-R Business Retail. The purpose of this district is to provide for and protect areas that can accommodate a variety of sales and services that are commonly needed by the rural community and which will not create undesirable traffic congestion. In order to be considered for this Land Use classification, any property must directly abut a collector or thoroughfare roadway as designated on the Official Road Classification Map of Brantley County, 
4-1.9  C-H Highway Commercial: The purpose of this district is to provide for and encourage the proper grouping and development of high traffic oriented uses which include a wide variety of sales and services that will best accommodate the needs of the county and the traveling public in order to reduce highway congestion, traffic hazards or blight. To be considered for this district, property must be located on a major thoroughfare roadway as designated on the Official Road Classification Map of Brantley County. 
4-1.10  L-1 Light Industrial: The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those wholesale and light industrial uses, which do not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust, and which do not possess other objectionable characteristics, which might be detrimental to surrounding neighborhoods, or to the other uses permitted in the district. Development must be 500 feet from all Residential Districts, and 200 feet from all Agricultural Districts. 
4-1.11  H-I Heavy Industrial: The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those industrial uses, which cannot comply with the regulations of the L-I District. Development must be 500 feet from all Residential Districts, and 200 feet from all Agricultural Districts. 
4-1.12  C-A Adult Commercial: The purpose of this district shall be to provide a reasonable location within the community for the development of adult-oriented businesses including adult entertainment establishments. 
4-2 - Land Use Districts Map and Major Thoroughfare Plan. 
The boundaries of each district are shown on maps entitled "Official Land Use Districts Map of Brantley County, Georgia". The classification of streets (local and collector streets and arterials) within Brantley County, Georgia is shown on a map entitled "Major Thoroughfare Plan, Brantley County, Georgia". The Official Land Use Districts map and Major Thoroughfare Plan shall be dated and certified by the Chairman of the County Commission and County Clerk, and said maps and all explanatory matter thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this ordinance. 
Accurate copies of the "Official Land Use Districts Map of Brantley County, Georgia", and the "Major Thoroughfare Plan, Brantley County, Georgia", shall be on file in the office of the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) at all times. Said maps shall accurately show all map amendments made in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) to ensure that the "Official Land Use Maps of Brantley County, Georgia" and the "Major Thoroughfare Plan, Brantley County, Georgia", displayed in this office are kept up-to-date and accurately show all amendments. 
4-3 - Interpretation of Land Use District Boundaries: 
When uncertainty exists with respect to the location of boundaries of any Land Use district as shown on the "Official Land Use Districts Map of Brantley County", the following rules shall apply: 
4-3.1  Unless otherwise specifically indicated, where district boundaries are indicated on the Land Use map as approximately following the centerline of a street right-of-way, highway, railroad right-of-way line, stream bed, or river bed, such centerlines shall be interpreted to be such district boundaries. 
4-3.2  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be interpreted as following such lot lines. 
4-3.3  Where district boundaries are indicated on the Land Use map, as approximately following the corporate limit lines, then such corporate limit lines shall be interpreted to be such district boundaries. 
4-3.4  Where district boundaries are indicated on the Land Use map as being set back from the centerline of a street right-of-way, road, highway, railroad, stream, or river, and parallel thereto, then such district boundaries, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall be interpreted as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of such street, road, highway, railroad, stream, or river as being parallel thereto. 
4-4 - Planned Development District (PD). 
Planned Development Districts are intended to provide an alternative method of land development and redevelopment not available within the framework of standard Land Use districts. The standards and procedures of approving these districts are intended to promote flexibility of design and allow for planned diversification and integration of uses and structures while at the same time retaining in the Commissioners the absolute authority to establish such conditions, limitations, and regulations as it deems necessary to maintain community aesthetics and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. In doing so, the Planned Development Districts are designed to achieve the following objectives: 
A)  Accomplish a more desirable development than would be possible through strict adherence of standard Land Use and subdivision regulations. 
B)  Accommodate a mixture of uses and/or development patterns which are compatible both internally and externally through limitations on sign control, building orientations, buffering or other techniques which may be appropriate to a particular development proposal. 
C)  Encourage flexible and creative concepts of site development planning which meet the changing needs, technologies, economic and consumer preferences. 
D)  Preserve natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas. 
E)  Encourage an efficient use of land, where appropriate and beneficial to the County, resulting in smaller network of streets and utilities thereby lowering development and housing costs. 
F)  Maintain consistency with the Goals, Policies, and Future Land Use elements of the Comprehensive Plan. 
4-4.1  Relation to other Regulations. The Planned Development District shall be a Land Use district, and is permissible when approved according to a concept plan that ensures the above objectives can be met. Once development has commenced under a PD approval, development must continue under the terms and conditions of the approval until it is completed or until the PD approval has been properly amended. 
Planned Developments shall meet the intent of all applicable development regulations of the County. These shall include but not be limited to the Land Use Ordinance, Subdivision Regulations and adopted Building and Fire Codes. Where these are in conflict, the approved PD plans, terms and conditions shall take precedence. All proposed deviations from the County's development standards shall be itemized and depicted in the PD proposal. County construction standards regarding streets, parking and utilities shall be met in all PD proposals without deviation. 
Planned Developments shall not be used as merely a means to avoid full compliance with standard development regulations for purpose of private gain. 
4-4.2  Eligibility Requirements. Minimum acreages for Planned Development proposals shall be as follows: 

 
4-4.3  Planned Development Review Process and Fees. Planned Developments shall be reviewed and advertised in the same manner as any proposed Land Use Map amendment as described in Section 13 of the Land Use Ordinance. Pre-application meeting(s) with appropriate County staff shall be required to discuss the proposal before the application is submitted. Base application fees shall be ($300.00). 
4-4.4  Development Plan Submittal Requirements. Proposed development plans shall include but not be limited to the following. Additional submittal requirements may be determined by County staff at the pre-application meeting or during the review process. 
A)  Completed application forms. 
B)  Letter of intent. 
C)  Master concept plan if developed in phases. If deemed necessary, each phase shall be reviewed and approved separately. 
D)  Drawn site plans with the appropriate numbers of copies provided for necessary staff review and public hearings. These plans shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1)  Location Map. 
2)  Title, scale and North arrow. 
3)  Existing and proposed site improvements. 
4)  Detention/Retention areas. 
5)  Landscape plan showing any vegetative buffers and open space. A minimum 14% of the gross property acreage shall be reserved as open space and/or outdoor recreation area. 
6)  Boundary survey and/or legal description in metes and bounds. 
7)  Proposed list of deviations from the County's development standards. 
8)  Written approval from the County Engineer stating that the proposal is in compliance with the County's street, parking and utilities regulations. 
Development approval shall be tied to all approved site plans made part of the public hearing. 
4.5 - Planned Development Amendments. 
Substantial amendments to an approved Planned Development District shall be reviewed and processed in the same manner as if it were a completely new development proposal. 
The term substantial shall include but not be limited to any of the following: 
A)  Greater than 10% increase in number of dwelling units, or total impervious surface area. 
B)  Reduction by greater than 10% of landscaped or open space areas, or building setbacks. 
C)  Any change in the boundaries of the Planned Development District. 
Non-substantial amendments to an approved Planned Development District shall be reviewed and approved jointly by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) and the Building Inspector. At their discretion, such amendments may be presented to the Commissioners for their consideration. 
4.6 - Enforcement and Penalties. 
The terms and conditions of approval for Planned Development Districts shall be enforceable in the same manner as any other provision of this Land Use Ordinance. Violations shall be punishable as provided in this Ordinance for each separate offense. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. A) 
SECTION 5. - SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED USES 

5-1 - Table of Permitted Uses. 
Within the various Land Use districts as indicated on the "Official Land Use Districts Map of Brantley County", no building, structure, or land shall be constructed, erected, altered, or used except as indicated in the following schedules: 
5-1.1  Uses Permitted by Right: Uses permitted as a matter of right are indicated on the following schedule by the letter "X" in the appropriate column. 
5-1.2  Special Exception: Uses permitted only after special review and approval of the County Commission are indicated on the following schedule by the letters "SE" in the appropriate column. Requests to approve a Use by Special Exception shall be advertised, reviewed and processed in the same manner as an amendment to the Official Land Use Districts Map as described in Section 12 - Amendment. 
5-1.3  Uses Not Allowed: Uses not specifically designated by an "X" or "SF" within the appropriate column are not allowed within the district, 
5-1.4  Conflict of Use Interpretation: In the event of a discrepancy between the various provisions of this ordinance as relates to a particular use of land being allowed in a particular Land Use district, Section 5, Schedule of Permitted Uses, shall govern. 
5-1. Table of Permitted Uses 

 
(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. A) 
SECTION 6. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

6-1 - Development Standards. 
Within the various Land Use districts as indicated on the "Official Land Use District Map of Brantley County, Georgia", no building or structure, excluding all signs, shall be constructed or erected except as indicated in the following schedule: 

 
The minimum distance from other property lines to any building over 35 feet in height shall be increased one foot for every two feet (or part of 2 feet) of building height greater than 35 feet. For B-R and C-H Land Use Districts: If lot is adjacent to a residential district, the yard requirements shall be increased by 10 feet and screening shall be provided as specified in Section 3-18 along the common lot line. 
* Plus, ½ any amount which the right-of-way width exceeds 60 feet for residential streets, 80 feet for collector streets, and 100 feet for Major and Secondary Streets. 
** Does not apply to structures over water bodies 
*** Maximum unit density of 12 units per acre. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. A) 
SECTION 7. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND SERVICE REQUIREMENTS 

7-1 - Scope of Provisions. 
Except as provided in this section, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvements, or use, a plot plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. 
7-2 - Parking Spaces May Not be Reduced. 
Off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum required number for the use or facility to which they are assigned. 
7-3 - Drainage, Construction, and Maintenance. 
All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties and/or public streets and shall be constructed of materials which will assure a surface resistant to erosion. All such areas shall be at all times maintained at the expense of the owners thereof in a clean and orderly condition. 
7-4 - Separation from Walkways, Sidewalks, and Streets. 
All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, and streets by curbing or other suitable protective device. 
7-5 - Parking Area Design. 
Parking stalls shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet and length of twenty (20) feet. There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. Interior driveways shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet wide where used with ninety (90) degree angle parking, at least eighteen (18) feet wide where used with sixty (60) degree angle parking, at least twelve (12) feet wide where used with forty-five (45) degree parking, and at least twelve (12) feet wide where used with parallel parking. Where there is no parking, interior driveways shall be at least ten (10) feet wide for one-way traffic movement and at least twenty (20) feet wide for two-way traffic movement. 
7-6 - Joint Parking Facilities. 
Two (2) or more neighboring uses, of the same or different types, may provide joint facilities, provided that the number of off-street parking spaces is not less than the sum of the individual requirements. 
7-7 - Pavement Markings and Signs. 
Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, and pavement directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows, and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their maximum efficiency. 
7-8 - Number of Parking Spaces. 
In order to assure a proper and uniform development of public parking areas throughout the jurisdiction of this ordinance, to relieve traffic congestion on the streets, and to minimize any detrimental effects on adjacent properties, off-street parking space shall be provided and maintained as called for in the following schedule. For any use or class of use not specifically mentioned in this schedule, the requirements shall be the same as a similar use as mentioned herein. Parking requirements for additions to existing uses or structures shall be based upon the total development even if the existing use is deficient. These regulations shall apply to all Land Use districts. 

 
7-9 - Off-Street Loading Requirements. 
On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, goods display, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials, or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets and alleys. 
Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be an area ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet, with fifteen (15) foot height clearance. 
7-10 - Minimum Number of Loading Spaces Required. 
Industrial, wholesale, and retail operations shall provide space as follows: 
A)  Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as appropriate to the functions and scope of operation of individual or groups of buildings and uses. 
B)  Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering to park and unpark vehicles for loading and unloading can take place entirely within the property lines on the premises. Loading spaces shall be provided so as not to interfere with the free, normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights-of-way. 
C)  Ingress and egress to off-street loading spaces shall conform to driveway entrance regulations of Brantley County. 
7-11 - Curb Cut Requirements. 
In any district as described below where the lowering or cutting away of curbs, or the placement of asphalt and/or driveway pipe on non-curbed sections for the purpose of ingress and egress is required to the property, such curb cuts or asphalt width shall be placed through the entire right-of-way and shall be subject to the following provisions: 
A)  Residential Curb Cuts: A-G, R-R, R-1, Land Use areas (excluding manufactured housing park development): 
1)  No more than two combined entrances and exits shall be allowed on any parcel of property, the front of which is less than 200 feet on any one street. Additional entrances or exits for parcels having a frontage in excess of 200 feet shall be permitted at the rate of one entrance/exit for each additional 100 feet. 
2)  At street intersections (corner lots), no curb cuts shall be located within 25 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or such lines extended; or within 14 feet of the intersection of two property lines (right-of-way lines) or such lines extended, whichever is more restrictive. On principal or minor arterials or collector streets, no driveway shall be within 70 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or curb lines extended. 
3)  The distance between any two curb cuts on the same side of the street shall be not less than 10 feet. Said distance shall be measured between the point of tangency of the curb return radii and the established curb. 
4)  All driveways shall be constructed so as to have at least five feet from any front property line (excluding right-of-way), except that a curb return may become tangent to a curb line at a point where such property line extends with the curb line, 
5)  The maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed 24 feet measured at the right-of-way line. 
6)  The sum of the two curb return radii for any curb cut shall not exceed 14 feet. 
7)  When development on sites where existing curb cuts are abandoned and access is no longer afforded due to parking lots, buildings or other permitted structures, the driveway shall be removed, the sidewalk (if existing) shall be replaced, the curb and gutter shall be replaced, fill dirt backfilled to its natural state. 
7-12 - Commercial, Industrial, and Manufactured Housing Park Curb Cuts: 
A)  No more than two combined entrances or exits shall be allowed any parcel or frontage, which is less than 300 feet on any one street. On parcels less than 150 feet, only one entrance shall be allowed provided it is a two-way driveway (two one-way driveways shall be allowed in lieu of the one two-way). Additional entrances or exits for parcels of property having a frontage in excess of 300 feet shall be permitted at the rate of one entrance-exit for each additional 150 feet. 
B)  No driveway shall be located closer than 150 feet [to] an existing driveway on an abutting lot. Existing lots of record less than 150 feet frontage shall be allowed one combined entrance/exit not to exceed 24 feet at right-of-way line. 
C)  At street intersections (corner lots), no curb cuts shall be located within 70 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or within 60 feet of the intersection of two property lines (right-of-way lines) where such lines extended, whichever is more restrictive. 
D)  All driveways shall be constructed so as to be at least 12.5 feet from any property line except that a curb return may become tangent to a curb line at a point where the property line extended intersects such curb line. 
E)  Maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed 35 feet measured at the right of-way line; minimum two-way shall be 24 feet at right-of-way line with a maximum of 12.5-foot radius. No two driveways on the same property shall be closer than 25 feet. 
F)  The maximum width of any curb cut in BR, C-A, L- I and H-I zones shall not exceed 35 feet at the right-of-way line. 
G)  The sum of the two curb return radii for any one curb cut shall not be less than 25 feet, nor greater than 40 feet. 
H)  When development on sites where existing curb cuts are abandoned and access is no longer afforded due to parking lots, buildings, or other permitted structures, the driveway shall be removed, the sidewalk (if existing) shall be replaced, the curb and gutter shall be replaced, fill dirt backfilled to its natural state; where it is a piped driveway to a dirt or paved street, said pipe shall be removed, asphalt removed and the shoulder and ditch regarding to its natural preexisting state. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. A) 
SECTION 8. - NON-CONFORMANCES 

8-1 - Non-conforming Lots. 
Any lot for which a plat or legal description has been legally recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Court of Brantley County at the time of passage of this ordinance which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located may, if vacant, be used for any of the uses permitted within the district by this ordinance, or if occupied by a structure containing a conforming use, may have the structure improved, enlarged, or extended; provided that in either case: 
A)  Minimum requirements of the district for front, side, and rear yard, height, and floor area shall be complied with. 
B)  A lot to be used for duplexes, residential group development projects, multi-family dwellings or manufactured homes, when allowed within the district, only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for those uses in the district and all development standards are met. 
8-2 - Non-conforming Uses of Land. 
Non-conforming uses of land consists of the open use of property (including such uses but not limited to storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, junk yards, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, manufactured housing parks and similar open uses) where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the use of the lot and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter under this ordinance in the district in which it is located, shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to the other requirements in this ordinance: 
A)  When a non-conforming use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any non-conforming use. 
B)  Non-conforming uses of land shall not be changed to any but conforming uses. 
C)  A non-conforming use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became non-conforming. 
D)  When any non-conforming use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six (6) months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
8-3 - Non-conforming Uses of Structures. 
Non-conforming uses of structures consist of structures used, at the time of passage of this ordinance, for purposes not permitted in the district in which they are located. In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, non-conforming uses of structures shall be governed by the following restrictions: 
A)  An existing non-conforming use of a structure may be changed to another non-conforming use that is similar in its operation and effect on surrounding properties or may be changed to a conforming use. 
B)  An existing non-conforming use of a structure shall not be changed to another non-conforming use that generates more automobile or truck traffic, creates more noise, vibration, smoke, dust or fumes, is a more intensive use of structures than the existing non-conforming use, and is in any way a greater nuisance to the adjoining properties than the existing non-conforming use. 
C)  A non-conforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged except into portions of the structure, which at the time the use became non-conforming were already erected and arranged or designed for such non-conforming use. No structural alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a non-conforming use, which would in any way increase the floor space, area, or volume of space occupied by the use. 
D)  When any non-conforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of 6 months, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or non-use of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
8-4 - Reconstruction of Non-Conforming Structures. 
When a non-conforming structure or a structure containing a non-conforming use or non-conforming sign is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, or act of God, such structure or sign may be reconstructed as a non-conforming use only if the damage totals less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the value of the structure. Structures which do not conform to the yard requirements of this ordinance, shall also be governed by this provision. 
8-5 - Non-Conforming Junk Yards. 
All non-conforming junkyards shall be made to conform to the special provisions of this Land Use Ordinance within a period of two (2) years of the adoption of the Land Use Ordinance. Screening of junk yards is intended to shield the use from public view and from the view of surrounding properties, to reduce noise emitting from the premises, and to protect surrounding property values. An eight (8) foot wide buffer strip shall be planted, or existing vegetation may be used, in combination with a solid fence, which shall be constructed of wood, concrete or chain link with wooden or metal slats, dense enough to interrupt vision and noise to a height of eight (8) feet. The required vegetative screen shall be planted such that it will reach its required height in a period of three years, and the fence and vegetative buffer shall be erected along all road frontages, side lot lines, and rear yards. All fences must be secured with locks approved by the Building Inspector. 
8-6 - Changes in Land Use. 
Any non-conformances created by a change in district boundaries or ordinance regulations after the date of passage of this ordinance shall also be governed by the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. A) 
SECTION 9. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CERTAIN USES 

9-1 - Agricultural Worker Housing. 
Agricultural worker housing is allowed as an accessory use in the AG (Agricultural) Land Use district subject to the following provisions: 
A)  Head of household shall be a full time or seasonal employee of the property owner. 
B)  Water supply and sewage disposal for said housing shall be approved by the Brantley County Health Department. 
C)  Such accessory uses shall be subject to the principal building front, rear and side yard setback requirements of the A-G (Agricultural Use) Land Use district. 
D)  All such structures or buildings developed for agricultural worker housing shall be limited to a maximum height of 35 feet and shall have a minimum of 30 feet of open, unoccupied space between it and any other building or structure in the development. 
9-2 - Home Occupations. 
A home occupation as defined by this ordinance shall be governed by the following requirements: 
A)  Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation. 
B)  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the dwelling. 
C)  Only one (1) point of business sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in size, motionless, non-lighted, and attached to the principal building shall be permitted. 
D)  Use of the building for this purpose shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the conditioned air space of the dwelling. 
E)  No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the dwelling shall be permitted. 
F)  The occupation shall not constitute a nuisance in the neighborhood. 
G)  No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used in connection with the home occupation. 
H)  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupation. 
I)  The following and similar uses shall be considered home occupations provided that all additional requirements of this section are met: dressmaking, addressing service, answering service, architect, computer consulting, desktop publishing, drafting, manufacturing agent, pet sitting (off-site), web design and other professions and/or services which are essentially office or clerical in nature as approved by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager). 
9-3 - Home Based Business. 
A home-based business, as defined by this Ordinance, shall be governed by the following requirements: 
A)  At least one resident and not more than one non-resident of the dwelling may be engaged in the home-based business. The resident must be the owner of the home-based business. 
B)  The home-based business shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character, of the dwelling. 
C)  No display of products shall be visible from the street and only products produced on the premises may be sold on the premises. 
D)  Only one (1) point of business sign, not exceeding two square feet in size, motionless, non-lighted, and attached to the principal building, shall be permitted. 
E)  Use of the dwelling for this purpose shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the conditioned air space of the dwelling. 
F)  No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the dwelling shall be permitted. 
G)  The home-based business shall not constitute a nuisance in the neighborhood. 
H)  Any accessory buildings used in connection with the home-based business shall not exceed 50 percent of the gross square footage main dwelling. 
I)  Instruction in music and other tutorial services shall be limited to two (2) students at a time. 
J)  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the home-based business. 
K)  No more than two (2) non-transient guests may be boarded at any one time as a home-based business. 
L)  The following and similar uses may be considered for approval as home based businesses provided that all additional requirements of this section are met: accountant, addressing service, answering service, architect, art instructor, barber or beauty shop (with no more than one (1) chair), drafting, insurance agent, manufacturing agent, music teacher, notary public, photography, real estate agent, tax consultant, and other home based businesses as approved following Planning Commission review and County Commission approval. 
M)  Not more than six (6) children may be kept in the home as a customary home occupation. Safe, proper and efficient loading and unloading spaces must be supplied and at least 100 square feet of outdoor play area is required for each child accommodated. The entire outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a steel mesh security fence with lockable gates approved by the Building Inspector or other substantial building material affording equal or better protection, having a minimum height of at least four (4) feet and constructed in such a manner that maximum safety to the children is ensured. 
9-4 - Rural Home Occupations. 
This provision is designed to provide for the reasonable development of rural home occupations as an accessory use to rural residential uses. Uses of property for the Rural Home Occupation (RHO) shall be governed by the following requirements: 
A)  Property for which an RHO is proposed shall be owner occupied and shall contain a minimum of five acres of land in the A-G Land Use district and shall directly abut an arterial or collector roadway as defined on the Major Thoroughfare Plan. 
B)  Any accessory structure used in conjunction with an RHO shall be located behind the residential structure and meet the side and rear building setback lines of the A-G Land Use district and all building code separation requirements shall apply. The accessory structure shall contain no more than seventy-five (75) percent of the gross square footage of the principal residential dwelling. 
C)  Any Rural Home Occupation shall be operated in such a manner as to not be a nuisance to adjacent residential structures. This section limits uses of excessive noise, lighting, traffic, and unsightly outside storage. 
D)  No display of products shall be allowed in the front yard. 
E)  Only one sign advertising the accessory use, not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in size, motionless and non-lighted, shall be permitted for the proposed RHO use. 
F)  All Rural Home Occupations operating under this ordinance section shall provide designated off-street parking to the rear of the primary residential structure for customers of said RHO. 
G)  Any occupation that meets the intent of this ordinance may be considered for a Special Exception within an A-G Land Use district as described herein. Such occupations may include but are not limited to the following: catering service, motorized vehicle repair, printing or engraving shop, flower shop, furniture upholstery shop, locksmith or gunsmith, personal service shops, photography studio, specialty shops as they relate to the sale of items manufactured therein, and service-oriented commercial activities associated with agricultural uses. Other uses as reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the County Commission may be considered. 
H)  Any use approved as a Rural Home Occupation, which proposes outside storage, shall provide for screening of the entire service or storage area as required in Section 3-18 of this ordinance. 
I)  Any business related to or associated with an agricultural activity shall not be construed as a RHO as defined by this ordinance. 
9-5 - Rural Farm Housing. 
In A-G development districts within the unincorporated area of Brantley County, there shall be permitted, as a matter of right, to any owner of property, one primary dwelling and as many as five (5) residential uses on any parcel of land under single ownership where the following conditions can and must be met. 
A)  Occupants of non-principal residential uses shall be related by blood ties to the owner of the property and said blood relationships shall extend to but not beyond the second descending and ascending generation. This shall not apply to occupants that are full time employees of the property owner and are responsible for the agricultural production of the property. 
B)  Each such non-principal residential use shall occupy a land area not Less than 43,560 square feet in size, with a minimum area width of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
C)  Each such land area shall be so defined by permanent physical markers as to be given a numerical address and location designation. 
D)  Each such land area shall receive approval from established county health authorities as to its suitability as a site for an effective sanitary sewage disposal system designed to accommodate wastes generated by the user of that land site. 
E)  An acceptable domestic water supply shall be available to each satellite user of this special provision and such water supply shall meet local public requirements as administered by county health authorities. 
F)  No commercial use of this special provision will be allowed and no rental charge can be placed on the non-principal uses. 
G)  Each such use shall be accessible, either by private drive or public roadway, to the public thoroughfare system. 
H)  Individual power supply sources shall be provided to each user under this special provision and each utility installation shall meet such standards as have been adopted by Brantley County. 
I)  Facilities established under this special provision for residential use shall meet the requirements of local construction codes established by the Brantley County Commission. 
J)  Permits for construction will not be issued prior to the approval of each of the aforementioned conditions by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager). In addition, any change in use or occupancy must be approved by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager). 
9-6 - Manufactured Housing Parks. 
Manufactured housing parks are allowed provided the following requirements are met: 
A)  The minimum lot size shall be three (3) acres. 
B)  The MHP shall have a minimum side yard of 20 feet, minimum rear yard of 20 feet, and front yard of at least 20 feet greater than that required for other uses permitted in the district, 
C)  Access to the park shall be limited to paved streets with at least fifty (50) feet of right-of-way. The site must directly abut a major thoroughfare roadway as designated on the Official Road Classification Map of Brantley County, 
D)  Each manufactured home shall be connected to an approved water and sewer system as required by the Brantley County Health Department. The park plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval from the Brantley County Health Department. 
E)  The minimum area per manufactured home space shall not be less than 8,000 square feet with a minimum individual space width of (60) feet. Individual manufactured home requirements shall be as dictated by the rules and regulations of the Brantley County Board of Health and the Land Use ordinance minimums. All Health Department required plans shall accompany the required site plan for Planning Commission review. 
F)  All manufactured home spaces or other park sites devoted to accessory uses (such as management offices, laundry facilities, recreation buildings, etc.) shall have an interior setback of ten (10) feet from its respective area boundaries. Residential accessory buildings associated with dwelling units shall be set back ten (10) feet from its respective space boundaries, limit of one (1) accessory building per manufactured home space. 
G)  A twenty (20) foot interior drive, paved and properly drained, shall serve all manufactured home spaces and shall be drained so as to prevent damage to adjoining property, public or private. 
H)  Each manufactured home space and accessory use space shall be clearly defined by means of concrete, steel or iron pipe markers placed at all corners. 
I)  All property lines of a manufactured housing park which abuts any Land Use district other than another MHP district, shall be screened as required in Section 3-18 of this Ordinance. 
J)  Prior to any application for Land Use district amendment, development or expansion, all manufactured housing park developments must be submitted to and reviewed by the Greater Brantley Planning Commission and must receive their approval prior to the issuance of any building permits. Proper utility plans, drainage plans and road development plans, drawn to county specifications, shall accompany the proposed site plan for county staff review prior to submission to the Planning Commission. For the purpose of the development of the required plans, site plans for manufactured housing parks shall contain data equivalent to the preliminary plat requirements of the Brantley County Land Subdivision Ordinance. Construction drawings equivalent to the improvements plan process described in the Brantley County Land Subdivision Ordinance shall be required to be submitted to and approved by the Brantley County Engineer prior to the initiation of any manufactured housing park construction. All utility and street construction must be completed prior to issuance of any building permits. 
1)  At least 500 square feet per manufactured home lot, not to be part of the required manufactured lot, shall be provided in one or more locations for community playground and recreation purposes. 
2)  No manufactured housing park shall be occupied by a greater number of manufactured homes than that authorized in the approved site plan. No manufactured housing park shall be enlarged or expanded unless a separate manufactured housing park site plan has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. 
3)  An identification sign, including the name of the manufactured home community, and the name of the owner/manager or another individual who can act for the owner/manager, measuring not less than 10 square feet and no more than 16 square feet, shall be placed on private property, close to the entrance of the park and readily visible from both directions of the public right-of-way. 
9-7 - Junk Yard Buffers. 
An eight (8) foot fence and six (6) foot wide buffer strip, developed in accordance with Section 3-18, shall be erected and properly maintained along all road frontages, all side lot lines and all rear yard lines of any junk yard. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. A) 
SECTION 10. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES 

10-1 - Land Use Administrator (County Manager.) 
An administrative official designated as the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) by the Board of Commissioners, Brantley County, Georgia, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
10-2 - Building/Development Permit Required. 
A building/development permit issued by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving, demolition, or alteration of any building or structure. No building or development permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance; however, a building permit issued before the adoption of this ordinance shall remain valid with the same qualifications as issued under this ordinance. 
10-3 - Application for Building/Development Permit. 
All applications for building/development permits shall be accompanied by a plat or plan in duplicate (2) drawn to scale, and furnished by the applicant, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the lot, the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, the setback lines of the building on the "permit lot", and such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. The following is required on the site plan before the site plan is considered by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager). 
Any building/development permit shall become void if the work involved has not begun within six (6) months after the date of issuance of the permit or if the work or development authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the work or development is commenced; provided that extensions of time and periods not exceeding six (6) months each may be allowed in writing by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager). Any unapproved deviation from the site plan shall cause the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) to not issue a Certificate of Occupancy. 
Single family residential, agricultural buildings, and their accessory uses, site plans need not be drawn to scale, but must be accurate as to dimensions of lot and proposed building. 
The applicant for a building/development permit shall submit a certificate with this application which certifies that the lot which he proposes to develop is a lot of record. When the lot in question does not meet the lot width and lot area requirements of this ordinance then the applicant shall certify that such lot was a lot of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance 11-1-10 or of the Brantley County Subdivision Regulations or is a lot which has been created through governmental taking of property. 
All applications for a building/development permit shall be closely coordinated with Brantley County's Soil and Sedimentation and Erosion Control Ordinance. 
10-3.1  Coordination with Development of Regional Impact Requirements. The Georgia Department of Community Affairs, pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act, has established criteria for the identification of certain large-scale developments which have the potential to cause land use impacts beyond the boundaries of the respective local government where a project might be proposed. These developments, known as Developments of Regional Impact (DRIs), shall be submitted, based on established DCA standards, procedures, and format, to the Southern Georgia Regional Commission (SGRC) for review and recommendation prior to issuance of any local building or development permit or utility tap (does not apply to any activity reviewed under any earlier Land Use district amendment.) As such, these requirements establish an official delay in the local permitting and/or review process to allow for compliance with these requirements. 
10-3.2  Coordination with Water Resource District Requirements. As identified in Section 10, Water Resource District for Brantley County contains three identified water resources: Groundwater Recharge Areas, River Corridor Protection Areas, and Potential Wetlands Areas. The Groundwater Recharge Areas, Protected River Corridor segments and generalized wetlands are available as digital overlays. Prior to issuance of any local building/development permits, these databases shall be checked, and if any are found applicable to the subject project or property, all requirements of Section 10, Water Resource Districts, shall be enforced as part of the permitting process. 
10-4 - Activities to Comply with Site Plan. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform to the specifications of said site plan. The site plan may be amended only with the approval of the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) or this designee. 
10-5 - Penalties for Violation. 
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, demolished, altered, repaired, moved, converted or maintained, or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the offender shall, upon conviction in Magistrate's Court, be fined no more than five-hundred ($500) dollars or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, for each offense. Each day of continued violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this ordinance, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) and/or [his] designee. Such actions shall be closely coordinated with U. S. Army Corps of Engineers supervision. If the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) and/or [his] designee discover a violation of this ordinance that also constitutes a violation of provisions of the Clean Water Act as amended, the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) or [his] designee may issue written notification of the violation to the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
10-6 - Enforcement. 
The Magistrate's Court of Brantley County shall have jurisdiction over violators of this ordinance and all procedures for enforcement of such ordinance shall be as provided in Article 4, Chapter 10 of Title 14, Official Code of Georgia. Complaints of violations of any provision of this ordinance shall be brought before the Magistrate's Court by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) or their designated representative and shall be prosecuted through that court. 
10-7 - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of these regulations, the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) or other appropriate county authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner or occupant who would be damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the violation in the case of such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use; or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land. 
10-8 - Complaints Regarding Violations. 
When a violation of this Ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint shall state fully the causes and basis thereof and shall be filed with the Land Use Administrator (County Manager). He shall record properly such complaint, investigate within thirty (30) days and take action thereon as provided in these regulations. 
10-9 - Cancellation of Permits. 
A demolition, building, or development permit shall be canceled by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) when the method of demolition, construction, or use violates any provision contained in these regulations, or any state or local ordinance or resolution. Upon such cancellation, any further work upon the demolition, construction, alteration, or repair on said building or structure, and any further use of said building or structure or land, shall be deemed a violation. Each and every day such unlawful demolition, construction, alteration, or repair on said building or structure, or further use of said building or structure or land continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
10-10 - Certificate of Occupancy. 
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) in accordance with the following provisions: 
10-10.1  Certificate of Occupancy Required: A Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
A)  A building hereafter erected. 
B)  A building hereafter altered so as to affect height, the side, front, or rear yard. 
10-10.2  Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy: Upon payment of all required fees, the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) shall sign and issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the proposed use of land or building is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance, and if the building, as finally constructed, substantially complies with the sketch or plan submitted and approved for the building permit. One (1) copy of all Certificates of Occupancy issued which contain a statement of the intended use of the applicable property and other pertinent information, signed by the owner or this agent shall be kept on file in the office of the Land Use Administrator (County Manager). 
10-11 - Reason for Denial of Permit. 
When a permit is denied, the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) shall provide in writing, upon request of the applicant for a permit, the reasons for denying the permit within ten (10) days after said request. 
10-12 - Permits and Licenses Void When Issued in Conflict. 
Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this resolution shall be null and void. 
10-13 - Appeals. 
Appeals from the decisions of the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) with regard to interpretation, administration, and enforcement shall be made to the Board of County Commissioners, Brantley County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. A) 
SECTION 11. - APPEALS 

11-4 - Appeals. 
11-4.1  Who May Appeal: Appeals to the Brantley County Commissioners may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the governing authority affected by any decision of the Land Use Administrator (County Manager). Such appeals shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days after the date of notification of the decision appealed from by filing with the Land Use Administrator (County Manager), and with the Commission, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Land Use Administrator (County Manager) shall forthwith transmit to the Commission all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
11-4.3  Presentation of Evidence: The appellant, and any public agency or private individual shall be entitled to present evidence on matters before the Commission. Commission may request data or factual evidence from the Planning Commission in reaching decisions. 
11-4.4  Appeals Decisions. The Commissioners may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Land Use Administrator (County Manager), and to that end shall have all the powers of the Land Use Administrator (County Manager). The Commissioners may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) to carry out the decisions of the Commission. 
11-5 - Public Hearing. 
11-5.1  Notice of Hearing Shall Be Given: Before making its decision on an administrative appeal, request for a variance, or any other matter within the Commission authority, said Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least fifteen (15) days but not more than 45 days notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be sent to the appellant or petitioner, to the Planning Commission, the Land Use Administrator (County Manager), and to the owners of all properties either adjoining the property with which the hearing is concerned or situated directly across a public right-of-way from said property. Such notice shall contain the name of the appellant or petitioner, the date, time, and place set for the hearing, and a brief statement of the nature of the hearing. 
11-5.2  Public Notice in Newspaper: The Board shall give a public notice of the hearing in a newspaper published and circulated in Brantley County, Georgia by advertisement published at least fifteen (15) days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing shall be published in two (2) consecutive issues of the legal organ of the county. 
11-5.3  Who May Appear: Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. 
11-5.4  Time Limit on Board's Decision: The Commission shall reach a decision following a public hearing within thirty (30) days. 
11-6 - Variances and Special Exceptions. 
11-6.1  Request for a Variance: The Commission may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of these regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of provisions of these regulations will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Provided, however, that a variance shall not be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance in the district in question. Such variance may be granted in an individual case upon finding by the board that all of the following exists: 
A)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography, and such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved and not to any other; 
B)  The application of these regulations to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
C)  Special circumstances are not the result of the action of the applicant, and granting the variance request will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
D)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of these regulations; provided that no variance may be granted for a use of land, building or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance. Applications for use variances shall be accepted by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) and shall be properly filed as requests for Land Use districts amendment, the authority for such being solely reserved for the Brantley County Commission. 
E)  Provided that the Board of Commissioners may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards (i.e., increased setbacks, buffer strips, screening, etc.) as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of residents and workers in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood. Provided, that whenever the Board of Commissioners shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations that any of the terms, conditions or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said Board shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for public hearing. 
11-6.2  Application for Special Exception Approval: An application for a Special Exception approval shall include the following: 
A)  The community or area in which is located the land proposed to be reclassified and the street number, if any, or if none, the location with respect to the nearby public roads in common use; 
B)  A plat of the land in question, and a description by metes and bounds, bearings, and distances of the land, or if the boundaries conform to the lot boundaries within a subdivision for which a plat is recorded in the land records of the County; then the lot, block, and subdivision designations with appropriate plat reference; or the map and parcel number according to the current tax mapping system of Brantley County; 
C)  The present Land Use district classification and the proposed Special Exception usage proposed for the subject property. 
D)  The names and address of the owners of the land, and the names and addresses of abutting property owners. 
E)  The area of the land proposed to be reclassified stated in square feet if less than one (1) acre, and in acres if one (1) or more; 
F)  The application number, date of application, and action taken on all prior applications filed for the development district reclassification or Special Exception use of the whole or part of the land proposed for Special Exception use. 
G)  A copy of the Written Statement of Consistency if Special Exception application is for a solid waste management facility as required and defined by the County Solid Waste Management Plan. 
11-6.3  Request for Extension of Non-Conforming Residential Uses: The Commission may authorize upon appeal in specific cases an extension or replacement of an existing non-conforming residential use which the Commission is specifically authorized to pass on under the terms of this ordinance. Said extension may be granted in an individual case upon finding by the Commission that: 
A)  The use is a non-conforming use as defined in these regulations; and 
B)  The use is in full compliance with all requirements of these regulations applicable to non-conforming uses; and 
C)  The extension of said use will not further injure a permitted use on adjacent property in the same district. 
D)  This section is specifically designed to allow far the replacement of homeowner occupied residential units in areas no longer zoned for residential uses. As such, this provision is not subject to the limits of Section 8-5. 
11-7 - Forms. 
Appeals from actions of the Land Use Administrator (County Manager), requests for variances, and requests for extension of non-conforming residential uses shall be made on forms provided for such purposes. The applicant shall provide all information required on said forms. Forms shall be filed with the Land Use Administrator (County Manager), and the applicant shall pay Brantley County for expenses incidental to the appeal. The Land Use Administrator (County Manager) shall accept no form unless it contains all pertinent information and is accompanied by the required fee to defray expenses as set from time to time by the County Commission. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. A) 
SECTION 12. - AMENDMENT 

12-1 - General Conditions. 
These regulations, including the official Land Use districts map, may be amended by the Board of Commissioners on their own motion, on petition of a property owner or this duly authorized agent, or on recommendation of the Planning Commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. Before enacting an amendment to these regulations, the governing authority shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon as set forth in this section. 
12-1.1  Establishment of Comprehensive Plan. The 2016 Greater Brantley Comprehensive Plan, as duly amended, is established as official policy of Brantley County. As such, the goals and policies of the Plan, and the resultant Future Land Use Plan, shall serve as the guide under which the unincorporated areas of the county are divided into Land Use districts. The recommendations of the Plan are hereby established as official policy of the county, and shall receive due consideration in all Land Use districts reclassification requests. 
12-1.2  Limited Use Provision. The Brantley County Board of Commissioners establishes the Limited Use provision for the purpose of allowing an applicant to request that a certain area be designated as a limited use. In some areas of the county, a specific land use activity out of a general Land Use classification may have less community impact than some of the possibilities of use in that specific Land Use district. For this reason, an applicant may request in his development petition to limit the use of a proposed property to a specified use only. The requested limited use must be among the uses permitted in the Land Use district classification for which the limited use is requested. Alteration or change of an approved limited use shall be treated as any normal Land Use amendment. 
12-1.3  Special Conditions Limitations. An applicant may file site plans, renderings, construction specifications, written development restrictions and other site planning or development conditions which the applicant proposes as binding conditions upon the development and use of the property involved in the application. Should the application be approved with these conditions, any alteration or change of special conditions limitation shall be treated as any normal Land Use district amendment. 
12-2 - Application for Amendment. 
12-2.1  General: Applications for amendment of these regulations may be in the form of proposals for amendment of the text of these regulations, proposals for amendment of the Land Use districts map or requests for Special Exception approval. Applications for amendment shall be submitted to the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) and shall include a fee payable to the county to defray expenses as set from time to time by the County Commission. No application for a Land Use district amendment affecting the same parcel of property or part thereof shall be accepted by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) until the expiration of at least six (6) months immediately following the denial of the development district amendment request by the Brantley County Commission. 
12-2.2  Signature of Applicant Required. All applications shall be signed by the applicant, and shall state this name and address. 
12-2.3  Application for Text Amendment. In the case of a text amendment, the application shall set forth the new text to be added and the existing text to be deleted. 
12-2.4  Application for Map Amendment. An application for a map amendment shall include the following information: 
A)  The community or area in which is located the land proposed to be reclassified and the street number, if any, or if none, the location with respect to the nearby public roads in common use; 
B)  A plat of the land in question, and a description by metes and bounds, bearings, and distances of the land, or if the boundaries conform to the lot boundaries within a subdivision for which a plat is recorded in the land records of the County; then the lot, block, and subdivision designations with appropriate plat reference; or the map and parcel number according to the current tax mapping system of Brantley County; 
C)  The present Land Use district classification and the classification proposed for such land; 
D)  The name and address of the owners of the land; and the names and addresses of abutting property owners. 
E)  The area of the land proposed to be reclassified stated in square feet if less than one (1) acre, and in acres if one (1) or more; 
F)  The application number, date of application., and action taken on all prior applications filed for the reclassification of the whole or part of the land proposed to be reclassified. 
12-2.5  Campaign Contributions. If the applicant has made, within two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the applicant's request for a Land Use amendment, campaign contributions aggregating $250 or more to any member of the Brantley County Commission or any member of the Greater Brantley Planning Commission, it shall be the duty of the applicant and the attorney representing the applicant to disclose the following in the application: 
A)  The name of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution or gift was made; 
B)  The dollar amount of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the map or Special Exception amendment and the date of each contribution; and 
C)  An enumeration and description of each gift having a value of $250 or more made by the applicant to the local government official during the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the Land Use amendment. 
D)  In the event that no such gift or contributions were made, the application shall affirmatively so state. 
12-2.6  Developments of Regional Impact. The Georgia Department of Community Affairs, pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act, has established criteria for the identification of certain large-scale developments which have the potential to cause land use impacts beyond the boundaries of the respective local government where a project might be proposed. These developments, known as Developments of Regional Impact (DRIs), shall be submitted, based on established DCA standards, procedures, and format, to the Southern Georgia Regional Commission (SGRC) for review and recommendation prior to any Planning Commission or Brantley County Commission action. As such, these requirements establish an official delay in the local amendment process to allow for compliance with these requirements. 
12-2.7  Referral to Planning Commission. Within five (5) days after the routine monthly application acceptance deadline, the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) shall transmit a copy of the completed application to applicable local staff members for review and recommendation. The Land Use Administrator (County Manager) shall coordinate this local review process with the County's planning staff and/or planning consultant to prepare a written staff report on all matters brought before the Planning Commission and County Commission. The Planning Commission shall review each application for consistency with the adopted local Comprehensive Plan, and the adopted standards for exercise of the Land Use powers. The staff report and Planning Commission recommendations shall then be transmitted to the County Commissioners. The Planning Commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to submit a report to the County Commissioners. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within thirty (30) days, it shall be deemed to have recommended denial of the requested amendment. 
A)  Posting of Property: Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the public hearing on any application for a map or Special Exception amendment (other than a map or Special Exception amendment initiated by the Planning Commission or the County Commission), the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) shall erect a sign on the land proposed to be reclassified. Such sign shall be erected by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) within (10) feet of whatever boundary line of such land abuts the most traveled public road; and, if no public road abuts thereon, then such sign shall be erected to face in such a manner as may be most readily seen by the public. The sign shall have a minimum size of twenty (20) by thirty (30) inches (20" x 30"), shall show the application number, the present Land Use classification, the proposed Land Use classification or Special Exception use, the scheduled date, time, and place of public hearing, and the telephone number to call for further information. If the land sought to be reclassified lies within more than one (1) block as shown on a plat recorded in the land records of the County, then a sign shall be erected on the land in each such block. 
B)  Removal of Sign: Any such sign shall be maintained at all times by the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) until a decision on the application has been made by the County Commissioners. 
12-2.8  Hearing Procedures. 
A)  Hearing Called: Before taking action on a proposed Land Use amendment, the Board of Commissioners shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least fifteen, (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days' notice of the time, place, and purpose of said hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within Brantley County, Georgia at least (2) consecutive issues. Such notice shall also state the application number and date, and shall contain a summary of the proposed amendment, if a text amendment, and in the case of a map amendment, the location of the property, its area, the name of the owner or their authorized agent, and the present and proposed Land Use classification or Special Exception use for the property affected. 
Further, such advertisement shall advise the public pursuant to O.C.G.A. 36-67A-3 that any opponent of a proposed district amendment or Special Exception approval action who has made campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official of the local government which will consider the application within two (2) years of the date of the application shall be required to file a disclosure with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: (1) The name and official position of the local government official to whom campaign contributions were made; and (2) the dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the opponent to the local government official during the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the proposed Land Use district amendment or Special Exception approval action and the date of each contribution. Such disclosure shall be required to be filed at least five (5) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing. 
B)  Notice to Interested Parties: A notice shall be given to the applicant and the Planning Commission of the date, time, and place of the public hearing. All application files shall be placed in the custody of the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) and be open to public inspection during regular office hours. 
C)  Letters: As to an application to amend the Official Land Use Districts Map or a Special Exception request, the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) shall send letters to abutting property owners at least fifteen (15) days and no more than forty-five (45) days in advance of the Public Hearing before the County Commission. Letters shall include information as to the nature of the application and the date, time, and place of the public hearing. 
D)  Public Hearing Procedure: All public hearings on Land Use matters shall be placed on the County Commission agenda under a section entitled "Public Hearings". The County Commission Chairman, or [his] designee, shall officially declare the public hearing open and shall note that Brantley County's written Public Hearing Procedures, Brantley County's Standards for Exercise of Land Use Powers, and a copy of Georgia's Conflict of Interest Law are available to the attending public as a handout and are posted for public review. 
The Land Use Administrator (County Manager) and/or designee shall then announce the matter for consideration. The Chairman shall then call for acknowledgment of a potential conflict of interest by members of the Commission. The Land Use Administrator (County Manager) will then report the staff recommendation and the recommendation of the Greater Brantley Planning Commission. The Chairman shall then allow public input. General procedures to be followed will require citizen comments to be heard in an orderly fashion. Citizens speaking in favor of the request shall be heard first, followed by those opposed to the issue. All speakers will be asked to provide his or her name and address for the public record. Citizens are requested to keep their comments as brief as possible so that all who wish to be heard will have adequate time. Where there is a large number of citizens wishing to testify at a given hearing, the presiding officer may invoke reasonable time limitations on both the proponents and opponents of a request. In such cases, these time limits shall apply to both sides of an issue equally, such minimum time period to be no less than ten minutes per side. Citizens shall address their comments to the County Commission as a whole. Individual attacks or cross examination of Commission members, county employees or other citizens will be ruled out of order. The Commission retains the privilege to ask any questions of staff or any citizen present for clarification. 
After all citizen comments have been received, all further discussion of the specific application is reserved for the County Commission. The Chairman shall then declare the public hearing closed and no further public comment will be entertained. The County Commission will then render a decision on the application. So that the purpose of this Ordinance will be served, health, public safety, and general welfare secured, the County Commission may approve the application, reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, add or delete conditions of the application, deny an application, or defer consideration of an application to acquire additional information. An action by the Commission to defer the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered, which statement shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the application and no further notice is required. IN THE CASE OF TABLING OF A MATTER, NO FURTHER PUBLIC COMMENTS WILL BE ENTERTAINED UPON FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF THE MATTER. 
When, in the opinion of the County Commission, the official public hearing has brought forth substantial new evidence or testimony not available to the Greater Brantley Planning Commission at the time of their review of a Land Use matter, or should the Commission desire to request further study by the Planning Commission of a particular aspect of an application, it shall be the policy of the Commission to table the issue and request that the Planning Commission restudy the issue and affirm or amend its recommendation, which action shall be reported to the County Commission prior to making a final decision. 
E)  Standards for Exercise of Land Use Powers: In order to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of Brantley County against the unrestricted use of property, the following standards, and other factors relevant to balancing the above stated public interests shall be considered as they apply to any application brought before the Planning Commission or the County Commission for a Land Use decision: 
1)  Is the proposed Land Use or use suitable in view of the Land Use and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
2)  Does the request represent the possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts and will the proposed use adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
3)  Will the proposed use cause an excessive or burdensome use of public facilities or services, including but not limited to streets, schools, water, sewer, or other public utilities, including police and fire protection? 
4)  Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the Comprehensive Plan or is the proposed use compatible and consistent with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
5)  Will the proposed change adversely influence existing conditions in the neighborhood or the city or county at large and are there substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be used as currently districted? 
6)  Are there potential adverse impacts on the environment, including but not limited to drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality, and water quality and quantity? 
7)  Are the costs required of the public in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and public safety necessities reasonable when considering the proposed changes? 
8)  Will the proposed change be detrimental to the value or improvement of development of adjacent or nearby property in accordance with existing requirements and development standards? 
9)  Is the proposed change out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood or Brantley County or does the request reflect a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and the right to unrestricted use of property? 
10)  Will the proposed change constitute a grant of special privilege to the individual owner as contrasted with the adjacent or nearby neighborhood or with the general public? 
F)  Standards for Special Exception Review: In addition to the standards enumerated in subsection (e) above, the following additional standards shall be considered for Special Exception requests: 
1)  Is the type of street providing access to the use adequate to serve the proposed Special Exception use? 
2)  Is access into and out of the property adequate to provide for traffic and pedestrian safety, the anticipated volume of traffic flow, and to allow access by emergency vehicles? 
3)  Are public facilities such as schools, water, sewer or other public utilities and police and fire protection adequate to serve the proposed Special Exception use? 
4)  Are refuse, service parking and loading areas on the property located or screened to protect other properties in the area from such adverse effects as noise, light glare and other negative impacts? 
5)  Will the hours and manner of operation of the Special Exception use have no adverse impacts on other properties in the area? 
6)  Will the height, size or location of the buildings or other structures on the property be compatible with the height, size or location of buildings or other structures on neighboring properties? 
In addition to the general factors articulated above for Special Exception uses, the following factors shall be specifically considered by the Planning Commission and the County Commission with respect to all "Solid Waste, Inert" facilities and all "Solid waste, sanitary, waste energy" facilities (as defined in Section 2-1): 
1)  Is the proposed Special Exception use consistent with the Brantley County, City of Hoboken, and City of Nahunta Solid Waste Management Plan including, but not limited to, all siting factors and related restrictions? Will the proposed use have any negative effect on the County's solid waste management program? 
2)  Will the disposal site be located on a State Highway for ingress and egress, and would the site create traffic through any primarily residential area? 
3)  What is the proximity of the site to: 
a)  Any protected river corridors or any lake or river or "state waters" as defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3(16), as may be amended from time to time; 
b)  Any wetlands; 
c)  Any public or private water supply wells; 
d)  Any cultural or historical site or place (including, but not limited to, National historic sites or places, such as the Sylvester Mumford House and the Brantley County Courthouse, and/or historical markers listed by the Georgia Historical Society); 
e)  Any schools or religious places of worship; 
f)  Any adjacent or nearby residential dwellings or residentially zoned districts; 
g)  Any private or public airports within Brantley County; 
h)  Any municipalities not participating in the Brantley County, City of Hoboken, and City of Nahunta Solid Waste Management Plan? 
4)  Would the Special Exception use be detrimental or injurious to the enjoyment, use, or development of adjacent or nearby properties, or to the general community? If so, would the benefits of and need for the proposed use be greater than any possible depreciating effects and damages to the neighboring properties? 
5)  Would the Special Exception use create a nuisance or hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use such a facility, vehicular movement, noise, fumes, or odors generated, or type of physical activity? 
6)  Will the hours and manner of operation of the Special Exception use have adverse impacts on other properties in the area? 
7)  Is the parcel of land on which the Special Exception use is proposed to be established of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of the use? 
8)  Does the property have other reasonably economically viable uses that would be less injurious to the neighborhood? 
Provided that the County Commission may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood; and provided that wherever the County Commission shall find in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations that any term, condition or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said County Commission shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing. 
Special Exception approval granted by the County Commission shall be valid for a period of three years. If the applicant fails to begin the Special Exception use within this three-year period, the County's approval shall become null and void. However, upon written motion of the applicant to the County at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the three-year period, the County may extend the three-year period where warranted in light of all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the size and phasing of the development, substantial financial expenditures, economic cycles, and market conditions. Such extension shall be by unanimous vote of the County Commission following a public hearing. The County shall publish a notice of the public hearing in the official County legal organ at least 15 days and no more than 45 days prior to said public hearing and in that same time period shall cause certified letters to be sent to all property owners and residents within one mile of the application property including the date, time and place of the public hearing. 
G)  Public Hearings Records Standards: The County Clerk shall mechanically record the proceedings of all Land Use public hearings. If requested by any party, verbatim transcripts of the public hearing can be prepared, but only if requested and purchased in advance by the requesting party, who must arrange at his expense for a certified court reporter to record and transcribe the hearing and furnish the original of the transcript to the commission for its records. The record of the public hearing and all evidence (e.g., maps, drawings, traffic studies, etc.) submitted at the public hearing shall be noted as such and shall become a permanent part of the particular Land Use amendment file. 
H)  Conflict of Interest and Disclosure Rules: Any Brantley County Commissioner or Planning Commission member shall refrain from discussion of or voting upon any Land Use matter where the following exist: 
1)  Has any direct ownership in any real property to be affected by a Land Use action under consideration by Brantley County Government; or 
2)  Has a ten percent (10%) or more direct ownership interest in the total assets or capital stock in any business entity which has any direct ownership in any real property affected by a Land Use action under consideration by Brantley County Government; or 
3)  Has a spouse, parent, sibling or child with any interest as described in items 1 and 2 above shall disclose the nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the Brantley County Commission as soon as he or she knows of its existence. Such an official, which shall include members of the County Commission, or Planning Commission also shall disqualify himself/herself from voting on the Land Use action and shall not take any other action on behalf of himself or herself or anyone else to influence action on the Land Use proposal. Any written disclosures made pursuant to this section which result in the inability of the County Commission to obtain a quorum for the purpose of making a final decision when considering a Land Use action, the County Commission shall initiate the special master process set forth in O.C.G.A. §36-67a-5, as amended. Moreover, questions of interpretation as to the application of this statute should be resolved by reference to the Georgia state law governing campaign contribution disclosures, O.C.G.A. §36-57-1 et seq, as amended. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. A) 
SECTION 13. - DUTIES OF LAND USE ADMINISTRATOR (COUNTY MANAGER), COUNTY COMMISSION AND COURTS ON MATTERS OF APPEAL 

13.1 - Land Use Administrator (County Manager). 
It is the intent of these regulations that the Land Use Administrator (County Manager) be chiefly: 
A)  Serve as administrative secretary to the Planning Commission. 
B)  Maintain public records concerning the administration of the Land Use Ordinance, including all maps, amendments, Certificates of Land Use Compliance, Special exception Uses, Variances, and records of public hearings. 
C)  To the extent practical, collect data and keep informed as to the best Land Use practices in order to be qualified to make recommendations to the Planning Commission, all of which must be approved by the County Commission. 
D)  Undertake other relevant duties as may be delegated by the County Commission. 
13-2 - County Commission. 
It is further the intent of these regulations that the duties of the County Commission shall be to adopt or reject proposed amendments to these regulations as detailed in Section 12. Matters of nonenforcement of this ordinance may be brought to the County Commission's attention by aggrieved parties only after the aggrieved party has followed the complaint procedure. Corrections to problems of non-enforcement shall be handled by the Board of Commissioners. Recourse from all decisions of the County Commission shall be to the courts as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. A) 
SECTION 14. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

14-1 - Conflict with Other Laws. 
All previous Land Use ordinances of Brantley County, Georgia, are hereby repealed. All ordinances or parts of ordinances not specifically in conflict herewith are hereby continued in force and effect, but all such ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require greater restrictions than those required by this ordinance, such ordinances or parts of ordinances shall govern. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require lesser restrictions, the requirements here within shall govern. 
14-2 - Separability. 
If any section, clause, portion or provision of this ordinance is found unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect any other portion of this ordinance. 
14-3 - Effective Date. 
This ordinance shall take effect and be enforced from and after its adoption and passage by the Brantley County Commission. 

(Ord. of 9-8-2016; Ord. of 6-15-2017, Exh. B) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND AMENDMENTS 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances, resolutions and amendments of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 