CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF CLAYTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2013 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted June 18, 2013 
Effective July 1, 2013 
____________ 

____________ 
David Phillips 
Mayor 
____________ 
Buff Green 
Willie Fortson 
John Bradshaw 
Debbie Chisholm 
Roy Quilliams 
City Council 
____________ 
Sylvia Henry 
City Manager 
____________ 
Mitchell Baker 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Scott Crane 
City Marshal 
____________ 
Rhonda Lunsford 
City Clerk 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Clayton, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1999 Code, as supplemented through July 25, 2001, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1999 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item of interest 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Senior Code Attorney, and Stephanie C. Benesh, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Sylvia Henry, City Manager, Mitch Baker, City Attorney, Rhonda Lunsford, City Clerk, Scott Crane, City Marshal, Andy Strait, Assistant Police Chief, and Moody Barrick, Public Works Director, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Clayton, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Clayton, Georgia. 
© ;hg;Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Clayton, Georgia. 2013. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CLAYTON, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Clayton, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 44, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 14, 2011, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 14, 2011, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective July 1, 2013. 
Passed and adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Clayton this 18th day of June, 2013. 

ATTEST: 

1st Reading: May 21, 2013  2nd Reading: June 18, 2013  Board Action 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council, held on the 18th day of June, 2013. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
Adding to this table with each supplement helps users of this Code of Ordinances gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER AND OTHER LOCAL ACTS 
ARTICLE I. - CHARTER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The City of Clayton, Georgia, was original incorporated as the Town of Claytonsville, Georgia, by 1823 Ga. Laws (Unnumbered Act), p. 196. The original town charter was repealed and re-enacted on several occasions thereafter, most recently by 1909 Ga. Laws (Act No. 284), page 600, as revised by 1921 Ga. Laws (Act No. 65), page 750. (A new charter proposed by 1960 Ga. Laws (Act No. 646), p. 2417, failed at referendum). Printed herein is the 1909 charter as revised in 1921 and as subsequently amended. Amendments to the revised charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act as revised in 1921. Affidavits and notices of intent that accompanied the original and amending acts have been omitted. A uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets has been added, if necessary, for clarity. 
State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; creation, dissolution, merger, boundary changes, and deannexation of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-2; municipal annexations, O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities and authority for amendment of local charter by ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; requirement for filing and publication of charter, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-5; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; terms city, town, and municipality declared synonymous, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1. 

Sec. 1. - Corporate name; general powers. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by the authority of the same, that from and after the passage of this Act, the inhabitants of the territory designated and described in Section 2 of this Act, located in the County of Rabun, in the State of Georgia, be, and the same are, hereby incorporated under the name and style of the 'City of Clayton,' and the said City of Clayton is hereby chartered and made a city under the corporate name of the 'City of Clayton,' and by that name shall have perpetual succession, and is hereby vested with all the rights, powers and privileges incident to municipal corporations of this State or city thereof, and all rights, powers, titles, property, easements and hereditaments within or without its corporate limits, now belonging to the Town of Clayton or hereafter belonging to said City of Clayton shall be, and are, hereby vested in said 'City of Clayton' as created by this Act; and the said City of Clayton, as created by this Act, may, by its corporate name, sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with, plead and be impleaded, have and use a common seal, make and enact, through its Mayor and Councilmen, such ordinances, bylaws, rules, regulations and resolutions for the transaction of its business, and the welfare and proper government of said city, as to said Mayor and Councilmen may seem best, and which shall be consistent with the laws of the State of Georgia and the laws of the United States, and the said City of Clayton shall have the right and power to purchase hold, rent, lease, sell, exchange, enjoy, possess and retain in perpetuity, or for any term of years any property, estate or estates, real or personal, lands and tenements and hereditaments, and of whatsoever kinds, and within or without the limits of said city, for corporate purposes said City of Clayton, created by this Act, shall succeed to all rights of, and is hereby made responsible, as a body corporate, for all legal debts, liabilities, undertakings and suits or actions brought by or brought against said Town of Clayton and its Mayor and Council, and of, or in which, said Town of Clayton may be in any wise connected, interested or liable, as heretofore incorporated." 
Sec. 2. - Territorial limits. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the corporate limits of said City of Clayton shall extend one mile in each and every direction from the center of the public square as now located in said city, and shall, therefore, be a circle, the center of which shall be center of said public square, with a radius of one mile. 
Sec. 2.1. - Addition to territorial limits—2004. 
In addition to the present territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following tract or parcel of land located in Rabun County, Georgia: 
All that tract or parcel of land, lying and being in Land Lots 20 and 21 of the 5th District, Rabun County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the most southerly point of the mitered right of way of the northerly variable existing right of way of Stekoa Falls Road and the easterly variable existing right of way of U.S. Highway 441, said point being the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; thence along the mitered right of way North 21 degrees 43 minutes 52 seconds West for a distance of 8.84 feet to an iron pin set at the intersection of the mitered right of way and the proposed easterly variable right of way of U.S. Highway 441; thence leaving the said mitered existing right of way and along the proposed easterly variable right of way of U.S. Highway 441 North 15 degrees 12 minutes 17 seconds East for a distance of 1014.74 feet to an iron pin set; thence leaving said right of way South 29 degrees 55 minutes 15 seconds East for a distance of 45.47 feet to an iron pin set; thence South 75 degrees 54 minutes 00 seconds East for a distance of 633.33 feet to an iron pin set; thence South 14 degrees 06 minutes 00 seconds West for a distance of 238.98 feet to an iron pin set; thence South 75 degrees 54 minutes 00 seconds East for a distance of 125.10 feet to an iron pin set; thence South 11 degrees 43 minutes 12 seconds West for a distance of 382.33 feet to an iron pin set on the northerly variable right of way of Stekoa Falls Road; thence along said right of way a curve to the left having a radius of 373.33 feet and an arc length of 35.93 feet, being subtended by a chord of South 36 degrees 54 minutes 16 seconds West for a distance of 35.92 feet to an iron pin set; thence, South 34 degrees 08 minutes 50 seconds West for a distance of 51.26 feet to an iron pin set; thence, along a curve to the right having a radius of 395.59 feet and an arc length of 24.87 feet, being subtended by a chord of South 37 degrees 51 minutes 51 seconds West for a distance of 24.86 feet to an iron pin set; thence, leaving said right of way North 75 degrees 54 minutes 00 seconds West for a distance of 417.40 feet to an iron pin set; thence, South 63 degrees 10 minutes 01 seconds West for a distance of 68.69 feet to an iron pin set; thence, North 75 degrees 54 minutes 00 seconds West for a distance of 203.71 feet to an iron pin set; thence, South 13 degrees 57 minutes 38 seconds East for a distance of 216.29 feet to an iron pin set; thence, along a curve to the right having a radius of 102.50 feet and an arc length of 80.76 feet, being subtended by a chord of South 08 degrees 36 minutes 43 seconds West for a distance of 78.69 feet to an iron pin set; thence, South 31 degrees 11 minutes 03 seconds West for a distance of 16.23 feet to an iron pin set on the northerly variable existing right of way of Stekoa Falls Road; thence along said right of way North 58 degrees 33 minutes 07 seconds West for a distance of 220.29 feet to an iron pin set, said point being the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. Said property contains 610,507 square feet or 14.015 acres. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 639), p. 3670) 
Sec. 2.2. - Addition to territorial limits—2006. 
In addition to the present territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following tract or parcel of land located in Rabun County, Georgia: 
All that tract or parcel of land, lying and being in Land Lots 21 and 22 of the 5th District, Rabun County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 21 and 22 in the Fifth Land District of Rabun County, Georgia containing 22.48 acres as shown on a plat of survey made by William F. Rolader, Georgia Registered Land Surveyor #2042, dated February 7, 2005, and more particularly described as follows TO WIT: 
Beginning at a point at the Northeast intersection of Old U.S. Highway 441 South and Owl Mountain Road, thence along North right-of-way line of Old U.S. Highway 441 S77°13'07"W/220.39', S76°56'41"W/96.65', 'S76°56'41"W/131.86', S77°04'25"W/106.15', S77°00'49"W/105.41', S79°15'33"W/82.87', S72°19'32"W/33.63', S75°50'52"W/48.32', S76°30'34"W/91.60', S76°50'12"W/113.74, S78°12'29W/124.53' TO A POINT; thence North N34°23'06"/57.20', N36°55'16"W/-42.75', N40°07'55W/87.77', N38°01'34"W/65.09', N50°46'42"W/78.99', N57°17'46"W/65.74', N57°26'31"W/72.75', N54°45'00"W/51.42', N52°54'01"W/87.05', N50°59'12"W/77.97', N46°24'57"W/64.05', N48°522'57"W/109.34', N44°22'14"W/72.40', N44°40'32"W/37.51', N34°22'50"W/92.35', .N30°00'42"W/54.20', N30°18'32"W/103.23', TO A POINT; thence S88°25'01"E/899.07'TO A POINT; thence S81°22'58"E/16.21', S61°58'23"E/26.80', S56°01'11"E145.29', S46°49'54"E/57.27', S56°12'03"E/59.54', S77°01'56"E/52.29', S81°42'05"E/103.77', S68°06'47"E/47.78', S54°57'54"E/28.05', S61°23'47"E/30.05', S71°42'15"E/42.74', N89°10'28"E/29.03', N62°51'06"E118.17', N62°10'21"E/75.69', N59°25'03"E/87.74', N61°46'22"E/46.14', N72°20'13"E/21.83', N86°03'35"E/45.01', N81°50'29"E/49.71', S89°48'31"E/31.49', S73°32'07"E/23.94', S52°29'10"E/31.48', S40°25'58"E/52.11', S29'07'27"E/31.70', S19°39'24"E/31.97', S07°04'22"E/40.85', S02°57'22"E/64.15, S05°07'57"E/43.99', S06°51'36"E/29.11', S13°10'39"E/26.13', S20°13'57"E/20.66', S27°54'05"E/27.06', S37°25'01"E/22.19', S40°57'06"E/27.23', S45°54'17"E/55.05', S49°42'20"E/53.18', S52°39'14"E/37.87', to the point of beginning containing 22.48 acres. 
(2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 723), p. 4041) 
Sec. 3. - Governing body. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the municipal government of said City of Clayton shall consist of, and be vested in, a Mayor and five Councilmen. That the present Mayor and Councilmen, to-wit: R. E. A. Hamby, Mayor, and J. C. Dover, T. L. Bynum and W. C. Norton. Councilmen, shall constitute the first Mayor and Councilmen of said city and shall remain in office until the first day of January, 1910, or until their successors are elected and qualified, and said Mayor and Councilmen shall exercise all the powers and authorities conferred upon the Mayor and Councilmen of said City of Clayton, created by this charter, and on the third Saturday in December, 1909, a Mayor and five Councilmen shall be elected as provided in the next section of this Act. 
Sec. 4. - Elections; terms; oath of office; meetings; vacancies. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that on the first Saturday in December, 1909, there shall be elected for said city by the qualified voters therein, a Mayor and five Councilmen, and annually thereafter, on the first Saturday in December, a Mayor and five Councilmen therefor, and all elections for Mayor and Councilmen under this charter, shall be by general tickets. The term of office for Mayor and Councilmen elected hereafter under the provisions of this charter shall be one year, commencing on the first day of January, next, after their election, unless said day shall fall on Sunday, in which event their term shall begin the following Monday, and said Mayor and Councilmen shall hold their offices until their successors are elected, or appointed and qualified. Before said Mayor and Councilmen shall enter upon the discharge of the duties of their offices, they shall severally take and subscribe before some authorized officer to administer oaths by the law of this State, or the retiring Mayor, the following oath, to-wit: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly demean myself as Mayor or Councilman (in which capacity I have been elected or appointed to fill) of the City of Clayton for the ensuing term, and that I will faithfully enforce the charter and ordinances of said city to the best of my skill and ability, without fear or favor, so help me God." 
Should the Mayor or any Councilman be absent from the meeting at the time when said oath should be administered to the incoming Mayor and Councilmen, he shall take said oath as soon thereafter as possible. Said Mayor and Councilmen shall provide for monthly meetings, and may hold such special or call meetings as the business of the city may require, all to be convened as provided by the city ordinances. In the event that the office of Mayor or one or more of the Councilmen shall become vacant by death, resignation, removal or otherwise, said vacancy or vacancies may be filled by appointment and selection by Mayor and Councilmen in case of a vacancy in the Council, and by the Councilmen in case of vacancy in the office of Mayor, and persons so elected shall be duly qualified to fill such vacancies in case they should be qualified to hold such office or offices, in case they were or should be regularly elected by ballot of the qualified voters of said city. 
Sec. 4A. - Manner of election. 
There are hereby created on the City Council five posts, to be designated as Post No. 1, Post No. 2, Post No. 3, Post No. 4 and Post No. 5. At the regular city election to be held in 1972, the Mayor and five Councilmen shall be elected. The Mayor and the Councilmen elected to Post No. 1 and Post No. 2 shall serve for initial terms of office of two years and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. The Councilmen elected to Post No. 3, Post No. 4 and Post No. 5 shall serve for initial terms of office of one year and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. The Mayor and councilmen elected at such election shall take office on January 1, 1973. Following the initial terms of office of the Mayor and Councilmen herein provided, the terms of office of the Mayor and Councilmen shall be two years and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. At the regular city election to be held in 1973 and in each odd-numbered year thereafter, there shall be elected three Councilmen from Post No. 3, Post No. 4 and Post No. 5, respectively. At the regular city election in 1974 and in each even-numbered year thereafter, there shall be elected a Mayor and two Councilmen from Post No. 1 and Post No. 2, respectively. 
(1972 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1459), p. 3830, § 1) 
Sec. 4B. - Date of regular election. 
Beginning in 1988, the date of the regular city election of the City of Clayton shall be the first Saturday in December of each year until otherwise provided by O.C.G.A. § 21-3-51. 
(1988 Ga. Laws, (Act No. 899), p. 3910, § 2) 
Editor's note— The revision encompassed in 1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 65), p. 3830, amended the city's charter by adding a new section 4A, and 1988 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 899), p. 3910, amended the city's charter by adding a new section 4A, the 1988 amendment has been designated at the editor's discretion as section 4B to avoid confusion and to facilitate reference. 
Sec. 5. - Removal of mayor. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that should the Mayor or any member of the Council fail or refuse to perform the duties of his office for a period of three consecutive months, or should any officer-elect refuse to qualify, the office may be, in the discretion of the remaining members of the Council, be declared vacant, and the vacancy filled as provided in the section of this Act. 
Sec. 6. - Election managers. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all elections held under this charter, and all elections in which any subject or question is submitted to the qualified voters of said City of Clayton, shall be managed by a Justice of the Peace, or some other judicial officer, and two freeholders, who are citizens of said city and own real estate therein, or by three freeholders all of whom shall be citizens of said city and own real estate therein, and said managers, before entering on their duties, shall take and subscribe before some Justice of the Peace or some other officer qualified to administer oaths before each other, the following oath: "That each of us do swear that we will faithfully and impartially conduct this election and prevent all illegal voting, and prevent no one from voting who is entitled to do so, according to law, to the best of our skill and power, so help me God." Said managers shall keep or cause to be kept, copies of two lists of voters and two tally sheets. All elections shall be held at the county Court House in said city, or at some other convenient place therein, and in case of the latter it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Council to give notice thereof for at least ten days before said election of the change of place by posting the same at the said county Court House and two other public places in said town, and all voting shall be by ballot. The polls shall be opened at 8 o'clock a.m. and closed at 6 o'clock p.m. Persons receiving the highest number of votes for the respective offices shall be declared to be elected by the managers, and a certificate from said managers to that effect shall entitle those elected to take the oath and enter upon the duties of his office. The managers of all elections held under the provisions of this charter shall be appointed by the Mayor and Councilmen, and said Mayor and Councilmen may determine and provide for the pay of the managers and such clerks as may be necessary to hold said election. 
Sec. 7. - Contested elections. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that should any contest arise over any election for Mayor and Councilmen in said city same shall be determined and disposed of as provided by Section 111 of Volume 1 of the Civil Code of 1905, and other general laws of this State governing the question of contests arising over election for municipal officers. 
Sec. 8. - Mayor pro tem. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen at their first meeting, or as soon thereafter as practicable, shall elect one of the Councilmen Mayor pro tempore, who shall in case of absence or disqualification of the Mayor or of vacancy in that office, perform and discharge all duties and exercise all the authority of the office of Mayor. 
Sec. 9. - Qualified voters. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all persons qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly of this State, and who have paid all taxes legally imposed and demanded of them by the authorities of said city, and shall have resided in said city one month next prior to the election at which they offer to vote, and shall have registered as shall be required by the registration laws or ordinances of said city, shall be qualified to vote at any election held in said city as provided by this charter. 
Sec. 10. - Eligibility of officers. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that any citizen who shall have been a resident of said city for twelve months next preceding the election and who shall be eligible to vote at the election at which he is a candidate, shall be eligible for the office of Mayor or Councilman, and no person who is not thus qualified shall be eligible to either of said offices. 
Sec. 11. - Clerk and treasurer; marshal; attorney. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that at the first meeting of the Mayor and Councilmen in each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, they shall elect a Clerk and Treasurer for said city, a Marshal who may be Chief of Police, and as many policemen as in the judgment of the Mayor and Councilmen shall be necessary to police said city, a City Attorney, and such other officers as said Mayor and Councilmen may deem necessary for and in the good government of said city. Each of said officers shall take such oaths, perform such duties, and give such bonds as the Mayor and Councilmen may by ordinance prescribe; provided, that all bonds of officers shall be made payable to the City of Clayton. Said Mayor and Councilmen shall have power and authority to suspend and remove said officers, in their discretion; it shall be their duty to fix the salary or compensation of said Mayor and Councilmen, and all other officers, agents and employees of said city by appropriate ordinance. All expenditures of the Mayor and Councilmen shall be paid out of the City Treasury by an order drawn by the City Clerk, countersigned by the Mayor, or, in his absence, by the Mayor pro tempore, after the Mayor and Councilmen have allowed and audited the same. 
Sec. 12. - Quorum; veto power. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and three Councilmen shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business before the body, and a majority of the votes cast shall determine questions before them; provided, that every question so determined or order passed, shall receive not less than three votes. On all questions before the said Council, the Mayor, or Mayor pro tempore, if he be presiding, shall be entitled to vote only in case of a tie. He shall have the veto power, and may veto any ordinance or resolution of the Councilmen, in which event the same shall not become a law unless subsequently passed over his veto by a vote of at least four Councilmen on a yea and nay vote, duly recorded on the minutes of the City Clerk, but unless he shall file in writing with the Clerk of said city his veto of any measure passed by that body, with the reasons for withholding his assent within three days from its passage, the same shall become a law just as if signed and approved by said Mayor, but he may approve same and the measure go into effect immediately. A "measure" as set forth in this section is hereby defined as an ordinance or resolution. A measure is not any other action, election, commendation, vote, contract, or expression of opinion by the City Council. 
(Ord. of 3-11-2008) 
Sec. 13. - Mayor; powers. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor of said City of Clayton shall be the chief executive officer thereof. He shall see that all laws, ordinances, resolutions and rules of said city are faithfully and fully executed and enforced, and that all of the officers of said city faithfully discharge the duties required of them. He shall have general supervision and jurisdiction of the affairs of said city, and shall preside at all meetings of the Mayor and Councilmen. He shall have the power to convene the Council in special, call or extra sessions whenever in his judgment it becomes necessary. 
Sec. 14. - Police court. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor, or in his absence or disqualification the Mayor pro tempore, or in case of the absence or disqualification of both the Mayor and Mayor pro tempore, any Councilman of the city may hold and preside over the Court in said City of Clayton, to be called and known as the "Police Court," for the trial of all offenders against the laws and ordinances of said city as often as necessary. Said Court shall have the power to preserve order, compel the attendance of witnesses, compel the production of books and papers to be used as evidence, and punish for contempt. Said Court shall have power to punish for all violations of this charter, laws or ordinances of said city by fine not to exceed one hundred ($100) dollars, imprison in the city prison or jail of Rabun County (the latter to be used as a city prison upon the payment of the jail fees required for keeping other prisoners) not to exceed sixty days, and to work on the streets in the city chain gang or such other public ways as the Mayor, acting Mayor, may direct, not to exceed sixty days and one or more of these punishments may be inflicted by the Mayor, or acting Mayor, in his discretion; and the fines imposed may be collected by execution, if the Mayor, or acting Mayor, shall direct. 
Sec. 15. - Presiding officer. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor, or the Mayor pro tempore, in case he shall be presiding, shall have the power in said Police Court of a Justice of the Peace and shall issue warrants against and try offenders charged with violating any criminal law of the State of Georgia in said city, and hear evidence on such charges and bind over the defendants to the Superior Court of Rabun County, commit to the common jail of said county or take bonds for his appearance to said Superior Court, in case the offense charged is bailable. 
Sec. 16. - Witnesses. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall have power to authorize by ordinance the Marshal or policeman of said city to summons any or all bystanders of any other citizen of said city to aid in the arrest of any person or persons violating any ordinance of said town, of any law of this State and to provide punishment for any person or persons failing or refusing to obey such summons. 
Sec. 17. - Arrests. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall be lawful for the Marshal or any police of said city to arrest, without warrant, person or persons within the corporate limits of said city, who, at the time of said arrest or before that time, have been guilty of violating any of the ordinances of said city and is at the time endeavoring to escape, and to hold such person so arrested until a hearing of the matter before the proper officer can be had, and to this end, said arresting officer is authorized to imprison and confine any person arrested by him in the city prison, or in the common jail of Rabun County, for a reasonable length of time. The Marshal and policemen of said city are authorized to the same extent as Sheriffs of this State to execute warrants placed in their hands charging any person or persons with violating the criminal laws of this State. The Marshal and policemen of said city are also authorized to arrest anywhere within the limits of this State any person charged with violating any of the ordinances of said City of Clayton, provided, when the arrest is not made within twenty-four hours after the offense charged is committed, said Marshal and policemen are not authorized to arrest the offender outside of the corporate limits of said city, except in obedience to a written warrant signed by the Mayor, or Mayor pro tempore, or acting Mayor. The City Marshal, or any policeman, may take bond payable to the Mayor of said city for the appearance of any person arrested by them, for appearance before the Court for trial, and all such bonds may be forfeited as hereinafter provided for forfeitures of appearance bonds by the Mayor, Mayor pro tempore, or acting Mayor. 
Sec. 18. - Chain gangs. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen of the City of Clayton shall have power to organize one or more chain gangs, or work gangs, and confine therein persons who have been sentenced by the Police Court of said city to work upon the streets or public works of said city, and shall have power to make rules and regulations that may be suitable or necessary for the care, management or control of said gangs, and to enforce the same through proper officers. 
Sec. 19. - Hearings continued. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor, Mayor pro tempore or acting Mayor, when any person, or persons, are arraigned before the Mayor's or Police Court, charged with violating any of the ordinances, resolutions, regulations or rules of said city may, for good cause shown by either side, continue the hearing to such time as the presiding Judge may think best and the accused shall give bond and security for his appearance at the appointed time for trial, and be imprisoned to await trial. If such bond be given and the accused fail to appear at the time fixed for trial the bond may be forfeited by the Mayor, the Mayor pro tempore or acting Mayor, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant, if anywhere to be found, and his securities, with rule nisi, at least two days before hearing said rule nisi, and final judgment passed thereon. The Mayor, Mayor pro tempore or acting Mayor, shall have power and authority to accept cash in lieu of bond and security for appearance of offenders for trial, and if such offenders shall fail to appear at the time and place fixed for said trial the cash so deposited shall be by order of the officer presiding, declared to be forfeited to the City of Clayton. 
Sec. 20. - Witnesses; contempts. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Police Court of said city shall have the same jurisdiction and power over the forcing of witnesses to attend criminal trials in said court as the Superior Courts of this State have in forcing the attendance of witnesses in criminal cases in those Courts and the presiding officer of said city has the same right to punish for contempts that are allowed by law to the Judges of said Courts in case of defaulting witnesses. 
Sec. 21. - Certiorari. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that any person convicted in the Police Court of said city shall have the right of certiorari to the Superior Court of Rabun County; provided, all costs are first paid and bond and security given in double the amount of cash fine imposed, and in case the sentence is imprisonment, then in such an amount as the presiding officer may think proper, to answer the final judgment in the case; and, provided, further, nothing in this section shall prevent the defendant who desires to certiorari his said cause to said Superior Court, to file the usual pauper affidavit in lieu of giving bond and security and paying the cost; and, provided, further, the applicant failing to give such bond and security may, in the discretion of the presiding officer, be placed in the city prison or county jail to await the final adjudication of his case. 
Sec. 22. - Recorder. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen may if they desire to do so, appoint a Recorder for said city to preside over the "Police Court," who shall have all the authority and power in said Court delegated herein or by ordinance or by laws, to the Mayor of said city; and when such Recorder is appointed as herein authorized, he shall be the sole Judge in said Police Court, but his duties may be discharged by the Mayor, Mayor pro tempore, or some member of the Council when said Recorder is absent from the city or otherwise disqualified to preside over said Court. 
Sec. 23. - Tax assessors; duties; returns; objections. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen may, at any time after the passage of this Act, elect three intelligent, discreet and upright persons, citizens and qualified voters of city, owners of real estate therein, Tax Assessors, whose terms of office shall be for one year. Said City Tax Assessors may at any time be removed from their office by the Mayor and Councilmen for good and sufficient cause, to be judged by said Mayor and Councilmen, and all vacancies occurring from any cause may be filled by the Mayor and Councilmen at any time; and it shall be the duty of said Tax Assessors to assess the value of all real estate located in said city for the purposes of taxation by said city, and it shall be their duty to examine tax returns placed before them by the Clerk of said city who shall receive the same, and increase the valuation of personal property thereon when, in their judgment, the value placed thereon by the tax payer is too small. The Mayor and Councilmen shall have power to prescribe rules for the government of said City Tax Assessors. Said Assessors shall make returns of the assessments made by them to said Mayor and Councilmen each year, thirty days before the time for collecting taxes. When said return is made, said Mayor and Councilmen shall appoint a place for hearing objections to the assessments, said objections to be heard by said Mayor and Councilmen of which public notice shall be given as may be prescribed by ordinance, and the Clerk of said city shall give each owner of property whose tax returns of personalty has been increased, at least five days' notice of such hearing, stating therein the amount of increase. If the property has been returned for taxation by an agent, notice to such agent shall be sufficient. If the owner is not a resident of said city, and has no agent residing therein, the Mayor and Councilmen shall prescribe by ordinance what notice, if any, shall be given. Said Mayor and Councilmen shall have power to provide by ordinance for assessing all property, both real and personal, located in, and subject to taxation by said city, not returned for taxation, and for double taxing defaulters. The City Assessors shall take such oaths and receive such compensation as the Mayor and Councilmen may prescribe. Such City Tax Assessors shall have the power to require the tax payers to furnish them with a list of all notes, accounts, mortgages, stocks, bonds, other securities and investments and choses in action, when in their opinion the production is necessary for a correct, just and true assessment. All assessments made by said Assessors of real estate shall become final, if no objections are made on or by the date set for hearing objections by the said Mayor and Councilmen, notice, such as may be prescribed by ordinance, having been given of such hearing, and if objections are made at the time of the hearing an assessment, the decision of said Mayor and Councilmen on said assessment whether they increase or decrease them shall be final. 
Sec. 24. - Property not assessed. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that in case any property which is subject to taxation should not be assessed, if realty, by the Assessors or returned for taxation, if personalty, or for any reason has not been assessed or returned for taxation and taxes collected in any year past, the City Tax Assessors may at any time assess said property for said year, or years, and double tax if there has been a failure to return it as required by law, and if the Mayor and Councilmen have provided for double-taxing defaulters and an execution shall issue therefor as in other cases, at the rate for the several years in which no taxes were paid. This section shall apply to the assessment of property which before the passage of this Act in any year, was not assessed for taxation, or which was not returned for taxation and taxes collected thereon, as well as to property which in the future may be omitted from any cause from return or assessment and the collection of taxes thereon omitted in any year. The Mayor and Councilmen may provide by ordinance for notice to parties whose property has been, or may be, assessed for back taxes, and the hearing of any complaint. All assessment referred to in this section shall be made by the City Tax Assessors. 
Sec. 25. - Tax payments. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen shall have the right and authority to provide by ordinance when all property in said city shall be returned for taxes. When taxes thereon shall fall due, when taxes shall be paid, when executions shall be issued against those who have not paid their taxes by the time fixed by ordinance, fix a penalty for nonpayment of taxes, when due and any and all other acts that will effectively force the payment of all legal and just taxes due said city on all property subject to taxation thereon. 
Sec. 26. - Fire limits. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen shall have full power and authority to provide for and define, by ordinance, the "fire limits" of said city and prescribe and designate the character, kinds and classes of improvements to be made within said "fire limits"; and, in order to carry out more effectively the provisions of this section, they may, in their discretion, appoint a building inspector for said city and define his powers and duties and provide for building permits. They shall also have the power and authority to enact ordinances regulating the sanitation and sanitary conditions of said city, and prescribe penalties for violating the provisions of this section, and all ordinances enacted in pursuance of same. 
Sec. 27. - Business licenses. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen shall have power and authority to require and collect a license tax on any or all business, occupations, avocations or professions carried on in said city, and to this end may, in their discretion, license in said city any or all businesses, occupations, avocations or professions, the running, practicing, carrying on, performing or conducting of which is not prohibited by the law of this State. 
Sec. 28. - Railway crossings. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Council of said city shall have full power and authority to require the railroad or railroads, electric road or road tram roads or roads, automobile road or roads, or any other road or roads except the public highways of said city, running through said city or any portion of it, to make and repair the crossings on their several lines whenever, and in the manner said Mayor and Councilmen may deem proper and necessary, and to place or repair such crossings, or open up and keep open any and all streets, alleys or byways over or along which their several lines shall run in said city, and the Mayor and Councilmen may pass any ordinance needful for carrying out the provisions of this section, and in case any of said named roads shall fail or refuse to make such crossings within five days, or such repairs within twenty-four hours after having been notified to do so by said city, the Mayor and Councilmen shall have power to create and make same at the expense of said road, or roads, and issue an execution therefor, and levy and collect the same as provided in the case of tax executions. 
Sec. 29. - Explosives. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen shall have the right and authority to provide for the inspection of steam boilers, to regulate or prevent the storage of gun powder, tar, pitch, rosin, coal, benzene, naphtha, nitro-glycerine, turpentine, cotton, petroleum, kerosene oil, dynamite or other explosives, or combustible substances or materials within said city, and to regulate the use of lights in stables, shops or other buildings or places; to regulate or prevent bonfires, the sale of fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, firing of guns, pistols, or firearms, anvils and any and all kinds of gaming or hunting within the corporate limits of said city. 
Sec. 30. - Amusement licenses. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen shall have power and authority to license billiard tables, pool tables, ten pin alleys, and all tables kept or used for the purpose of playing, gaming or renting, all ten pin alleys, nine pin alleys, or alleys of any and all kinds, or other tables, devices or machines kept for the purpose of playing, or for the purpose of running the same, dancing halls or other places of amusements kept or rented for private gain, and to charge for said license such sums as they may by ordinance prescribe. 
Sec. 31. - Brokers' licenses. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen shall have power and authority to assess taxes on all persons, firms or corporations carrying on a brokerage business in addition to other taxes they may have paid. They shall have power to license brokers in said city, define by ordinance their powers and privileges, revoke their license, impose taxes and exercise such superintendence as will ensure fair dealing between them and their customers. 
Sec. 32. - Other licenses. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall have full power and authority to license, regulate and control all markets in said city, opera houses, livery stables, drays, hacks used for hauling of any kind and vehicles used for hire, auctioneers, itinerant lightning rod or other like dealers or peddlers, immigrant agents, all fire, life insurance companies or their agents doing business in said city, traders of all kinds, itinerant dealers in jewelry and medicine, and any or all itinerant articles of merchandise, except such as are exempt by the laws of this State; also any person, firm or corporation running a flying-jenny, flying-horse, merry-go-round, bicycle or skating rink and like devices for gain, and all circuses, moving picture shows, side shows, and all other shows, exhibitions or performances exhibiting in said city, and all persons selling goods, wares and merchandise, or offering the same for sale by sample, advertisement or retail and all other business, calling or vocation which are not exempt from license under the laws of the State. 
Sec. 33. - Impounding. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen shall have the power and authority to prevent horses, mules, cattle, hogs, sheep, dogs, goats, and any and all other animals or fowls from running at large in said city, and to prevent and prohibit the keeping of hogs within the city limits or regulate the manner in which they must be kept if allowed to remain; also to impound such animals when found running at large in said city, and to charge such fees and costs for same as they may prescribe; also when the owner or owners of such animal or animals shall fail or refuse to pay the impounding fee and cost of keeping such animal or animals, the same may be sold at public outcry and the proceeds applied to the payment of said fees and costs of keeping such animal or animals under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by said Mayor and Councilmen. 
Sec. 34. - Streets and public ways; condemnation; telephone poles and wires. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall have full and complete control of the streets, public roads, sidewalks, alleys, public squares and all public ways in said city, and shall have power and authority to maintain, work or improve the same in any manner they may deem to the best interest to said city, and shall have power and authority to buy or condemn the property of any and all kinds for the purpose of widening, straightening, grading, or in any way changing said streets, or for the purpose of laying out and building new streets, alleys, or public ways in said city, and when it becomes necessary to condemn lands for the purpose herein named, whether the land so condemned shall be in the hands of the owner, trustee, administrator, executor, guardian, or agent, said condemnation may be done in the manner provided in Sections 4657 to 4685 inclusive, of Volume 2 of the Code of Georgia of 1895, the Acts amendatory thereof and the general laws of this State relating thereto. After any proceedings shall be begun to condemn lands for the purposes herein specified, the Mayor and Councilmen may abandon the same at any time, if they think it to the best interest of the city, upon payment of cost, which they are hereby authorized to do. The Mayor and Councilmen shall have full power and authority to remove, or cause to be removed any buildings, steps, fence, gate, post or other obstruction or nuisance in the public streets, alleys, lanes, sidewalks, squares or other public places in said city, and to enforce the provisions of this section by appropriate ordinance. The Mayor and Councilmen shall have the further right, power and authority to provide for and regulate, or have the same done, the curbs, gutters and other sluiceways or drainways emptying into the streets, sidewalks, alleys, or other public ways of said city; to regulate or prohibit (except as such power may be restricted by any existing general law of this State) the use of the streets, sidewalks, public squares or other public ways or places of said city for signs, signposts, awnings, telegraph or telephone poles, horse troughs, racks, and for carrying banners, handbills and advertising; to regulate or prohibit exhibitions of banners, handbills, placards, or things of like character on the streets, sidewalks and public places in and of said city; also to compel any telegraph or telephone company having previously erected poles and wires in said city, to remove the same to any reasonable location designated by said Mayor and Councilmen, the same to be done for the purpose of better maintaining, changing or improving the public ways or squares of said city or accommodating the traveling public thereof and therein; and in case said telegraph or telephone company shall fail to remove said poles and wires within thirty days after having been notified to do so, said Mayor and Councilmen shall have the right to do so at the expense of said company, and collect the cost of such removal by execution. 
Sec. 35. - Street improvements. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said Mayor and Councilmen shall have full power and authority in their discretion to grade, pave, macadamize or otherwise improve the travel and drainage of the streets, sidewalks, roads, alleys and other public squares and ways of said city. In order to carry into effect the authority above, said Mayor and Councilmen shall have the right and authority to assess not more than two-thirds of the cost of paving and otherwise improving the streets and sidewalks on and against the real estate abutting on same, said assessments to be done in a just and fair manner to the city and the adjoining real estate owners; and when said improvements are made a bill for the pro rata part of the cost thereof shall be presented to the adjoining land owner or his agent, if either lives in said city, if not posted on the land for five days and if the same is not paid, executions shall issue therefor and be collected as tax executions in said city are issued and collected, and the lien against the property for its pro rata of said improvements shall begin at the time of the passage of the ordinance authorizing the same to be made and shall have priority to all liens, except liens for taxes due the State and county. 
Sec. 36. - Sewerage and drainage. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall have power and authority to establish, construct, maintain and operate a system of sewerage and drainage, or parts of such system of sewerage and drainage in said city, and around said city, for health, cleanliness and comfort of its inhabitants; and the said Mayor and Councilmen shall have entire and absolute control and jurisdiction over all pipes, private drains, public sewers, private water closets, privies and the like, both public and private, in said city, with full power to prescribe the location, structure, uses and regulations concerning them in all particulars as may seem best for the maintenance and preservation of the health and comfort of the inhabitants of said city, with full power also to require changes in or discontinuances of any such contrivances or structures already in existence or that may hereafter be allowed. When any system of sewerage or drainage shall be constructed by said Mayor and Councilmen, or under their direction, assessments may be made and executions may issue for the cost thereof, under the same rules and governed by the same provisions as assessments and executions for paving, grading or improving streets or other public ways under this charter; and said assessments shall be a lien on the property so assessed, as provided in this Act for paving streets; and all the provisions of this charter in reference to making and enforcing assessments in paving streets and the amount thereof shall apply so far as they may be applicable to constructing and maintaining sewers, and may be enforced by said Mayor and Councilmen by appropriate ordinances. 
Sec. 37. - Damages. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that in case any sewer or sewers, or parts of same, shall be located upon, or through, private property, and the owners of said property refuse to grant right for that purpose, and if such owners and the authorities of said city cannot agree upon the damages to be paid for such easement, the damage shall be assessed as in cases of property taken for opening, straightening or widening streets under this charter. Upon payment or tender of the amount of the award the work may proceed, notwithstanding an appeal; and that the Mayor and Councilmen of said city may provide by ordinance, or ordinances, for the execution of the provisions of the sections regarding sewerage, drainage and sanitation, except as to taking of private property for construction of sewers, by such boards, committees, or officers, as they may deem best. 
Sec. 38. - Extension of sewerage system. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that for the purpose of the preservation of the health of the inhabitants of said city, the Mayor and Councilmen are empowered to extend their system, or any part thereof, of sewerage or drainage beyond the limits of said city, and the provisions as to the construction and maintenance of such sewerage system and the taking of property therefor shall apply to the territory without the limits of said city as may be necessary for the construction of said system. 
Sec. 39. - Assessments for sanitation. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said Mayor and Councilmen shall have full power and authority to make assessments on the various lands and lot owners in said city for sanitary purposes not to exceed two dollars per annum on each lot assessed, and to collect same by execution against the lots so assessed and the owners thereof; the amounts so assessed shall be a lien on the lot from the date of assessment and the execution shall be issued, enforced and collected in the same manner that other executions are issued, enforced and collected in said city. The amount so collected shall be used for sanitary purposes only. The said Mayor and Councilmen shall have power to prescribe and define what shall constitute a lot for sanitary purposes and assessments, provided assessments shall not be on lots or resident lots sub-divided. 
Sec. 40. - Tax ad valorem. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that for the purposes of raising revenue for the support and maintenance of the government of said City of Clayton, the Mayor and Councilmen shall have full power and authority to levy and collect an ad valorem tax on all property, real and personal, including money, notes, bonds, accounts and every other species of property in said city or owned or held therein, of not exceeding $2.50 on each and every hundred dollars of taxable property, exclusive of taxes for public school purposes and other specific tax not necessary in the support and maintenance of the general government of said city; and for the purpose of providing a sinking fund for the purpose of paying the principal on any bonds that may be issued by said city authorities, and to provide for a fund for the payment of any interest on any such bonds a greater ad valorem tax may be levied and collected. Said Mayor and Councilmen shall have power and authority to provide by ordinances for the return and collection of all taxable property in said city and to provide penalties for neglect or refusal to comply with the same. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. unavailable), p. 4143, § 1) 
Sec. 41. - Extension of police and sanitation jurisdiction; land for public utilities. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the jurisdiction of the Mayor and Council of said city and the territorial limits of the same are hereby extended for police and sanitary purposes over all the lands that may be acquired by said city for waterworks, sewer or electric light purposes and waterworks or other stations, and for any other public purpose or use, and adjacent lands, and the pipes and mains of said waterworks or sewer system, and they shall have power and authority to provide by ordinances for the protection of said city waterworks or sewerage system and the preservation of the purity of the water of said waterworks system, and to provide penalties for violation of said ordinances, and the enforcement of the same. Said Mayor and Councilmen shall have jurisdiction over all property used for public purposes of any and all natures within or without the limits of said city and the police power of said city shall be exercised over the same, and said Mayor and Councilmen shall have the right to make ordinances governing the same. Said Mayor and Council shall have full authority to contract for or condemn lands within or without said city for the purposes of establishing and maintaining an electric lighting or waterworks plant or system, sewerage system or any of them; provided that if it becomes necessary to exercise the right of condemnation, all proceedings shall be under the provisions of Sections 4657 to 4686, inclusive, of Volume 2 of the Code of Georgia of 1895, and Acts amendatory thereof. 
Sec. 42. - Health and sanitation. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen shall have full and complete control of the sanitation of said city, and shall appoint such committees or boards as they may deem proper to look after the sanitary conditions of said city and prescribe the rules and regulations governing said bodies. And said Mayor and Councilmen shall have power and authority to cause owners of lots or parts of lots, yards, cellars and other places where filth or trash may accumulate, in case the same should prove a nuisance, to fill or drain the same, and to fill or level the same so that such filth and trash should not accumulate therein or thereon and the sanitary conditions thereof become pure. That if the occupants or owners of said lots, yards or cellars shall fail after notice, either to themselves or agents, or after notice has been posted thereof for five days, to comply with the request of the Mayor and Council to fill up or drain said lot, yard or cellar, it shall be lawful for said city authorities to have said work done and issue execution for the cost of doing the same against the property so improved, and sale under such execution shall pass title to the property when sold. 
Sec. 43. - Nuisances. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Council may by ordinance declare what shall be a nuisance in said city and provide for the abatement of the same. The Police Court in said city shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the Mayor and Councilmen in respect to the trial and abatement of all nuisances in said city. 
Sec. 44. - Blind tigers. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Marshal of said city shall have full power and authority to enter and, if necessary, to make such entrance, to break open and enter any building or place in said city in which the said Marshal or the Mayor and Councilmen shall have reasonable cause to believe or may suspect, a "blind tiger," or where whiskeys, beers, wines, malt or intoxicating liquors are sold, and to seize the stock of liquors and apparatus for selling the same; and the said Mayor and Councilmen shall have full power and authority to abate any place in said city as a nuisance when they shall have reasonable cause to believe that a "blind tiger" is being carried on therein or spirituous, vinous, malt or intoxicating liquors or beers are being sold therein, and to arrest the offender or offenders, and upon conviction of a person for maintaining such nuisance and as a punishment for same, said Mayor and Councilmen shall have power and authority to cause the Marshal or policemen of said city to seize and destroy the stock of liquors, beers and wines of said offender and the apparatus for selling the same, and otherwise punish said offender, or offenders, as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Sec. 45. - Building supervision; public worship. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen shall exercise general supervision over all buildings or structures within said city and shall prescribe rules and regulations for the building and improving the same; and they shall have power to protect all places of divine worship and cemeteries in said city, to provide places for the burial of the dead, either within and without the city limits, to regulate interments therein and to expend annually such sums as may be necessary to keep said cemeteries in proper condition. 
Sec. 46. - Protection against disease; quarantine; vaccination. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen shall have the power to enact ordinances for the purpose of preventing the spread of contagious or infectious diseases, to declare and maintain quarantine line and regulations against such diseases, and punish for violations of any of said quarantine rules and regulations of said city. They shall have power to build or establish a pest house within or without said city limits and for this purpose they are authorized to buy, rent, hold or receive real estate, either within or without said city limits. They shall have power to compel the removal to the pest house any person or persons who shall have smallpox or any other contagious or infectious diseases, when in their judgment it is to the best interest of the inhabitants of the said city to do so; and they may compel all persons to be vaccinated, whether they be residents or sojourners of or in said city, and may provide vaccination points and materials and employ physicians at the expense of said city, all persons who are not able to procure said vaccination materials and may provide by ordinances punishment for persons failing to or refusing to be vaccinated. 
Sec. 47. - Rules and regulations. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all rules, regulations and ordinances heretofore of force in the Town of Clayton, and which are now in force and not inconsistent or repugnant to this Act, shall remain in force and effect until the same are repealed, altered or amended by the Mayor and Councilmen of said City of Clayton, which they are hereby authorized to do at any time they may deem it proper. All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations passed by said Mayor and Councilmen shall be recorded in a well-bound book by the Clerk of said city, which shall be open to inspection by the citizens of said city at any and all times, and it shall not be necessary to give notice to the public of the intention to introduce any ordinance, rule, resolution or regulation, either before or after its passage, other than such notice or publication as is given by the recording of the same in the book to be kept as aforesaid by said City Clerk. 
Sec. 48. - Franchises. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall have power to grant franchises, easements and rights-of-way over, in, under and on the public streets, squares, lanes, alleys, parks, and other ways and property of said city on such terms and conditions and for such compensation as they may fix; provided, that no such privileges shall be granted by said Mayor and Councilmen for a term of more than twenty years. 
Sec. 49. - Arrests; warrants. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that should any person violate any of the ordinances of said city and escape from the jurisdiction thereof, he may be apprehended wherever he may be found in this State, and a warrant of the Mayor, Mayor pro tempore, or acting, of said city shall be sufficient authority for his arrest and return for trial upon the charge resting against him, and should any person after conviction of a violation of any ordinance of said city escape, he may be apprehended wherever found in this State and the warrant of the aforesaid city officers, or either one of them, shall be sufficient authority for his arrest and return, and all persons so escaping from the custody of said city, or its officers, may be tried against for such escape and punished not exceeding the penalties hereinbefore provided. 
Sec. 50. - Investigation of officer's conduct. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall be empowered and authorized, through a committee or by themselves, in the discretion of said Mayor and Councilmen, whenever necessary, to examine into the workings of any officer, or conduct of any officer, and said committee or Mayor and Councilmen conducting said examination, shall have power to send for any persons and papers, compel the production of books and papers, compel the attendance of persons summoned, swear witnesses, and make all disclosures pertinent to such investigation, and if the facts authorize it, to suspend any officer so investigated or whose conduct is the subject of such investigation. 
Sec. 51. - Fee bill. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall have power and authority to establish a fee bill for the officers of said city, such fees when collected to be paid into the City Treasury. 
Sec. 52. - Prison. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen may provide for a city prison which shall be safe and suitable for keeping and detention of prisoners and convicts, and may appoint a custodian therefor, but in case said Mayor and Councilmen should so desire they shall be allowed to use the county jail of Rabun County for such purposes by paying the fees allowed the Sheriff or jailor of said county for receiving, feeding and discharging other prisoners. 
Sec. 53. - Houses of ill fame. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen shall have full power and authority to suppress lewd houses, lewdness and immoral conduct, gambling and gambling places and to preserve the sanctity of the Sabbath day, and to this end may enact such ordinances and provide such penalties as they think advisable to carry out the powers granted in this section, and upon proper and sufficient proof of ill fame, bawdy houses, lewd or gaming or gaming houses or place, said Mayor and Council shall have full power and authority to abate the same by causing the occupants thereof to be forcibly removed, after three days' notice, and any property owner or agent who shall, after notice of the character of the inmates, continue to rent to or suffer the same to remain on the premises, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 54. - Public utilities. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said City of Clayton, created by this Act, shall have power and authority to establish, own, maintain and operate a system of waterworks, electric light plant or plants, gas works and sewerage system or any of them for the purpose of supplying its inhabitants and the city as well as customers generally, within said city and its suburbs, with water, lights, electricity or gas for ordinary using or power purposes, sewerage, or any of them, and the Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall have full power and authority to do any and all things necessary for such purposes, to contract with any person for the purchase of such plants, or any parts of the same, land or premises, and water rights, to be used in connection therewith, whether within or without said city, and if necessary to condemn the same as in this charter provided. Said Mayor and Councilmen shall have authority to make contracts for the purchase of plants, machinery and appliances, and to do any acts necessary in connection with same, and for the purpose of making said systems more proficient, the said Mayor and Councilmen shall have the power to appoint a Commission for all, or any, of said systems, and prescribe their duties and powers by proper ordinances. 
Sec. 55. - Registration of voters. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen shall provide for the proper registration of qualified voters for both general and special elections in and for said city, and to this end they are hereby authorized to pass such ordinances, rules and regulations governing the same as will carry said registration into effect in a way that will allow all citizens of said city, who are qualified to vote to exercise that right, and prohibit those not qualified to vote from doing so. 
Sec. 56. - Claims; how executed. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all executions in favor of the City of Clayton for the enforcement and collection of any fine, forfeiture, assessment, taxes or other claims, demand or debt, shall be issued by the Clerk of said city, and bear test in the name of the Mayor (except when otherwise provided by this charter), and shall be directed to the Marshal of said city and all and singular the Sheriffs and Constables of the State and shall state for what issued, and be made returnable to the Mayor and Councilmen of the City of Clayton at least within ninety days after issuing the same, and it shall be the Marshal or other collecting officer's duty to advertise the sale of such real or personal as may be levied on by him to satisfy said execution, in the same manner respectively as Sheriff's sales or realty or constable's sales of personalty are required to be by law. All of said sales to be at the place and within the usual hours of sale of Sheriffs and constables, and to be made under the same rules and regulations as govern Sheriffs' and constables' sales of similar property; that the time, place and manner of sale of property, both real and personal, for taxes due said city shall be the same as provided by law for sales under executions for State and county taxes. Whenever any land is sold for taxes, the owner thereof shall have the privilege of redeeming it within one year by paying the purchaser the amount paid therefor, with ten per centum premium thereon. Whenever, at any such sales for taxes due, no person present shall bid for the property put up for sale as much as the amount of such execution for taxes and all costs, and after such property shall have been cried for a reasonable time, then any officer or agent of said city may bid off said property for said city, and the marshal, or the officer making said sale, shall make to said City of Clayton a deed to the property so sold and deliver the same, and the title thus acquired by the city shall be perfect and complete after the period of redemption of the owner shall have expired, and the Marshal or other officer making said sale shall put the city in possession, and the Mayor and Council of said city shall have no right to divert or alienate the same, the title of the city to sell said property, except by public sale to the highest bidder, in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinances duly made and executed by the said Mayor and Council of said City of Clayton. The Clerk of said city shall keep an execution docket, and shall enter thereon all executions, giving the date, the amount, the purpose of which, and to whom the same was delivered, and all the doings and actings thereon. Said execution shall also be returned to the office of said Clerk after the same has been duly satisfied. All sales and conveyances made under executions shall have all the force and effect of sales and conveyances made by Sheriffs and constables of this State, and the officer making any sale shall have the same power as the Sheriffs and constables to put purchasers in possession of the property sold by them under the laws of this State. 
Sec. 57. - Accusations. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Council shall provide by ordinance the form of all accusations, affidavits and warrants to be issued in all trials for violations of the ordinances and criminal laws of said city and of the State in said city, and the procedure in such trials. Nothing in this section shall operate to repeal any ordinance or rules of said city now of force on this subject, but the same shall remain in force and effect until the same are hereby repealed or amended by ordinance duly adopted by said Mayor and Councilmen. 
Sec. 58. - Parks. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall have power and authority to acquire in behalf of the City of Clayton, by gift, purchase, lease or otherwise, grounds suitable for park or parks, as in their judgment may be to the interest, welfare and beauty of said city or citizens thereof, and shall have the power and authority to lay out the same into such park or parks, improve, maintain and preserve the same, and to this end may appoint such officers and employees to carry out the purposes of the section, and prescribe their compensation for such employment. 
Sec. 59. - Trees. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said Mayor and Council shall have the power and authority to adopt ordinances for the setting out, improving and protecting the trees and groves of said city, and upon the streets, sidewalks and other public ways or places thereof; and no one shall be empowered with the right to fell, or otherwise injure, said trees without written consent of the said Mayor and Councilmen. 
Sec. 60. - Commutation tax. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen of the City of Clayton may require and compel all male persons in said city between the ages of sixteen and fifty years, subject to road duty under the laws of Georgia, to work upon the streets, sidewalks, lanes, alleys, squares and other public ways and property in said city not to exceed fifteen days in each year, at such time or times as the said Mayor and Councilmen may require, or to pay a commutation tax in lieu thereof, not to exceed one dollar per day for each day required to be performed, as said Mayor and Councilmen may determine by ordinance. Should any person liable to work as aforesaid in this section fail or refuse to do so, or to pay the commutation tax required of him in lieu thereof, after having been notified, either by serving him in person or by leaving written summons at his most notorious place of abode at least one day before such work shall be done or commutation tax in lieu thereof to be collected, shall be deemed guilty of violation of this section, and on conviction in the Police Court of said city shall be fined in a sum not to exceed three dollars for each day he may be required to work or for each dollar of commutation tax due by him, or imprisoned in the city prison not to exceed fifteen days for each time he may be required to work, or imprisoned in the city chain gang not to exceed three days for each day required to work or for each dollar required as commutation tax, and said Mayor and Councilmen shall make such rules, regulations and ordinances to carry into effect this section as they may deem proper, not inconsistent herewith. 
Sec. 61. - Ordinances. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said Mayor and Councilmen of said City of Clayton shall have full power and authority to pass all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations that may deem and consider necessary for the peace and good order, health, prosperity, comfort and security of said city and the inhabitants thereof, and that may be necessary to foster virtue and good morals in said city, to suppress lewdness, gambling, disorderly conduct, drunkenness and to enforce such laws and ordinances by such penalties as are authorized by this charter. The said Mayor and Councilmen shall have full power to adopt and enforce any and all ordinances they may consider advisable or necessary to carry out the powers granted to said city and said Mayor and Councilmen by this charter; to make and enforce such ordinances, rules, resolutions and regulations for the government of their body, and all officers of said city, and to do any and all other acts and exercise all other power conferred upon them by this Act, or that may be done or exercised under the laws of this State conferring power upon municipal corporations, provided said laws, ordinances, rules, resolutions and regulations are consistent with the laws of the State. 
Sec. 61-A. - Vehicles. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said Mayor and Councilmen shall have the power to control and regulate the running and operating of all locomotives, trains, streetcars, automobiles and all other vehicles, to prevent unnecessary noise from locomotives, steam whistles, bells or other contrivances that may disturb the peace and comfort of the citizens and to adopt the necessary ordinances for these purposes and penalties and enforce the same for violation thereof. 
Sec. 62. - Vagrancy. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said Mayor and Councilmen shall have power to pass ordinances and regulations preventing idleness and loitering within the corporate limits of said city and to prescribe penalties for violations thereof. 
Sec. 63. - Impeachments. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that in case the Mayor or any Councilman, while in office shall be guilty of malpractice and willful neglect in office, or abuse of the powers conferred on him, or shall be guilty of any other conduct unbecoming his station, he shall be subject to be impeached by the City Council, and on conviction shall be removed from office. 
Sec. 64. - Fire department. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Councilmen of said city to provide for fire protection; and they shall have power to organize and equip a fire department, either paid or volunteer, to make such appropriations as may be advisable for this purpose, and for providing any buildings necessary therefor, and adopt such ordinances, and regulations as will best promote the object of this section, and the protection of property in said city from fires. 
Sec. 65. - Dog tax. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen shall have power and authority to levy a tax on dogs within said city, not to exceed two dollars each, and shall have power to enact ordinances providing for the collection of said tax, and authorize the City Marshal and policemen of said city to kill any dog running at large in said city whose owner refuses to comply with such ordinance. 
Sec. 66. - Enforcement of laws. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that authority to carry out and enforce and effectuate by ordinance, and provide penalty for violation of said ordinances, whenever in their discretion the Mayor and Councilmen may deem it necessary, and all further power granted to said City of Clayton, as created by this Act, are hereby expressly conferred on the Mayor and Councilmen of said city. 
Secs. 67—80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 67 through 80 of the city's Charter, relating to a public school system for the city, were repealed by 1924 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 506), p. 496. 
Sec. 81. - Waterworks and sewerage; bonds. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen of said city have power and authority to establish and maintain a waterworks and sewerage system for said city, and to this end may purchase, lease, rent and control lands, within or without the corporate limits of said city, and shall do any and all acts in establishing, maintaining and controlling the same as they may deem proper. They shall have the privilege of purchasing all things or materials in connection therewith. If they deem it proper, they may issue bonds in the sum of not exceeding twenty-five thousand ($25,000) dollars, the same to be of such denominations and bear such rate of interest not exceeding six percent, per annum as said Mayor and Councilmen may see fit. Said bonds to be paid within twenty years, but said Mayor and Councilmen may refund the same within a less period than twenty years. Before said bonds shall be issued, said Mayor and Councilmen shall order an election at which time all qualified voters eligible to vote for Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall be entitled to vote. Those in favor of bonds shall have written or printed on their ballots, "For waterworks and sewerage bonds," and those against such bonds shall have written or printed on their ballots, "Against waterworks and sewerage bonds." If two-thirds of such qualified voters, voting at said election shall cast their ballots for such bonds, said Mayor and Councilmen shall issue the same, and the proceeds from their sale shall be used for the establishment of said system and for no other purpose. Said Mayor and Councilmen shall post notice of said election at least ten days next prior to the holding thereof in three conspicuous places in said city, and said election shall be held under such rules and regulations as elections for Mayor and Councilmen are held for said city, at or before the issuing of said bonds or any part thereof. Said Mayor and Councilmen shall prepare for the levy or collection of taxes, over and above other taxes to be levied in said city with which to pay the annual interest and the principal of said bonds when the same shall become due. If said election should be in favor of the issuance of said bonds, the Mayor and Councilmen have the right to order other taxes to be levied in said city with which to pay the annual interest and principal of said bonds when the same shall become due. If said election shall not be in favor of the issuance of said bonds, the Mayor and Councilmen shall have the right to order other elections not less than six months apart until said bond issue shall carry. 
Sec. 82. - Electric lighting; bonds. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said Mayor and Councilmen may establish and maintain an electric lighting system in and for said city, and to this end they are authorized to purchase all things, equipage and materials necessary in the establishment and maintenance of said system. They shall have the right for this purpose to purchase, lease, rent, or otherwise hold lands, and right-of-way either within or without the corporate limits of said city, and make all ordinances, rules and regulations necessary in the establishing, maintaining, controlling and preserving said system, and in renting lights and power to customers. Before said system shall be installed, said Mayor and Councilmen shall have power and authority to issue bonds in a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), which said bonds shall bear an annual rate of interest not to exceed six per centum and shall be issued in such denominations as the said Mayor and Councilmen shall see fit, and shall be paid within twenty years from their issuance, but said Mayor and Councilmen may refund said bonds in an earlier period than twenty years; and that at the time and before said bonds are issued, said Mayor and Councilmen shall provide for the levy and collection of taxes over and above other taxes in and for said city sufficient to pay the principal and interest due on said bonds whenever the same may become due and payable before said bonds shall be issued, the Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall order an election for said bonds at which all voters qualified to vote for Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall be eligible to vote. Said Mayor and Councilmen shall give notice of said election by posting the same in at least three conspicuous places in said city for ten days next prior to holding of said election, and the same shall be held under the same rules and regulations as elections for Mayor and Councilmen of said city are held. At said election all voters in favor of such bonds shall have written or printed on their ballots "For electric light bonds," those against said bonds shall have written or printed on their ballots "Against electric light bonds." If two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the qualified voters, voting at said election, shall cast their ballots for said bonds, then it shall be the duty of the said Mayor and Councilmen to issue said bonds. 
Sec. 83. - Street improvement bonds; election. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen of the said City of Clayton, Georgia, shall have power and authority to issue bonds in the sum not exceeding twenty thousand ($20,000) dollars, to be issued in such denominations as the Mayor and Councilmen may determine and to bear the rate of interest not to exceed six per centum per annum, said bonds to mature within thirty years from the date of the issuing of same, but the Mayor and Councilmen may pay up the same within a less period of time than thirty years. Before said bonds shall be issued, said Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall order an election, at which all voters which are eligible to vote for the Mayor and Councilmen of said city shall be entitled to vote. Those in favor of bonds shall have written or printed on their ballots "For bonds for street and improvements." Those against bonds shall have written or printed on their ballots "Against bonds for street paving and improvement." If two-thirds of the qualified voters voting at said election shall cast their ballots for such election shall cast their ballots for such bonds, the Mayor and Councilmen shall issue the same, and the proceeds of the sale thereof shall be used for the improvement and paving of said streets, roads and alleys. Said Mayor and Councilmen shall post notices of said election for at least ten days next prior to the holding thereof in three conspicuous places in said city, and said election shall be held under such rules and regulations as elections for Mayor and Councilmen are held for said city at or before the issuing of said bonds or any part thereof. And the said Mayor and Council shall prepare for the assessment, levy and collection of taxes over and above the other taxes in said City of Clayton, Georgia, with which to pay the annual interest and the principal of said bonds when the same shall become due. If said election shall not be in favor of bonds, the Mayor and Councilmen shall have the right and power to order other elections, not nearer than six months apart until said bond issue shall carry. 
Sec. 84. - Financial statement. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor and Councilmen of said City of Clayton shall publish twice every year in the official organ of Rabun County an itemized and detailed statement of all receipts and disbursements of the City of Clayton and showing the amount in the City Treasury at the time of said publication, said statement to show to whom, in what amount and for what purpose each expenditure was made, the expenses of said publication to be paid out of the City Treasury. 
ARTICLE II. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1986 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1190), p. 4778). Amendments to the original act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Affidavits and notices of intent that accompanied the original and amending acts have been omitted. A uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets has been added, if necessary, for clarity. 

Sec. 1. - Homestead defined. 
As used in this Act, the term "homestead" means a homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
Sec. 2. - Granted; amounts. 
(a)  Each resident of the City of Clayton, Georgia, is granted an exemption on the resident's homestead from all City of Clayton ad valorem taxes, including ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and retire bonded indebtedness, in the amount of $2,000.00. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Clayton, Georgia, who is 65 years of age or over is granted an exemption on the resident's homestead from all City of Clayton ad valorem taxes, including ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and retire bonded indebtedness, in the amount of $4,000.00. The homestead exemption granted by this subsection shall be in lieu of and not in addition to the homestead exemption provided by subsection (a) of this section. 
Sec. 3. - Application; forms; claim and return. 
The governing authority of the City of Clayton or its designee shall provide application forms for the homestead exemptions granted by this Act and may require such information and documentation as may be reasonably necessary to determine the eligibility of an applicant for any such homestead exemption. The homestead exemptions granted by this Act shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. It shall be the duty of any person granted a homestead exemption authorized by this Act to notify the governing authority of the City of Clayton or its designee in the event the person for any reason becomes ineligible for such exemption. 
Sec. 4. - Applicability. 
The homestead exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986. 
ARTICLE III. - CLAYTON-RABUN COUNTY WATER AND SEWER AUTHORITY ACT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1170), p. 6403). Amendments to the original act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Affidavits and notices of intent that accompanied the original and amending acts have been omitted. A uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets has been added, if necessary, for clarity. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Clayton-Rabun County Water and Sewer Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Created. 
(a)  There is created a public body corporation to be called the Clayton-Rabun County Water and Sewer Authority and by such name, style, and title, such body may contract and be contracted with, bring and defend actions, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the authority or the trustee acting under any trust indenture shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of its officers, agents, or employees. 
(b)  The authority shall consist of five members, three of whom shall be appointed by the governing authority of the City of Clayton, Georgia, and two of whom shall be appointed by the governing authority of Rabun County. With respect to the initial appointments by the governing authority of the city, one member shall be appointed for a term of three years, one member shall be appointed for a term of two years, and one member shall be appointed for a term of one year. With respect to the initial appointments by the governing authority of the county, one member shall be appointed to a term of three years and one member shall be appointed to a term of two years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be made for terms of three years and until successors are appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Immediately after the passage of this Act and the appointment of the members by the governing authorities of the City of Clayton and Rabun County, the members of the authority shall enter upon their duties, and as soon as it is practicable thereafter, they shall hold an organizational meeting. The members of the authority shall elect one of their number as chairman and another as vice chairman. The members shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer, or a secretary-treasurer, who need not be members of the authority. Three members of the authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the authority of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and powers of and perform all of the duties and obligations of the authority. The appointing governing authorities may provide by joint resolution for compensation for the services of the members of the authority in such amounts as they may deem appropriate; provided, however, that such members shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority may make rules and regulations and adopt bylaws for its own government. The authority shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 3. - Vacancies. 
Any vacancy in the membership of the authority shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the governing authority of the county or municipality which appointed the member who has vacated his or her membership on the authority. 
Sec. 4. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Authority" means the Clayton-Rabun County Water and Sewer Authority created by Section 2 of this Act. 
(2)  "Cost of the project" means and embraces the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment; financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, and for one year after completion of construction, the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal, and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expense; and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized in this Act, the construction of the project, the placing of the same in operation, and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. The cost of any project may also include a fund or funds for the creation of a debt service reserve, a renewal and replacement reserve, and such other reserves as may be reasonably required by the authority with respect to the financing and operating of its projects and as may be authorized by any bond resolution or trust agreement or indenture pursuant to the provisions of which the issuance of any bonds may be authorized. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(3)  "Project" means and includes the acquisition and construction of systems, plants, works, instrumentalities, and properties: (A) used or useful in connection with the obtaining of a water supply and the conservation, treatment, distribution, and sale of water for public and private uses; or (B) used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment, and disposal of sewage and waste; together with all parts of any such system, plant, work, instrumentality, and property and all appurtenances thereto, including lands, easements, rights in land, water rights, contract rights, franchises, approaches, dams, reservoirs, generating stations, sewage disposal plants, intercepting sewers, trunk-connecting and other sewers and water mains, filtration works, pumping stations, and equipment. 
(4)  "Revenue bonds" and "bonds" means revenue bonds authorized to be issued pursuant to this Act, and revenue bonds may be issued by the authority as authorized in this Act without any other actions or proceedings. 
(5)  "Self-liquidating" means any project which, in the sole judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom, including but not limited to any contractual payments, and all properties used, leased, and sold in connection therewith, together with any grants, will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued for the cost of such project or projects. 
Sec. 5. - Powers. 
The authority shall have the power: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, gift, or otherwise, and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority, the authority being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act except from the funds provided under the authority of this Act; and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the action or proceedings as may be just to the authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, provided no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; 
(4)  To enter into an agreement with the City of Clayton or Rabun County or with any other political subdivision or municipal corporation of the state with respect to acquiring a source of water supply; providing sewerage service, preparing engineering data, plans, and specifications for a water and sewerage system; extending water mains; apportioning the costs of constructing, extending, and maintaining a water or sewerage system, or both; providing for the testing and inspection of facilities constructed; providing for rates to be charged for water and sewerage services furnished to users of such system; providing for the reading of meters and keeping of pertinent records; or apportioning or designating the responsibility for any functions normally maintained by a water and sewerage system at the most reasonable cost possible; 
(5)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(6)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient thereto, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and any and all persons, firms, and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state and all special districts and all municipal corporations located in Rabun County are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and without limiting the generality of this paragraph, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations, special districts, and counties and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of water and sewerage service and facilities or either of them by the authority to such municipal corporations, special districts, and counties to the authority for a term not exceeding 50 years. As to any political subdivision, department, institution, or agency of this state and all special districts and municipal corporations located in Rabun County which shall enter into an agreement under the authority granted in this paragraph or in paragraph (4) of this section, the obligation to perform and fulfill such agreement shall constitute a general obligation of such entity for which its full faith and credit shall be and is pledged; 
(7)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects, as defined in this Act, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from such proceeds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof; 
(8)  To make loans with, and accept grants or loans of money or materials or property of any kind from, the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(9)  To make loans with, and accept grants or loans of money, materials, or property of any kind from, the State of Georgia or any agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision may impose; 
(10)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes, to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(11)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to make short-term loans and to approve, execute, and deliver appropriate evidence of any such indebtedness, provided no such power is in conflict with the Constitution or general laws of this state; 
(12)  To investigate the conditions of the City of Clayton's and Rabun County's water and sewer plant and facilities, necessary improvements for each system and the costs of same, and the costs of expanding the systems in the future; and 
(13)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Sec. 6. - Financing projects. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the authority created in this Act, shall have power and is authorized at one time, or from time to time, to borrow money for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost, as defined in this Act, of any one or more projects and to provide by resolution for issuance of negotiable revenue bonds for that purpose. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided in this Act for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. The interest rate or rates to be borne by any bonds and the time of payment of such interest shall be fixed, and with respect to any interest rate which floats in response to a variable, the method of calculation shall be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of all bonds. Any bonds issued by the authority shall be exempt from all laws of the State of Georgia governing usury or prescribing or limiting interest rates to be borne by bonds or other obligations. 
(1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 758), p. 4072) 
Sec. 7. - Revenue bonds; form; denominations; registration; place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine, and provision may be made for registration, conversion, and exchangeability privileges and for rights of redemption and may contain such other terms, covenants, assignments, and conditions as the resolution or resolutions authorizing the issuance of such bonds may provide. 
Sec. 8. - Same; signatures; seals. 
All such bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairman or vice chairman of the authority and the attesting manual or facsimile signature of the secretary, assistant secretary, or secretary-treasurer of the authority, and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto, either manually or by facsimile. The signature of one of such officers shall be placed manually on each bond. Any coupons attached thereto shall bear the manual or facsimile signatures of the chairman or vice chairman and the secretary, assistant secretary, or secretary-treasurer of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signature of and may be manually signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the authority by those persons who at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of issuance of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bond or on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes, the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. 
Sec. 9. - Same; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to negotiable instruments. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and the said bonds, their transfer, and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
Sec. 10. - Same; sale; price. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be in the best interest of the authority. 
Sec. 11. - Same; proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit, which, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to pay from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be used for paying the principal of and the interest on such bonds. 
Sec. 12. - Same; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Sec. 13. - Same; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Sec. 14. - Same; conditions precedent to issuance; object of issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular, special, or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of the quorum as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 15. - Same; credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the State of Georgia, the City of Clayton, or Rabun County nor a pledge of the faith and credit of such state, municipality, or county, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this Act, and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate such state, municipality, or county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the provisions enumerated in this section. 
Sec. 16. - Same; trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank inside or outside the state having the powers of a trust company. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, charges, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insurance of the project, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys; may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority and shall be satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor; may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depositary of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers; and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depositary and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of private corporations. In addition, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Sec. 17. - Same; to whom proceeds of bond shall be paid. 
The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in any trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who or any agency, bank, or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes of this Act, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
Sec. 18. - Same; sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, charges, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, tolls, charges, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated together with any grant funds, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal of and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust indenture may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: (1) the interest on such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; (3) the necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest; and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in any trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or of any trust indenture, surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds, and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall immediately be canceled and shall not again be issued. 
Sec. 19. - Same; remedies of bondholders. 
Any holders of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights given in this Act may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by any trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted under this Act or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Sec. 20. - Same; refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of refunding bonds of the authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon, and to refund any revenue bonds issued by any city, county, or authority with respect to any facilities to be acquired by the authority from any such city, county, or authority. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the provisions of this Act insofar as such provisions may be applicable. 
Sec. 21. - Same; venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Rabun County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in such court, which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 22. - Same; validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure provided for in Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq.], the "Revenue Bond Law," as now or hereafter amended. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or any other party which has contracted with the authority to furnish or receive the services and facilities of the water and sewerage system for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated, and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality or other party shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds when validated and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds, against the authority issuing the same, and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, instrumentality, or other party contracting with the authority. 
Sec. 23. - Same; interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of the authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this Act shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Sec. 24. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as proceeds of short-term loans, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, fees, and earnings shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 25. - Purpose of the authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this Act, the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, equipping, constructing, maintaining, and operating adequate water supply, treatment, and distribution facilities and sewerage collection, treatment, and distribution facilities; making such facilities and the services thereof available to public and private consumers and users located in the City of Clayton and Rabun County and its environs, including municipalities inside or outside such county, and to adjoining counties; extending and improving such facilities; and doing all things deemed by the authority necessary, convenient, and desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation for such type of undertakings. 
Sec. 26. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
The authority is authorized to prescribe, fix, and collect rates, fees, tolls, or charges and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls, or charges for the services, facilities, or commodities furnished, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as provided in this Act to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment, or extension of the water and sewerage system, and to pledge to the punctual payment of such bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues of such undertaking or project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
Sec. 27. - Tax-exempt status of authority. 
The properties of the authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the State of Georgia and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties and the authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any city, county, or the state or any political subdivision thereof. 
Sec. 28. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act. 
Sec. 29. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The provisions of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized by this Act and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
Sec. 30. - Liberal construction of Act. 
This Act, being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of this state and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes of this Act. 
Sec. 31. - Effect of partial invalidity of Act. 
The provisions of this Act are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of any competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
Sec. 32. - Other existing powers and authority. 
This Act does not in any way take from the City of Clayton or Rabun County or any municipality located in Rabun County or in any adjoining county the authority to own, operate, and maintain water systems or issue revenue bonds as is provided by Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq.], the "Revenue Bond Law." 
CHARTER AND LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and Local Acts and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER AND LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and Local Acts and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; requirements for publication of code, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19; maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; municipal corporation defined, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Ordinances, City of Clayton, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Clayton City Code." 
(Code 1999, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City. The term "the city" means the City of Clayton in the County of Rabun and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
City council. The term "city council" or "the council" means the city council of the City of Clayton, Georgia. 
City officials; city officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only (i.e., "city clerk", "chief of police", etc.), they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the City of Clayton, Georgia. 
Code. "Code" means The Code of Ordinances, City of Clayton, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "county" or "the county" means Rabun County, Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Fee schedule. The city council has adopted a schedule of fees, as amended from time to time, providing the amount of fees charges for various city services. A copy of the schedule is available in the office of the city clerk. 
Fine schedule. The term "fine schedule" means the schedule of fines authorized by section 1-13. 
Gender. Terms importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the city council of Lincolnton, Georgia. 
Incorporated limits or incorporated areas of the city means all areas of the city that are not situated within the territorial limits of an incorporated city or town. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the mayor and council. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the state constitution and statutes, this Code, ordinances and resolutions of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations that may be promulgated thereunder. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Clayton" were added to such name or title. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and" and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city governing authority of a special or temporary character. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office, which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined by the city council. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the city seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" means the sheriff of Rabun County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "the state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and their approaches within the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days. 
Written or in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1999, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of statutory definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; general statutory definition, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, Charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1999, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, preserved in loose-leaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or his designee to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances that indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of this Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the city council. A copy of this Code shall be available in the office of the city clerk for examination by all persons. 
State Law reference— Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; requirements for publication of code, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-5. - Responsibility of city personnel with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
Each city official or employee assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by the official or employee having custody thereof, upon expiration of his term of office or employment, to his successor or to the city clerk, in case he shall have no successor. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Ordinances, City of Clayton, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1999, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1999, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of section renumbering on city signs and forms. 
Sections of this Code have been renumbered during recodification. Former section numbers appearing on city signs or included in various forms used by the city shall deemed to refer to those sections as renumbered in this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1999, § 1-10) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying, or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-10. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any land development, subdivisions or zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(b)  No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1999, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-12. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained in the ordinance, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance that repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1999, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty, continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared to be an unlawful act, an offense, or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor, an offense, or an unlawful omission by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  The term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context of this Code that it is the intent of the city to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the city officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code or by general law, a person convicted of a violation of the Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or work on the streets or public works for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, or any combination thereof. 
(d)  The city council has adopted a fine schedule, available in the offices of the city clerk, the city marshal, and the municipal court clerk, providing fine amounts for certain violations of this Code. The fine provided in the schedule shall apply to violations listed in the schedule. The fine for all other violations shall be in accordance with subsection (c) of this section in an amount in the discretion of the municipal court. 
(e)  All sentences may be in the alternative, and fines may be imposed with the alternative of the other punishment in the event the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of any provision of the Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, each day that a violation of this Code continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. Further, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rules, regulation or order shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law. 
(h)  The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit equitable relief. 
(i)  The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit revocation or suspension of a license, permit, or franchise or the imposition of other administrative sanctions. 
(j)  All fines shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(k)  In the event community service is substituted for a fine, the monetary rate for hourly work shall be the federal minimum hourly wage. 
(l)  If it is deemed by a court of competent jurisdiction that a punishment imposed under this Code conflicts with the laws of the state, the punishment shall be the maximum permitted by law. 
(Code 1999, § 1-11) 
State Law reference— Maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-1, 36-32-5, 36-35-6; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 
Sec. 1-14. - Liability for violations by corporations, other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-15. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1999, § 1-4) 
State Law reference— Severability of state legislation, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; general authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-1 et seq., 36-35-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties, municipalities, and other governmental entities, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations for acts or omissions, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; municipal acquisition and disposition of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of council to bind subsequent council, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-3; councilmen incompetent to hold other municipal office, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-4; effect of residence in annexed territory as qualification for office, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-5; voting when personally interested, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6; method of calling election in the event all seats in municipal governing authority are vacant, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-13; initial terms of office of members of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-9. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-19. - Members; authority. 
The city is governed by the city council, consisting of the mayor and five councilmembers who are vested with all corporate, legislative and other powers of the city as permitted by the city charter and by law. The council shall be the final judge of the election and qualifications of its members, also of the amount and manner of compensating them for their services, to the extent permitted by the city charter and state law, provided that no challenge has been filed or ruling entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
State Law reference— Powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; home rule powers of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-20. - Election; term; vacancies. 
Election of the mayor and councilmembers shall be elected as provided in the city charter or by general law. Vacancies in office shall be filled as provided in the city charter or by general law. 
State Law reference— Term of municipal offices, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-541.1; general assembly authorized to enact local laws relation to municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-541.2; initial terms of office of member of municipal governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-9. 
Sec. 2-21. - Compensation; reimbursement of expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive such compensation as may be established from time to time by ordinance of the city council, together with reimbursement of their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Expense reimbursements shall be subject to approval by the city council. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide compensation and employee benefits to municipal officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 2-22. - Organizational meeting; election of mayor pro tem. 
At their first regular meeting in each year, the mayor and council shall elect a mayor pro tem who shall have full authority to discharge all the duties of the mayor, whenever from sickness, absence from the city, or any other cause the mayor is unable to act. 
Sec. 2-23. - Oath of office. 
Each councilmember, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, shall take an oath in the form prescribed by the city council. 
State Law reference— Oath of public officers, O.C.G.A. § 45-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-24. - Duties of councilmembers. 
It shall be the duty of each councilmember to faithfully discharge his duties as chairperson or member of such committees as he shall be appointed on, and to perform such other and all duties as may be required of him by the city charter, state law, and this Code. 
Sec. 2-25. - Mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall act as chairperson of the council and is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the council. The mayor shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. 
(b)  The mayor may not introduce motions or second a motion except that the mayor may introduce or second a motion to go into executive session as authorized by section 2-63. The mayor shall not vote except to break a tie. 
(c)  The mayor shall have the veto power, and may veto any ordinance or resolution of the council. The veto shall be recorded with the city clerk in writing within three days of the passing of the ordinance or resolution. The veto shall include the reason for withholding the ascent. The clerk shall record upon receipt of the veto the date and time of its delivery from the mayor. Ordinances or resolutions vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the clerk to the city council at its next meeting. If the city council then adopts the ordinance or resolution by the affirmative vote of four council members, it shall be approved. 
(Code 1999, § 2-36; Ord. of 3-11-2008; Ord. of 11-19-2013(1)) 
Sec. 2-26. - Mayor pro tem. 
The council shall select a mayor pro tem from the councilmembers at the beginning of each calendar year. The mayor pro tem shall fulfill the duties of the mayor if the mayor is not in attendance. If the mayor and the mayor pro tem are absent and a quorum is present, the remaining councilmembers shall select a councilmember to serve as temporary chairperson of the meeting until either the mayor or mayor pro tem is present at the meeting. 
(Code 1999, § 2-37) 
Sec. 2-27. - Committees. 
The mayor, with the concurrence of the council, may create committees of members of the council to study any issue before the council. Any of the committees may make recommendations to the city council, but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration. In addition to councilmembers, committees may include other city officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any litigation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the mayor with the concurrence of the council. The mayor shall serve as an ex officio member of all committees. 
(Code 1999, § 2-38) 
Secs. 2-28—2-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Open meetings and notice of meetings required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; meetings of governing bodies of counties and municipalities to be open, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1. 

Sec. 2-58. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the city council shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(Code 1999, § 2-39) 
Sec. 2-59. - Organizational meeting. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on or before the second Monday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk, and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members of the city council whose terms of office shall begin the day and hour of taking the oath of office. 
(Code 1999, § 2-40) 
State Law reference— Oath of public officers, O.C.G.A. § 45-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-60. - Regular meetings. 
The date and time for regular meetings of the city council shall be set by the mayor and council to be held on a recurring monthly basis. All regular meetings shall be held in the city municipal complex. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the council. 
(Code 1999, § 2-41; ; Amend. of 3-15-2016(1) ) 
State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of city council, due notice requirement for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.; excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3; meeting agenda required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-61. - Notice of rescheduled or relocated meetings. 
A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the city by the mayor for any reason. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the official city newspaper or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-62. - Emergency meetings. 
(a)  Any three members of the city council may convene a special or emergency meeting of the mayor and council by notifying either the city clerk or the city manager. The notification shall be made in a manner sufficient to provide public notice unless conditions warrant an emergency session. The mayor and council shall be notified individually and personally by the city clerk or the city manager. The mayor or mayor pro tempore shall preside. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
(b)  In the absence or disqualification of the mayor or mayor pro tempore, any councilmember may preside over the meeting. 
(Code 1999, § 2-43; Ord. of 3-11-2008) 
Sec. 2-63. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  Executive sessions of the city council may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the council is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any the exceptions shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the city council taken in a public meeting. 
(b)  The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the councilmembers present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the city clerk at the direction of the mayor. Any the minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of the portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the council may only be delayed until the time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(Code 1999, § 2-44) 
Sec. 2-64. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the council. A quorum is a majority of all of the members of the council then in office. It is the duty of the mayor to enforce this rule. Any councilmember may raise a point of order directed to the mayor if he believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a councilmember leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the mayor with the approval of the councilmembers present. 
(Code 1999, § 2-45) 
Sec. 2-65. - Voting; majority. 
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of the majority of councilmembers present and voting, either in person or via teleconference, at a meeting at which a quorum is physically present. A member may participate via teleconference if necessary, so long as the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. are complied with. Unless otherwise specified in these procedures, a majority means more than half of the councilmembers present or participating via teleconference, excluding abstentions. Any councilmember participating via teleconference may make or second any motion as if he or she were present at the meeting. Where a two-thirds majority is specified, a majority vote means at least two-thirds of the councilmembers present in person or participating via teleconference, excluding abstentions. In the event of a tie vote, the mayor shall vote to break the tie. 
(Code 1999, § 2-46; Amend. of 2-21-2017(1) ) 
Sec. 2-66. - Abstentions. 
A councilmember shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest that would prevent him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the councilmember shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. 
(Code 1999, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-67. - Agenda. 
(a)  The city clerk, with the advice of the mayor and the councilmembers, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. An agenda work session shall be held by the city clerk to finalize the agenda. The mayor and all councilmembers may participate in the work session. Whenever a quorum of the council is present for an agenda work session, the meeting shall be open to the public and all notice and recordkeeping requirements applicable to an open meeting must be met. The agenda shall be made available to the councilmembers at least one business day before every council meeting. 
(b)  Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. To be considered, this request must be submitted in writing to the city clerk and received at least three business days before the meeting. 
(c)  The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the council. A new subject that requires urgent attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a two-thirds vote of the council. 
(d)  A copy of the agenda and a list of those members present shall be made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of any meeting. 
(Code 1999, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-68. - Consent agenda. 
(a)  A consent agenda may be prepared by the city clerk for the council to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval and where no debate is expected may be placed on a consent agenda. 
(b)  At the appropriate time of the meeting, the mayor shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a councilmember objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the mayor shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the mayor will ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda will be adopted by unanimous consent. 
(Code 1999, § 2-49) 
Sec. 2-69. - Minutes. 
(a)  The city clerk shall promptly record the minutes for each council meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the council meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the council but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the council. The minutes shall specify the names of councilmembers present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the councilmember who proposed each motion, the councilmember who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll-call vote, the name of each councilmember voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a councilmember has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the council. 
(b)  The council must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the council. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the councilmembers at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the council at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the mayor and attested to by the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 2-50) 
Sec. 2-70. - Order of business. 
All regular council meetings shall follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Minutes. 
(3)  Invited guests. 
(4)  Reports from committees and departments. 
(5)  Consent agenda. 
(6)  Old business. 
(7)  New business. 
(8)  Public comments. 
(9)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1999, § 2-51) 
Sec. 2-71. - Decorum. 
(a)  All councilmembers must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the mayor and not to individual councilmembers, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A councilmember is not allowed to speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the mayor. All comments made by a councilmember shall address the motion that is being discussed. 
(b)  The mayor shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a councilmember believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The mayor can rule on the question or he may allow the council to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote. 
(Code 1999, § 2-52) 
Sec. 2-72. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the city council shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Public comments. The final agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. All members of the public who wish to address the council must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the city clerk at least three business days before the council meeting. These individuals will be allotted five minutes to make their comments and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the council. 
(2)  Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote, the council may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the council. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for five minutes and may only speak once. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the council. Anyone wishing to speak at any council meeting must be recognized by the mayor before addressing the council. 
(3)  Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a council meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for councilmembers. Individuals who violate any rules of the council may be ruled out of order by the mayor or on a point of order made by a councilmember. A majority vote of the council will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the mayor. 
(4)  Public hearings. The council may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the council. Hearings may be held immediately prior to or following a meeting of the council or at the other places and times as the council may determine. No official action shall be taken at any the public hearing. 
(Code 1999, § 2-53) 
Sec. 2-73. - Amendments to rules. 
Any amendments to the rules of order must be submitted by a councilmember in writing to the city manager three business days before a regular meeting of the council. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all councilmembers. All amendments require a two-thirds vote of the council to be adopted. 
(Code 1999, § 2-54) 
Sec. 2-74. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable and requires a two-thirds vote of the council. Rules governing quorum, voting methods and requirements, the notification to councilmembers of meetings, and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended. 
(Code 1999, § 2-55) 
Sec. 2-75. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public meetings. 
(Code 1999, § 2-56) 
Secs. 2-76—2-93. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RULES OF PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-94. - Applicability. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, procedures for meetings of the city council shall follow Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, prescribed by the mayor. 
(Code 1999, § 2-76) 
Sec. 2-95. - Parliamentarian. 
The city attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for council meetings. 
(Code 1999, § 2-77) 
Sec. 2-96. - Main motion. 
In order for the council to take any official action on any subject, a councilmember must propose a main motion. A proposed main motion will not be recognized by the chair until another councilmember agrees to second the motion. A second does not require the councilmember seconding the motion to support the motion. A councilmember may withdraw a main motion that he has made at any time before the council has voted on that motion. 
(Code 1999, § 2-78) 
Sec. 2-97. - Debate. 
(a)  After the main motion is recognized by the chair, the council shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the mayor in a manner that is fair to all members of the council. Councilmembers may participate in the debate only when they are recognized by the mayor. 
(b)  During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce subsidiary motions that propose that the council take a particular action on a motion. There are two classes of subsidiary motions: debatable subsidiary motions and undebatable subsidiary motions. Debatable subsidiary motions consist of motions to postpone indefinitely, amend, refer to committee, and postpone to a time certain. Debatable subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. There are three undebatable subsidiary motions: limit debate, vote immediately, and lay on the table. They require a second and cannot be debated. 
(c)  Councilmembers may also introduce privileged motions. Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting and can be introduced during the course of debate. Privileged motions consist of a motion to raise a question of privilege and motions to recess and adjourn. The motions to recess and adjourn require a second. Debate is not allowed on privileged motions. 
(Code 1999, § 2-79) 
Sec. 2-98. - Voting procedure. 
Voting on debatable motions and voting on undebatable motions shall take place in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Debatable motions. In the case of debatable motions, the vote can be proposed in one of two ways: 
a.  If debate has been completed and no other councilmember wishes to speak, the chair can call for the vote. If there are no objections then the chair can proceed with the vote. 
b.  If the mayor calls for the vote and there is an objection, a member of the council may move to vote immediately ("move the previous question"). If this motion is seconded and approved by a two-thirds vote, debate will stop. The mayor will then read the proposed motion to the council and ask for the votes of the councilmembers. 
(2)  Undebatable motions. In the case of undebatable motions, the vote shall occur immediately after the motion is recognized by the chair. The mayor shall read the proposed motion to the council and then call for the vote. 
(Code 1999, § 2-80) 
Sec. 2-99. - Ranking of motions. 
(a)  Each subsidiary and privileged motion is assigned a specific rank. A motion of higher precedence can interrupt a motion of lower precedence. The higher motion must be decided before the council returns to consider the motion of lower precedence. 
(b)  A main motion has the lowest rank and does not take precedence over any other motion. A motion to adjourn has the highest rank and will take precedence over all other subsidiary and privileged motions. The order of precedence of motions shall be in accordance with this section. Motions at the bottom of the following list take precedence over motions at the top of the list: 
(1)  Main motion (lowest rank). 
(2)  Subsidiary motions (debatable): 
a.  Postpone indefinitely. 
b.  Amend. 
c.  Refer to committee (commit). 
d.  Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). 
(3)  Subsidiary motions (undebatable): 
a.  Limit debate or extend limits. 
b.  Vote immediately (previous question). 
c.  Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). 
(4)  Privileged motions (undebatable): 
a.  Question of privilege. 
b.  Recess. 
c.  Adjourn (highest rank). 
(Code 1999, § 2-81) 
Sec. 2-100. - Subsidiary motions. 
During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce motions that propose that the council take a particular action on a main motion. These motions are called subsidiary motions and they allow a council to reach a conclusion on the main motion. Subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. Three subsidiary motions: amend, limit debate and vote immediately also may apply to other subsidiary motions. 
(1)  Postpone indefinitely. If a councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered by the council, that councilmember may move to postpone the consideration of the main motions indefinitely. If the motion is successful, consideration of the main motion stops and the main motion is tabled. A motion to postpone indefinitely may be debated, but it cannot be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(2)  Amend. If a councilmember believes that a main motion that is on the table should be changed in order to make it more acceptable, he can move to amend the motion. 
a.  Amendments must be closely related to the original motion and must not change the nature of the motion that they amend. 
b.  Motions to refer, amend, postpone to a time certain and the motion to recess can also be amended. 
c.  A motion cannot be amended more than two times. 
d.  Debate is allowed on a motion to amend only if the original motion is debatable. 
e.  A majority vote is required for the council to adopt an amendment. 
f.  If the amendment is adopted then the council shall consider the amended version of the motion. 
(3)  Refer to a committee (commit). If a councilmember believes that further information is needed before the council can act on a main motion, he may propose that the motion be referred to a specific committee or department for further study. If an appropriate committee does not already exist, then a committee may be formed as a part of the motion. A motion to refer should specify the date that the committee or department will report back to the council. This motion is debatable and amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(4)  Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). A motion to postpone to a certain time may be proposed if a councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered until a future time. This motion shall set a particular time for the main motion to be considered again. It is debatable and can be amended. If this motion is passed, the mayor will bring the original motion back to the council for consideration at the specified time. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(5)  Limit or extend limits of debate. A motion to limit debate places a time constraint on the length of debate. The details of such a motion are to be decided by the councilmember who makes the motion. This motion can also be used to extend the limits of debate if a limit on debate already exists. Debate is not allowed on this motion and a two-thirds vote is required. 
(6)  Vote immediately (previous question). If a councilmember believes that the motion that is being considered should be voted on, the councilmember may move to vote immediately. The motion is undebatable and a vote of two-thirds of the council is required for the motion to pass. 
(7)  Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). A motion to lay on the table proposes that the consideration of a main motion be postponed until a later time in the meeting. The motion can be brought up for consideration only if a motion to resume consideration is accepted by the council during the same meeting. The motion will die if it is not taken up during the meeting. Debate is not allowed on this motion and the motion is not amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Code 1999, § 2-82) 
Sec. 2-101. - Privileged motions. 
Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting. They do not address or relate to a main motion and can be introduced whether or not there is a main motion under consideration. Privileged motions take precedence over all subsidiary motions. Debate is not allowed on these motions. 
(1)  Question of privilege. A formal question addressed to the chair concerning the rights of a councilmember or of the council as a whole is referred to as a question of privilege. It does not require a second and cannot be debated or amended. The chair is required to make a ruling on the question. 
(2)  Recess. A motion to recess proposes that the meeting be suspended for a particular amount of time. The motion must specify the length of the recess. The motion must also be seconded. Debate is not allowed on this motion but the motion can be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(3)  Adjourn. In order for a meeting to come to a close, a councilmember must make a motion to adjourn. The motion to adjourn has the highest rank of any motion and, as a result, it can be introduced at any time. The motion requires a second, but is not debatable or amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Code 1999, § 2-83) 
Sec. 2-102. - Incidental motions. 
Incidental motions allow councilmembers to exert their rights as a member of the council. Incidental motions can be introduced at any time during a meeting. 
(1)  Appeal. If a councilmember disagrees with a decision that is made by the chair, that councilmember may appeal the decision. If the appeal is seconded, the appeal will be considered by the council. The chair has the opportunity to explain the ruling that has been challenged. The council may then debate the appeal. The council shall decide by majority vote if the chair's decision is to be upheld or overturned. An appeal is high in precedence and can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or by a motion to lay on the table. 
(2)  Parliamentary inquiry. If a councilmember has a question about the rules of order, he may ask the chair to give an opinion on that question. This question should take the form of a parliamentary inquiry and should relate to the current business of the council. This motion takes precedence over all motions except privileged motions. This motion does not require a second and is not debatable or amendable. 
(3)  Point of order (question of order). If a councilmember believes that a violation of the rules of parliamentary procedure has occurred, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chair can make a ruling on the question or can allow the council to debate and then rule on the question by majority vote. A point of order can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or a motion to lay on the table. 
(4)  Point of information (request for information). If a councilmember has a question about the facts of a particular issue that is being considered, he may ask a point of information. This motion is addressed first to the chair and then to the appropriate person. A second is not required and the motion is not debatable or amendable. 
(Code 1999, § 2-84) 
Sec. 2-103. - Supplementary main motions. 
Three motions allow the council to act on a main motion that has either been passed or tabled by the council. These motions are considered to be main motions but differ from usual main motions in the ways specified. 
(1)  Reconsider. The motion to reconsider allows the council to debate whether or not to overturn a decision made at the meeting that is in progress. It allows the council to consider new information that may affect the decision that has already been made. Any councilmember may make a motion to reconsider and any councilmember may second the motion. The motion is debatable but it cannot be amended. A majority vote of the council is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to reconsider is passed, the original decision will be voided and the council will return to debate and revote the original motion. 
(2)  Rescind. A motion to rescind proposes that the council overturn a motion passed at a previous meeting. A motion to rescind can be made by any councilmember. It is in order as long as the original motion has not been implemented. An announcement of the intention to rescind a motion may be made at the meeting where the decision was made, or the councilmember seeking to rescind may place the matter on the agenda for the next meeting pursuant to section 2-67. The motion to rescind will then be placed on the agenda for the next meeting. At the next meeting, the motion to rescind will formally be made. If it is seconded, then the council shall debate and vote on rescission. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to rescind is passed, the original decision will be voided. 
(3)  Resume consideration. The motion to resume consideration allows the council to consider a motion that has been temporarily postponed. This motion requires a second and is not debatable or amendable. It is a main motion but ranks higher than any debatable motion. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Code 1999, § 2-85) 
Secs. 2-104—2-134. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LEGISLATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances of a city council not to bind succeeding councils, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-3; authority to adopt municipal ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 2-135. - Legislative authority generally. 
The city council shall exercise the legislative functions of the city, and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the government of the city; provided, however, the ordinance or resolution is not in conflict with the city charter or state or federal law. 
(Code 1999, § 2-106) 
Sec. 2-136. - Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the manner provided in this division. 
(Code 1999, § 2-107) 
Sec. 2-137. - Preparation of ordinances. 
Whenever possible, all ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. 
(Code 1999, § 2-108) 
Sec. 2-138. - Required elements of ordinances. 
(a)  All ordinances passed by the council shall contain the following items, which shall be set forth in the ordinance in the following order: 
(1)  Ordinance number. 
(2)  Title and purpose. 
(3)  Enacting clause. 
(4)  Body of ordinance by sections. 
(5)  Severability clause. 
(6)  Penalty clause. 
(7)  Repealing clause. 
(8)  Adoption date. 
(9)  Effective date. 
(10)  Authentication of city clerk. 
(b)  Ordinances that amend this Code shall be in the form prescribed in chapter 1 and shall clearly indicate by section number the section repealed, amended or added. 
(Code 1999, § 2-109) 
Sec. 2-139. - Introduction of ordinances, resolutions and other matters. 
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters of subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council. 
(Code 1999, § 2-110) 
Sec. 2-140. - Action restricted; emergencies. 
No ordinance shall be put on its final passage on the same day on which it is introduced, except that where an emergency exists and public health and safety require it, an ordinance containing a full statement of the facts and reasons for the emergency may be made effective upon its adoption, if approved by the council. 
(Code 1999, § 2-111) 
Sec. 2-141. - Reading of ordinances. 
Each ordinance shall be read at two consecutive meetings of the mayor and council. This subsection may be waived by two-thirds of those voting upon the question of waiver. 
(Code 1999, § 2-112) 
Sec. 2-142. - Subject matter of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title; and no ordinance, or section of the ordinance, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed. When practicable, all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 2-113) 
Sec. 2-143. - Adoption of ordinances, resolutions, contracts. 
An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives an affirmative vote of a majority of the whole council. 
(Code 1999, § 2-114) 
Sec. 2-144. - Effective date of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall take effect until ten days after its adoption unless deemed an emergency measure, in which case the ordinance shall take effect immediately. 
(Code 1999, § 2-115) 
Secs. 2-145—2-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND DEPARTMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-1 et seq., 36-35-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; authority to provide for, regulate, etc., officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; liability of municipality for acts of officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; personal liability of municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; local government officers and employees not subject to liability for torts involving use of government vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-92-3; fixing of salaries of municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; training of members of municipal governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-45-04; local referenda for abolishing local offices or shortening or lengthening term, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-11; authority to provide compensation and employee benefits to municipal officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 

Sec. 2-172. - Authority to organize and reorganize city administrative structure. 
The mayor and council may by ordinance establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, provided that the same person shall fill a number of offices and positions of employment, and transfer or change the functions and duties of various offices, positions of employment, and department and agencies of the city. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish municipal offices, agencies, and employments, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(1); authority to define, regulate, and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation, and tenure of municipal officers, agents, and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2). 
Sec. 2-173. - Adoption of personnel policies. 
(a)  The mayor and council has adopted the City of Clayton Personnel Policy and Procedure Manual that provides rules, regulations, and policies consistent with the city's Charter concerning the method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; the administration of a position classification and pay plan, and methods of promotion and transfer within the classification plan; hours of work, vacation, sick leave and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and rules governing layoffs or similar reductions in force; such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and such other personnel policies, regulations, provisions, or notices as were and may be necessary to provide for the adequate and systematic handling of personnel matters. A copy of the manual is available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall be in addition to regulations provided in the adopted personnel manual. In the event of conflict between this chapter and the adopted manual, the more stringent provision shall prevail. 
(c)  Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance or resolution adopting, establishing or amending any job classification and compensation plan for the city employees or any other personnel rule, regulations or policy, which has been adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-174. - Responsibility of department heads. 
Every department head is immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of his respective department. Each department head shall be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor. Each such department head shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of his department and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in his particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the city manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Submit annual reports of the activities of his department to the city manager; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the city manager; 
(5)  Have power, when authorized by the city manager, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in his department. 
Sec. 2-175. - Intradepartmental cooperation. 
Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the city manager, any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
Secs. 2-176—2-203. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES AND AGENCIES 

Sec. 2-204. - Establishment by council. 
The city council shall establish such boards, commissions, and authorities as it deemed necessary or desirable from time to time to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function the mayor and council, upon such terms as are provided by the council by ordinance in accordance with the city's Charter. 
Sec. 2-205. - Rules, regulations and bylaws. 
Unless otherwise provided by the city council, each board, commission, and authority established by the city council may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the city's Charter, the Code, or general law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs; provided, however, that copies of such bylaws, rules and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Secs. 2-206—2-233. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE AND TAXATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— For provisions regarding taxes related to businesses, see chapter 22. 
State Law reference— Municipal finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; adoption of budget articles and resolutions, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; political subdivision audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1; limitations on use of purchasing and contract procedures, O.C.G.A. § 34-4-3.1; municipal bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-38-1; standards for city and city audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-8; officer responsible for political subdivision investments, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-4; public works bidding, O.C.G.A. § 26-91-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-234. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on July 1 and end on June 30 of each year. 
State Law reference— Fiscal year required to be established by ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-235. - Fee schedule; fees established by resolution. 
The city maintains a schedule of fees for permits, licenses, and other municipal charges. The amount of fees or charges imposed by the city, including, but not limited to, those encompassed in the city's fee schedule, shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council, as it deems necessary. A copy of the fee schedule is available in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 2-236. - Identity theft prevention program. 
For purposes of compliance with 16 CFR 681.1 et seq., the city has adopted an identity theft prevention (red flag) program, a copy of which is available in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 2-237. - Ad valorem tax due date; delinquent payments; penalties. 
All ad valorem taxes due to the City of Clayton shall be due and paid on January 20, and upon failure of any property owners to pay all taxes when due, the clerk and treasurer shall issue execution against such property owners, for taxes due as provided by the City Charter, this Code, and state law. The clerk and treasurer are further authorized to charge interest on unpaid taxes and penalties as are provided by state law. 
(Code 1999, § 62-1; Ord. of 3-13-1990, § 1; Ord. of 11-19-2013(2)) 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-238—2-267. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY PROPERTY (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-268—2-297. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC RECORDS (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-298—2-327. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ETHICS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2-328. - Definitions. 
City council member shall be any person who is an elected city official, including the mayor, of the City of Clayton. 
Employee shall be any person who is a fulltime or part-time employee of the City of Clayton. 
Government or city shall be construed to mean the City of Clayton, Georgia government. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-329. - Acceptance of gifts. 
City council members shall not solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation, or group which: 
(1)  Has, or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city; 
(2)  In exchange for the thing of value seeks to have a council member exercise a matter of discretion in his or her favor; or 
(3)  In exchange for the thing of value seeks to have interests, which may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duty of the council member. 
The term anything of value shall be defined to include and excluded those things set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-10-2. 
This section shall not apply to campaign contributions which shall be reported in accordance with state laws. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Secs. 2-330—2-339. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-340. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this section that city council members avoid any action whether or not specifically prohibited by section 2-328 which might result in, or create the appearance of the following: 
(1)  Using public office for private gain; 
(2)  Impeding government efficiency or economy; or 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-341. - Financial interests of members. 
City council may not: 
(1)  Have direct or indirect financial interests that conflict substantially with their responsibilities and duties as government servants; or 
(2)  Engage in, directly or indirectly, financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained from their office. Aside from these restrictions, city council members are free to engage in lawful financial transactions to the same extent as private citizens. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-342. - Use of public property. 
A city council member shall not use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he or she direct employees to use such property for these purposes. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-343. - Use of confidential information. 
A city council member shall not directly or indirectly, make us of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, official information not made available to the general public. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-344. - Coercion by council members. 
A city council member shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him or persons within his immediate family, or those with whom a council member has business or financial ties. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-345. - Voting in matters of personal interest. 
A city council member shall not vote on an ordinance or amendment in a city council meeting that would directly affect his or her private business. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-346. - Unauthorized purchases. 
A city council member shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-347. - Meeting of the council. 
Meeting of the council shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A, title 50, chapter 14, as amended, and title 36, chapter 80, section 1, as amended, as it applies to municipalities. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-348. - City attorneys used for private business. 
A city council member shall not use the attorney or attorneys who are under retainer by the city for personal or private business without paying just compensation. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-349. - Unauthorized use of public employees. 
A city council member shall not use his superior position to request or require an employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of his family, business, social, church or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal business, or political purposes; and 
(3)  Work for him personally without offering just compensation. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-350. - Travel expenses. 
A city council member shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention, or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention, or conference without refunding the pro-rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-351. - Penalties. 
The code of ethics to be observed by the council members are set forth above and any violation thereof shall subject the offender to disciplinary action which may include censure and either public or private reprimand. Power to administer a greater punishment shall include power to administer the lesser. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2-352. - Ethics committee. 
The ethics committee shall consist of three persons, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the council, and the third appointed by the two above named subject to approval by a majority of the city council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall serve a two year term. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-353. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city council members shall be filed with the ethics committee. The ethics committee may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegible or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the city council. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics committee shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The ethics committee shall be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(c)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the ethics committee shall be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics committee shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent government servant. 
(d)  The ethics committee shall be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence and hold hearings where provided for in the rules. 
(e)  The ethics committee shall be empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, subpoenas, notices, applications for reinstatement and any other written instruments necessary or desirable under these rules. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-354. - Additional regulations. 
This chapter shall be cumulative to any other ordinance, resolution or act now existing. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-355. - Right to appeal. 
Any final decision by the city council pursuant to this code of ethics for the city council members shall be reviewable by the Superior Court of Rabun County. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the city council, which supported the decision of the council. Provided, however, no action of the city council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
DIVISION 3. - CONFLICT OF INTEREST, POLITICAL ACTIVITIES AND CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-356. - Conflict of interest, generally. 
No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. (Ga. L. 1977, p. 3541, Sec. 1.9) 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-357. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  If an employee of the city is an officer, director, agent or member of, or owns interest of any entity which is subject to the regulation of, or which has financial commitments with the city, they shall file a sworn statement to this effect with the city clerk. 
(b)  Employees shall not transact any business in their official capacity with any business entity of which he or she is an officer, director, agent, member, or in which he or she owns a controlling interest, excluding civic, charitable or religious organizations. 
(c)  Employees shall not have personal investment in any enterprise which will create a conflict or a perceived conflict between their private interest and the public interest. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-358. - Acceptance of gifts, gratuities, special privileges. 
(a)  Employees shall not accept any gifts, loans, rewards, favors, or services that may reasonably tend to improperly influence them in the discharge of their official duties. This limitation is not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value, which are distributed generally, nor to prohibit employees from accepting loans from regular lending institutions. It is particularly important that employees guard against relationships, which might be construed as, or give the appearance of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. 
(b)  Employees shall not use or attempt to use their position to secure an economic benefit or advantages, special privileges or exemptions for themselves or others including the use of knowledge obtained by through their employment or by virtue of their position. 
(c)  Employees shall not accept employment or engage in any business or professional activity, which they may reasonably expect, would require or induce them to disclose confidential information acquired by them by reason of their official position. 
(d)  Employees shall not accept payment from outside sources for professional services (i.e. teaching, instructing, speaking engagements, consulting, honorariums) when such activities are done on city time or when such services pertain to the purchase or sale of city property. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-359. - Proprietorship of creations. 
All plans, designs, reports, specifications, drawings, devices, inventions, and other items produced or created by employees during working hours or through the use of city facilities or equipment or at the request of the city shall be and become the sole property of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-360. - Confidential information 
Employees shall not disclose confidential information gained by reason of their official position, nor shall they otherwise use such information for thief personal gain or benefit. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-361. - Political activity. 
(a)  No person employed by the city shall either publicly or otherwise hold himself out as a candidate in any city election while holding employment with the city. 
(b)  City employees shall not take part in any political management or political campaigns in election of mayor or any member of the city council for the city during any period of time for which he is expected to perform work or receive compensation from the city. 
(c)  No employee, official or other person shall solicit, orally or by letter, or be in any other manner concerned in obtaining any assessments, contributions, or services for any political party from any employee during his hours of duty, service or work with the city. 
(d)  Employees shall not represent the city by wearing any uniform or portion thereof that is issued by the city while he is participating in any campaign at any time. 
(e)  The city in no way seeks to influence employees in their choice of party affiliations or candidates, recognizing that this is a matter for each person to decide. Therefore, nothing contained herein shall be construed to restrict the right of the employee to hold membership in and support a political party, to vote as he chooses, to express opinions on political subjects or candidates, to maintain actively during off duty hours in all areas of political activity. 
(f)  Employees shall not utilize any city equipment or vehicles in support of any political campaign. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Secs. 2-362—2-366. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 2-367. - Limitations and approval requirements. 
(a)  City employment shall be considered to be the primary employment of all full-time employees. No employee may engage in outside employment which will interfere with the interests of city service. Standards by which some employment is no acceptable include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Illegal activity; 
(2)  Employment that by virtue of association will reflect upon the reputation of the city. 
(3)  High hazard or fatiguing work which might detract from or reduce city performance. 
(b)  Prior to beginning any regularly scheduled outside employment, employees will obtain specific written approval from their department head or his designee on request forms which indicate the name of the outside employer, the nature of the work, hours of work, address and telephone number where the employee can be reached. Such information will become a part of the employee's official personnel record. Employees are required to obtain approval from their department head or his designee for any change in a previously approved outside employment request. 
(c)  Any employee accepting or engaging in outside employment under the terms of this rule shall make arrangement with the outside employer to be available to respond immediately to any emergency call of duty whenever the department head or his designed shall determine that the employee's services are necessary. 
(d)  Employees sustaining injuries while engaged in outside employment are normally ineligible to receive benefits under the city's worker's compensation program. If an employee sustains an injury while engaged in outside employment, but is performing duties within the scope of his city responsibilities (i.e. a police arrest), he may be eligible for partial worker's compensation benefits. 
(e)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section will result in disciplinary action. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; regulation of alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq.; authority of local authorities to license and regulate alcoholic beverage sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; local regulation of sales on Sundays, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; prohibited acts on licensed premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.; malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq.; local licensing requirements for sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; requirements for sale of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Unless otherwise defined herein, the definitions contained within O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq., shall be applicable to this chapter. 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises means all distilled spirits, alcohol, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine that are consumed on the premises, including bottles of beer or malt liquor and bottles of wine that are opened only for consumption on the premises, except for certain partially consumed bottles of wine in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4 and this article. 
Craft beer means a beer with a distinctive flavor, produced in small quantities and distributed in a particular region by a small independent American craft brewer (or certain European brewers) having an annual production of 6,000,000 barrels of beer or less and less than 25 percent of the craft brewery is owned or controlled (or equivalent economic interest) by a beverage alcohol industry member that is not itself a craft brewer and is a brewer that has a majority of its total beverage alcohol volume in beers whose flavor derives from traditional or innovative brewing ingredients and their fermentation. 
Farm winery means a domestic winery located on premises, a substantial portion of which is used for agricultural purposes, including the cultivation of grapes, berries or fruits to be utilized in the manufacture or production of wine by the domestic winery that: 
(1)  Makes at least 40 percent of its annual production from agricultural produce grown in this state; 
(2)  Is owned and operated by persons who are in engaged in the production of a substantial portion of the state agricultural produce used in its annual production; and for this purpose such production of a substantial production of such state agricultural produce shall be determined by the state commissioner; and 
(3)  Produces less than 100,000 gallons per year. 
Growler means a bottle made of glass or other material customary to the industry, provided that the bottle is capable of being sealed with a screw cap with a collar or other seal over the screw for the purpose of complying with open container laws. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing complementary samples of such wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the licensed premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine can be given complimentary or for a fee. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
Winery means a manufacturer of wine. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2008, § 3; ; Amend. of 5-17-2016(2) ) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 
Secs. 4-2—4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES AND PERMITS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Declaration of business of manufacturing, selling and other dealings in alcoholic beverages as privilege subject to regulatory requirements, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1; powers of local authorities as to granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of licenses generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; allowing or permitting of breaking of packages or drinking of contents thereof on premises prohibited, exception for sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-21. - License declared privilege. 
Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, the distribution, sale, handling, and other dealing in or possession of alcoholic beverages in the city is a privilege and not a right, and the issuance of a license under this chapter shall not create any property rights in the license holder. Furthermore, such privilege shall not be exercised in the city except as licensed under the terms of this chapter. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1. 
Sec. 4-22. - Compliance with applicable law required. 
The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code and, if other provisions of this Code conflict with this chapter, then this chapter shall control. In addition, all licensees shall at all times comply with federal and state laws, municipal ordinances and the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner, including licensing qualifications. 
Sec. 4-23. - License required; classes of licenses available. 
(a)  Generally. Each person engaged in the manufacture, distribution and selling of alcoholic beverages at wholesale or retail, not exempt by state law from municipal licensing regulations, shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this division. 
(b)  Package and on-premises consumption licenses for sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine. In addition to farm winery tasting room and alcoholic beverage caterers' licenses as provided in this section, the city may issue alcoholic beverage licenses for package sales and by the drink sales of distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine. 
(c)  Farm winery tasting room licenses. It is unlawful to operate a farm winery tasting room within the city for any domestic wine manufactured in a farm winery or otherwise without having the appropriate license. Such licenses may be issued pursuant to this article provided that: 
(1)  A license issued under this subsection authorizes the holder to carry on the business of operating a farm winery tasting room, which includes retail sales of wine produced at the farm winery by the package, retail sales of wine by the glass, and complimentary samples of wine, within the licensed tasting room premises, so long as the location of the tasting room is in compliance with any zoning or land use requirements as on the date of the issuance of the license. 
(2)  A license issued under this subsection may be issued only to farm wineries licensed by this state allowing the licensee to deal in its farm winery products pursuant to state law. 
(d)  Alcoholic beverage caterers. Any retail dealer licensed under this article and state law for the sale of malt beverages, distilled spirits, liquors and wines shall be eligible to make an application for an off-premises license pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-11-2 for any licensed location. 
(Code 1987, § 33-103(1); Code 1999, §§ 6-121, 6-171; Ord. of 4-10-2001; Ord. of 8-9-2005, § 6-7; Ord. of 1-8-2008, §§ 4, 5) 
State Law reference— Dealing in malt beverages at wholesale and retail prohibited without local license, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40; county licensing fees for the sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-41; restriction on county licensing fees for the sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43; dealing in wine at wholesale and retail prohibited without local license, O.C.G.A. § 3-8-40. 
Sec. 4-24. - Temporary wine-tasting event permits. 
In addition to the licenses available under this chapter, the mayor and council may issue an event permit for licensed retail dealers to provide for a wine tasting event to be held on these city streets and sidewalks so long as the permit applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the council that: 
(1)  They indemnify the city and provide general liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 for the specific event; 
(2)  They provide adequate assurance to the city council that no underage persons will be served through an appropriate program of identification and restriction of the area of service; 
(3)  No alcoholic beverages may be brought into the area of the event for consumption and no opened alcoholic beverages shall be removed from the area of service by the consuming public; 
(4)  The city council approves the closure of the public right-of-way for the purposes of holding the event; with a plan approved by city council; 
(5)  The applicant does not apply for more than one permit in a calendar year; 
(6)  All persons, serving wine at the wine tasting event would be retail dealers licensed pursuant to state law and the city to sell beer and wine for retail consumption on premises; 
(7)  The applicant reimburses the city for additional public safety personnel for event security; 
(8)  The applicant for the permit fully complies with the provisions of this article relating to alcoholic beverage caterer licenses. 
(Ord. of 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 4-25. - Separate license required for each business location. 
A separate alcoholic beverage license shall be required for each retail place of business licensed under this chapter. 
Sec. 4-26. - Payment of other taxes required for license issuance. 
No license shall be issued under this chapter unless the applicant has fully paid all license fees and taxes due under this chapter as well as all other business taxes and ad valorem taxes, and any utility billings due to the city for the business location. 
Sec. 4-27. - Application. 
Applications for licenses under this article shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city clerk. The applicant shall provide all information required on the form together with a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. A copy of the applicant's state license and any other license issued by a relevant licensing authority shall be attached to the application. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2008, § 9) 
Sec. 4-28. - Qualifications for licensure. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to any applicant, unless that applicant meets the following qualifications, in addition to all other requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  All applicants must be at least 21 years of age at the time of filing an application for license under this chapter. 
(2)  All applicants for retail licenses must provide with the application for license proof of financial responsibility. The city council may require all applicants to provide financial statements and other evidence of financial responsibility in conjunction with any application. 
(3)  The applicant must be a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, and a resident of the county on the date of filing the application and continuously thereafter during the entire term of licensure. 
(4)  No applicant who has a criminal record (except minor traffic offenses) shall be granted a license. The plea of nolo contendere and the forfeiture of bond or collateral shall be considered a conviction for the purposes of this subsection. Additionally, no applicant who has been convicted of violating any ordinance of the city or any law or regulation of the state or any political subdivision thereof, governing the sale of any alcoholic beverage shall be granted a license. 
(5)  No license shall be issued to an applicant who has previously had revoked, within five years next preceding his application, any license issued to him by any city or county in this or any other state to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind. 
Sec. 4-29. - Moral character of applicant and employees. 
(a)  All applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses must be of good character, and all managers, clerks or other employees shall be of like character or the application will not be considered. 
(b)  Ascertainable standards of good moral character of applicant that may be considered by the mayor and council in deciding if a license will be issued include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Present and prior compliance with city ordinances. 
(2)  Prior supervision over employees and customers. 
(3)  Truthfulness in submitted application. 
(4)  Criminal and civil court records. 
(5)  Employment history. 
(6)  Credit reports. 
Sec. 4-30. - Active involvement in business required. 
(a)  Applicants for license and licensees under this chapter shall be either the owner of the premises for which the license is held or the owner of a lease thereon, and a copy of any applicable premises lease shall be provided with the license application. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. 
(b)  The applicant for a license under this chapter must be active in and solely responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. 
Sec. 4-31. - Partnership applicants. 
If the applicant is a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license, one member of the partnership must be a resident of the county, and all members of the partnership must make sworn statements of those qualifications. 
Sec. 4-32. - Corporate applicants. 
A license may be granted to a corporation existing under the law of the state or to a foreign corporation authorized to do business in the state; provided, however, that any such corporation shall be required to designate a resident of the county as its local agent responsible for compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and authorize to accept all services of notice. 
Sec. 4-33. - Lapse of license; application for extension. 
All businesses issued licenses under this chapter must, within 90 days after the issuance of a city license, open for business. Failure to open for business shall constitute forfeiture and cancellation of the issued licenses and no refund of license fees or business taxes shall be made. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this section may make written request to the city council for an extension of time not to exceed 90 days, and the city council may, at their discretion, grant or deny the request. 
Sec. 4-34. - Term of license, renewals; fees. 
(a)  All licenses to manufacture and distribute alcoholic beverages shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued. All applications for renewal of licenses to manufacture or distribute alcoholic beverages shall be submitted to the city on or before December 1 of the year in which the license was issued, and the reapplication must be approved or disapproved within 30 days of December 1 of that year. 
(b)  The amount of all fees associated with licenses authorized by this chapter shall be as set forth in the city fee schedule. The license fee shall be due and payable upon submission of the application to the city. Payment may be made only by certified check. If the mayor and council fails to approve the application, the license fee shall be refunded. 
(c)  An applicant for any license under this chapter who makes application at any time after January 1 and before July 1 shall pay the full annual license fee. An applicant for any license under this chapter who makes application on or after July 1 shall pay one-half the annual license fee. 
(Code 1999, §§ 6-26, 6-176; Ord. of 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 4-35. - Factors for mayor and council consideration. 
The mayor and council in passing upon an initial application for a license under this article shall be guided by the following factors as to whether to grant or deny the application: 
(1)  The proximity of other establishments selling alcoholic beverages to the proposed location. 
(2)  The character of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location. 
(3)  The proximity of churches, schools and playgrounds to the proposed location. 
(4)  Whether the proposed location has adequate parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons. 
(5)  Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom. 
(6)  The feelings and attitudes of the citizens residing in the area adjacent to the proposed location. 
(7)  The information set forth in the application. 
(8)  Whether any malt or alcoholic beverage license previously issued for such location was ever revoked for cause by the city council. 
(9)  Whether the applicant has ever sold malt or alcoholic beverages illegally in the city. 
(Code 1987, § 33-102(4); Code 1999, §§ 6-71, 6-124, 6-174; Ord. of 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 4-36. - Temporary license during application process; issuance of permanent license. 
(a)  The city marshal shall be authorized to issue a temporary beer and wine license after the applicant has tentatively qualified regarding a check of criminal records. The temporary license shall be effective while the applicant's fingerprints are checked by appropriate state and Federal authorities and while state licensure is pending. 
(b)  No later than 45 days after the issuance of a temporary license, the mayor and council shall consider the issue of the granting of a permanent license, considering all such factors as may be relevant, including those delineated in section 4-35. Any such granting of a permanent license by the mayor and council shall be contingent upon approval by appropriate state and Federal authorities. 
(Code 1999, § 6-30; Ord. of 3-10-1998(1); ; Amend. of 5-17-2016(1) ) 
Editor's note— Amend. of 5-17-2016(1) changed the title of § 4-36 from "Temporary license during application process" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 4-37. - Posting of license. 
All retail licensees issued under this chapter shall be posted on the licensed premises. 
(Code 1999, § 6-2; Ord. of 4-10-2001) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-3. 
Sec. 4-38. - Change of location; transfer. 
A license issued under provisions of this article shall permit the manufacture, distribution, and selling of alcoholic beverages at wholesale or retail only on the premises described in the application. No city license may be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another without permission and approval of the mayor and council upon written application made. Approvals as to any change shall be at the discretion of the mayor and council. Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at come other location must make a complete new application for such new location. 
(Code 1987, § 3-102(5); Code 1999, §§ 6-72, 6-125, 6-178; Ord. of 4-10-2001; Ord. of 1-8-2008, § 13) 
Sec. 4-39. - Termination of business. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only so long as the licensee is actively engaged in such business, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration, and in the event the licensee shall cease to be actively engaged in such business, the license shall be invalid and the licensee of such business shall immediately notify the mayor and council and return his license thereto. 
(Code 1999, § 6-177; Ord. of 4-10-2001) 
Secs. 4-40—4-66. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 4-67. - Investigations incident to disciplinary action. 
The city council shall have the right to make such inquiry or investigation as it may find to be reasonably necessary to determine the licensee's compliance or noncompliance with this chapter. Such investigation may consist, among other actions, of calling licensees for examination under oath, obtaining evidence under oath from other persons, the procurement of documents and records including records of the licensee, and inspection and examination of records and documents from whatever source obtainable. 
Sec. 4-68. - Temporary closure of business. 
When, in the opinion of the city council or city police chief the present operation of one or more licensed businesses represents a clear danger to the public safety, the chief of police or other police officer may order closed such business or businesses for the remainder of that business day. Emergency closing beyond a single business day may only be directed by the mayor and council meeting in public session. 
(Code 1999, § 6-1; Ord. of 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 4-69. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Grounds. The following shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of a license to manufacture and distribute alcoholic beverages, and the existence of such grounds exists shall be determined by the city council in its sole discretion: 
(1)  The violation by the license holder or an employee of any state or federal law or regulation, or any ordinance of this city other than traffic violations; provided that the determination of whether any such violation has occurred shall be made by the mayor and council and an actual conviction in a court for such offense shall not be necessary. 
(2)  The failure of the license holder or an employee to report promptly to the police department any violation of the law or a municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violation occurring inside the premises. 
(3)  Any conduct on the part of the license holder or an employee contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals. 
(4)  Operating or conducting the business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(5)  The violation of any state law or regulation pertaining to alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  The failure to submit timely reports as required in this chapter. 
(7)  The revocation of a licensee's state license. 
(b)  Hearing. 
(1)  When, in the opinion of the mayor and council or city manager, grounds for the suspension or revocation of a license may exist, the licensee shall be served by the chief of police or other officer with written notice to appear at a show-cause hearing before the mayor and council on a weekday not less than five days and no more than 30 days from the date of such service. The notice shall contain the grounds alleged. The hearing shall constitute a separate and distinct call meeting. 
(2)  The standard of proof to be supplied by the council at the hearing in determining whether or not grounds exist for suspension or revocation of a license is preponderance of the evidence. A preponderance of the evidence is defined as evidence upon the issues involved, which, while not enough to wholly free the mind from a reasonable doubt, is yet sufficient to incline a reasonable and impartial mind to one side of the issue rather than the other. 
(c)  Additional penalties. License suspension or revocation as provided in this section is in addition to all other penalties applicable for violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1999, §§ 6-27, 6-29; Ord. of 4-10-2001; Ord. of 1-8-2008, § 6) 
Secs. 4-70—4-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS 

Sec. 4-97. - Appeal of decision of clerk. 
The denial of issuance or renewal of any license under this chapter by the clerk may be appealed to the city council by filing notice with the clerk, who shall place the matter on the agenda for the council's next regular meeting following the clerk's receipt of the application for appeal. A clerk's suspension or revocation of a license issued hereunder may be appealed to the city council in the same manner. 
Sec. 4-98. - Appeal of decision of council. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council on an appeal of the decision of the city clerk with regard to refusal to issue or renew a license or to suspend or revoke a license issued under this chapter shall be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction in the manner provided by state law. 
Secs. 4-99—4-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; excise taxes on malt beverages to be paid by wholesale dealer, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81; prohibition on requirement for markings on beverage containers regarding excise taxes, O.C.G.A. § 35-5-82; local excise taxes on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-8-60. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-125. - Supplementary to license fee. 
The excise tax provided for in this article shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages or wine at retail or wholesale, within the city. 
Sec. 4-126. - Levied. 
(a)  Wine wholesalers. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of wine an excise tax in the sum of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. The wine excise tax shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in wine in the city. 
(b)  Farm wineries. There is hereby set and levied on the first sale or use of wine by the package and wine sold for consumption on the premises an excise tax in the sum of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. The wine excise tax shall be paid by each licensed farm winery tasting room licensee in wine in the city. 
(c)  Malt beverages. A malt beverage excise tax is levied against and shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages in the city as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(d)  Distilled spirits. 
(1)  Package sales. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of distilled spirits by the package, an excise tax in the sum of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. The distilled spirits excise tax of this subsection shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in distilled spirits in the city. 
(2)  By the drink. There is hereby set and levied on the purchase of distilled spirits for beverage purposes by the drink an excise tax equal to three percent of the purchase price. The distilled spirits by the drink excise tax shall be paid by each purchaser at the time of collection for beverages served. 
(Code 1999, §§ 6-51(a), (b), 6-101(a), (b), 6-151(a), (b), 6-152(a), (b); Ord. of 4-10-2001; Ord. of 1-8-2008, § 14(a), (b)) 
Secs. 4-127—4-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 4-151. - Due date, required report. 
(a)  Malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits by the package. Excise taxes under this article levied for malt beverages, wine (including farm winery wines), and distilled spirits by the package shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact type and quantities of beverage sold for the preceding calendar month by size of container. Any tax remaining unpaid at the expiration of 15 days from the due date shall be delinquent. 
(b)  Distilled spirits by the drink. The distilled spirits by the drink excise tax shall be collected by every licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. All amount of such tax collected by each licensee shall be paid on or before the 20th day of the month following the calendar month in which it was collected and payment shall be accompanied by a report showing the gross receipt of the sale of distilled spirits by the drink and the amount of tax collected on such drinks. Any tax remaining unpaid at the expiration of 15 days from the due date shall be delinquent. 
(Code 1999, §§ 6-51(c), 6-101(c), 6-151(c), 6-152(c); Ord. of 4-10-2001; Ord. of 1-8-2008, § 14(c)) 
Sec. 4-152. - Collection allowance for licensees selling distilled spirits by the drink. 
Licensees collecting excise tax on distilled spirits by the drink shall be allowed a percentage of tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. 
(Code 1999, § 6-152; Ord. of 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 4-153. - Authority of enforcement officials. 
The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the power to: 
(1)  Examine, or authorize the examination of, books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any person subject to the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any report made, or if no report is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(2)  Require the filing of reports by any person having possession or custody of information relating to the tax herein levied; and 
(3)  Allow a credit on any amount due and payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(Code 1999, §§ 6-51(d), 6-101(d), 6-151(d); Ord. of 4-10-2001; Ord. of 1-8-2008, § 14(d)) 
Sec. 4-154. - Failure to furnish required report. 
Upon the failure of any person selling alcoholic beverages to furnish promptly to the city when due any report required by the ordinances of the city or to pay any tax due the city for the sale of such commodities, there shall be assessed a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of tax due or that shown due by any such report. The penalty shall be in addition to any such tax. Failure to furnish said report may result in suspension or revocation of license. 
(Code 1999, § 6-156; Ord. of 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 4-155. - Deficiencies. 
(a)  Determination. If the city has cause to believe that the report of the tax or the amount of the tax to be paid to the city by any person is not proper, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  Notice of determination and service. The city shall give to the person written notice of the determination. The notice may be serviced personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the person at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when mailed with a certificate of service stamped thereon and a copy retained in city files or when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the month following the calendar month for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1999, §§ 6-51(e), 6-101(e), 6-151(e), 6-152(e); Ord. of 4-10-2001; Ord. of 1-8-2008, § 14(e)) 
Sec. 4-156. - Determination if no return is made. 
(a)  Estimates of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return, the city shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in possession of or may come into the possession of the city official. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed above. 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the calendar month or which the amount or any portion thereof would have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(c)  Penalty for nonpayment. Any licensee who fails to pay the tax herein imposed or fails to pay any amount of the tax required to be collected and paid to the city within the time required shall pay a penalty of 25 percent of the tax owed in addition to interest as set forth above. 
(Code 1999, § 6-152(f); Ord. of 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 4-157. - Enforcement by execution. 
In addition to all other remedies authorized by this chapter or state law, the taxes levied by this article may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city, and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. 
(Code 1999, §§ 6-51(d), 6-101(d), 6-151(d); Ord. of 4-10-2001; Ord. of 1-8-2008, § 14(d)) 
Secs. 4-158—4-182. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-183. - Sanitary conditions of premises; inspection. 
All premises used for the sale or manufacture of distilled spirits shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the ordinances of this city and the laws of this state. To ensure compliance with this section and other regulations of this chapter, premises operated under the provisions of this chapter shall be open to inspection by authorized personnel of the city at all times. 
(Code 1999, § 6-157; Ord. of 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 4-184. - Food sales requirements for consumption on the premises licensees. 
(a)  Licenses permitting consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(1)  Fifty percent of income must be derived from food sales. All consumption on the premises of license holders in the city including the consumption on the premises of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits shall maintain at least 50 percent of their annual gross income from the sale of foods. Authorized officials of the city may examine the records of businesses licensed hereunder at any reasonable time to ascertain that the requirements of this and other provisions of this chapter are met. 
(2)  Income reports required. Within 120 days after having been issued a consumption on the premises license, the licensee shall submit to the city a statement or other satisfactory evidence (including but not limited to register receipts, sales tax reports or other accounting records) showing that the income requirements set forth in the above provisions have been met for the first 90 days after the applicant received his license for the premises consumption. Thereafter, each consumption on the premises license holder shall submit to the city an annual statement from a certified public accountant or registered public accountant in the same form as prescribed by the State of Georgia that the income requirement set forth in the above provisions have been met. 
(b)  Farm winery tasting rooms. 
(1)  Food sales. Any provisions concerning the requirement that a specified percentage of gross sales be derived from the sale of food with alcoholic beverages shall not apply to farm winery tasting rooms. A farm winery tasting room may engage in incidental food sales subject to applicable food service laws. 
(2)  Consumption on premises. Only complimentary samples of wine or poured wine by the glass may be consumed on the premises. Packaged wine may not be consumed on the premises. 
(3)  Limitation on samples. No complimentary samples may be provided to any patron or guest, if in the discretion of tasting room management or employees or law enforcement, the patron or guest appears intoxicated. 
(Code 1999, § 6-155; Ord. of 4-10-2001; Ord. of 2-11-2003; Ord. of 1-8-2008, §§ 10—12) 
Sec. 4-185. - Posting advertisements. 
Licensees shall not post more than one authorized sign at their places of business; nor shall they display signs advertising brand, product or price either outside or inside in such a manner as to be visible from the outside. 
(Code 1999, § 6-2; Ord. of 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 4-186. - Sale on election days. 
As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20, licensees at all locations where alcoholic beverages are sold may open their places of business for such sales on all election days. 
(Code 1999, § 6-3; Ord. of 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 4-187. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sell any alcoholic beverage for consumption by the drink on the premises, in or upon any licensed premises, except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, on all days except for Sundays. On Sundays, it shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption by the drink on the premises in or upon any licensed premises, except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale package alcoholic beverages at wholesale or retail, in or upon any licensed premises except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on all days, except for Sunday. 
(c)  All licensees under this chapter which serve alcoholic beverages for consumption by the drink on the premises shall be closed at 12:30 a.m. 
(d)  No licensee under this chapter shall permit a place of business to sell alcoholic beverages on any other day or times during or upon which the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by law. 
(Code 1999, §§ 6-4, 6-102, 6-154; Ord. of 4-10-2001; Ord. of 12-13-2011) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; Sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays and election days generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20; Sunday sales by farm wineries, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2; Sunday sales of distilled spirits by private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-2. 
Sec. 4-188. - No possession or consumption on certain premises. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage, (to include, without limitation, malt beverages, distilled spirits, liquors, and wines), may be possessed or consumed, (or permitted to be possessed or consumed), upon the premises of any business, within the city, which provides food services, or live or recorded entertainment, or facilities for dancing, unless such business shall have a valid city license for the sale of such possessed or consumed beverage, and such possessed or consumed beverage is purchased upon such premises in conformity with the city license. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises licensed as an adult business establishment under chapter 6. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall apply jointly and severally to any persons possessing or consuming such beverage in violation hereof, and any business license holder, their managers, their agents, or employees permitting such possession or consumption in violation of this section. 
(Code 1999, § 6-6; Ord. of 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 4-189. - Growler; regulation of growler sales. 
Businesses licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package, may fill growlers with malt beverages at the licensed location subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  At least 90 percent of the licensee's total gross sales are from packaged sale of malt beverages and/or wine or the licensee's premises have a minimum of 400 square feet of floor space dedicated to the display of malt beverages and/or wine offered for sale. 
(2)  A growler shall not exceed 64 ounces. Growlers may only be filled from kegs or barrels procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. 
(3)  Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. The filled growler must be securely sealed on the premises with a tamper-proof cap and seal. Each filled growler must be removed from the premises in its securely sealed condition. No open growler container shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(4)  Licensees may fill growlers only with draft beer that is defined as craft beer at the licensee's location from kegs lawfully procured by the licensee. 
(5)  A licensee authorized to fill growlers under this ordinance may make available samples of tap malt beverages, provided that no individual shall be allowed to sample more than a total of 24 ounces which shall be comprised of at least four different varieties of malt beverages. A licensee may charge a fee for samples of tap malt beverages. 
(6)  The licensee shall comply with all state, Federal and local packaging and labeling laws regarding alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. of 5-17-2016(1) ) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to restrict adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; state regulation of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq.; state regulation of billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq.; authority of city to regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2; state regulation of carnivals, circuses and itinerant entertainers, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-15. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to restrict adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means: 
(1)  Any business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat either by law or by the operators of such business; 
(2)  Any business, other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five percent of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Good moral character means a person who has not been convicted of a felony or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
Specified anatomical areas means less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola or human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means actual or simulated sexual intercourse; clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast. 
(Code 1999, § 10-31) 
Sec. 6-20. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests, reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Code 1999, § 10-32) 
Sec. 6-21. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction as provided in section 1-13. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1999, § 10-33) 
Secs. 6-22—6-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 6-46. - Required; does not condone illegal activity. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, any of the adult entertainment establishments, defined in this article, without a permit to do so. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under state or federal law. 
(Code 1999, § 10-56) 
Sec. 6-47. - Operation of premises without permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid permit or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which permit shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Code 1999, § 10-57) 
Sec. 6-48. - Persons prohibited as permittees. 
No permit provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  Any applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; or 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to county, state or federal law. 
(Code 1999, § 10-58) 
Sec. 6-49. - Issuance based on need. 
Should there be a sufficient number of current permits to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new permits shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. , 427 U.S. 50. 
(Code 1999, § 10-59) 
Sec. 6-50. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full, true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The previous addresses of applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth. 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches, taken within the last six months. 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. 
(8)  The business permit history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under permit, has had such permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the city clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant, corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted, and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the sheriff's department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters specified in this section as required to be set forth in the application. 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, any partners, any and all officers, any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding and directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony, involving moral turpitude in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant. 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the permit is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The permitting officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(18)  Address of the premises to receive the permit. 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises; a copy of those documents giving such legal right. 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business regulated under this article. 
(21)  Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; or 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 10-60) 
Sec. 6-51. - Applicant to appear for submission of application. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear before the city council and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the mayor and council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the information described in this article. 
(Code 1999, § 10-61) 
Sec. 6-52. - Investigation; granting. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city may grant the permit if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the offenses mentioned in this article, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses mentioned in this article, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or county or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(9)  That the applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not within five years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined in this article to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined in this article openly occur. 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required under this article commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted under this article. 
(12)  That the grant of such permit will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the county, state or the United States. 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the county to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Code 1999, § 10-62) 
Sec. 6-53. - Refusal; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the code and ordinance enforcement officer of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the code and enforcement office. The code and enforcement officer shall within ten days notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 10-63) 
Sec. 6-54. - Renewal; fee. 
Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishments permit shall be established as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 10-64) 
Sec. 6-55. - Display of permit. 
Permits issued under this article shall be conspicuously displayed at all times on the business premises for which the permit is issued. 
(Code 1999, § 10-91) 
Sec. 6-56. - Transfer. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit, upon notification to the county, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. If the city permits transfer of a permit under this section, the new permit holder shall pay, with the application for transfer, the transfer fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Code 1999, § 10-65) 
Sec. 6-57. - Change of location, name or size of establishment. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee as provided in the city fee schedule has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the code and ordinance enforcement office. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in the city codes, have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 10-66) 
Sec. 6-58. - Appeals. 
(a)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision or receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the mayor and council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(d)  When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Code 1999, § 10-67) 
Sec. 6-59. - Hearing procedure. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the mayor and council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The mayor and council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(b)  Powers of hearing officer. The hearing officers appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(c)  Rules of evidence inapplicable. The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(d)  Hearing officer's report. The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendation. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk. 
(e)  Meeting. The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular mayor and council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(f)  Action by council. The mayor and council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specified points. In either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Code 1999, § 10-68) 
Secs. 6-60—6-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 6-77. - Erotic dance establishments. 
(a)  No person shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment permittee shall file a verified report with the permit officer showing the permittee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment permittee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment permittee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 21 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(f)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet from any patron. 
(g)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(h)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(i)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(j)  All areas of an establishment holding permits pursuant to this article shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot-candles per square foot. 
(Code 1999, § 10-91) 
Sec. 6-78. - Exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
No person shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Code 1999, § 10-92) 
Sec. 6-79. - Minors. 
(a)  Admission. It shall be unlawful for a permittee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a premises holding a permit. 
(b)  Sale. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, or to offer to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Code 1999, § 10-93) 
Sec. 6-80. - Hours of operation. 
Adult entertainment establishments in the city shall be closed no later than 12:00 a.m. and shall remained closed until at least 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1999, § 10-91) 
Sec. 6-81. - Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages and controlled substances. 
No adult entertainment establishment permittee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the permittee. 
(Code 1999, § 10-91) 
Sec. 6-82. - Establishment location; distance restrictions. 
(a)  No establishment permitted pursuant to this article shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined pursuant to this article is located; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; or 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from the property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Code 1999, § 10-94) 
Sec. 6-83. - Employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult use establishment shall be not less than 21 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult use establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" includes an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the premises holding a permit. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a premises holding a permit, he shall file a notice with the code and ordinance enforcement office of his intended employment on forms supplied by the code and ordinance enforcement office and shall receive approval of such employment from the code and ordinance enforcement office. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the code and ordinance enforcement officer requires, including a set of fingerprints. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the premises holding a permit. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of the denial, appeal the decision of the code and ordinance enforcement office to the mayor and council, who may issue such order as is proper. An investigation fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall accompany the notice of intended employment, and a receipt of the code and ordinance enforcement office evidencing the payment of such fee must be submitted at the time the notice of appeal is filed. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation of permit. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city or the laws and regulations of the state shall subject an employee to the suspension or revocation of a permit. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be issued permits as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or permittee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 1999, § 10-95) 
Sec. 6-84. - Cleaning of premises. 
Each premises holding a permit shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the premises holding a permit. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the premises holding a permit to meet this requirement and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire premises holding a permit. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises holding a permit but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Code 1999, § 10-97) 
Sec. 6-85. - Self-inspection of premises. 
The permittee or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the premises holding a permit at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the officer issuing permits. Each premises holding a permit shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Code 1999, § 10-98) 
Sec. 6-86. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A premises holding a permit, or any part thereof, may be sealed by order of the officer issuing permits on his findings of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the officer issuing permits shall serve on the permittee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the premises holding a permit, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the officer issuing permits may physically seal that portion of the premises holding a permit causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the officer issuing permits. The officer issuing permits shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "unclean" or "unsafe," as the case may be. 
(Code 1999, § 10-99) 
Sec. 6-87. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action pursuant to this article, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit granted pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1999, § 10-96) 
Sec. 6-88. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A premises holding a permit, or any part thereof, may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Code 1999, § 10-100) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing and registration of animals by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; disposal of diseased, disabled, or dead animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1; dangerous dog control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq.; animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; cruelty to dogs; authorized killing of dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Abandonment means releasing or leaving an animal on any property, public or private, with the intention of deserting the animal. 
Adequate food and water means food and water which is sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent starvation, dehydration, or a significant risk to the animal's health from a lack of food or water. 
(1)  Adequate food means palatable, noncontaminated and nutritionally adequate food that is appropriate for the species. Adequate food does not include garbage. 
(2)  Adequate water means clean, fresh, potable water. 
Adequate shelter means a structure having three sides, a top and bottom which is suitable for the animal's size to protect it from cold, wind and rain and other elements. During cold weather, sufficient bedding inside the shelter shall be present. 
Animal means any living thing not a plant, other than man and excluding rodents, insects and fish. 
Animal control officer means the person authorized by the city council to enforce the provisions of this chapter and may include any or all of the following: designated county personnel, city marshal, city code enforcement officer, and state, county and city law enforcement officers. 
Cruel means causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering, or unjustifiable injury or death. 
Dangerous animal means any wild mammal, reptile, or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition and which, because of its size, vicious nature, or other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters; and any domestic mammal, reptile, or fowl which, because of its size, vicious propensity, or other characteristic, would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters. 
Dog means any canine, regardless of age or sex. 
Humane care of animals means, but is not limited to, the provision of adequate shelter and wholesome and adequate food and water consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the breed. 
Inhumane care means any act, omission or neglect which causes unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death to any living animal. 
Inoculation against rabies means the injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, of rabies vaccine approved by the state department of public health, and administered under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian and a certificate of vaccination or inoculation issued by the veterinarian. 
Livestock means cattle, horses, donkeys, swine, sheep, goats, llamas, emus, ostriches, alpacas or farm raised deer and other such animals susceptible to use for commercial purposes, including domesticated fowl, such as chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, guineas or other poultry. 
Owner means any person, partnership or corporation owning, possessing, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for seven or more consecutive days. 
Restraint means any animal that is on a leash or at heel or beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets and roads of the city, or in a fenced area within the real property limits of the owner, or invisible fence systems maintained in good working order. 
Running at large means any animal that is off the property of its owner and not under the control of a competent person. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-3-2, 4-8-21, 4-8-41, 4-11-1, 4-11-12. 
Secs. 8-2—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to enact ordinances for the protection of animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-18. 

Sec. 8-21. - Adequate food, water and medical care required. 
It is unlawful for any person, whether owner, person in possession or any person in charge of any animal, to fail, refuse or neglect to provide such animal with the necessary food and water as well as necessary medical treatment for such animal. 
Sec. 8-22. - Cruelty to animals prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to overload, poison, cruelly treat, maim, tease, bruise, deprive of necessary sustenance or medical attention, ill use, deprive of shade and shelter or in any manner whatsoever, torture, kill or abuse any animal. 
(b)  No person shall abandon any animal, on any property, public or private or keep an animal under unsanitary conditions. 
State Law reference— Animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; performing cruel acts on, harming, maiming or killing dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1. 
Sec. 8-23. - Authority to remove abused or neglected animals. 
Animal control officers shall be authorized to remove or cause to have removed to a safe location any animal that appears to be abused or suffering undue pain from abuse or neglect, as may be necessary to prevent further suffering. The owner or possessor of the animal may be charged according to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4 concerning cruelty to animals. 
Sec. 8-24. - Authority to remove animals from vehicles. 
Animal control and law enforcement officers may use any force reasonably necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle if the owner cannot be immediately located. The operator of the vehicle may be charged with cruelty to animals as defined in this chapter. No injunction or claim for damages may be placed against the animal control department or its officers for this action. 
Sec. 8-25. - Motorist hitting domestic animals to make report. 
Any person who, while operating a motor vehicle, strikes or causes injury to any domestic animal shall notify the owner if known or ascertainable, as well as the police department, of the injury to and location of animal. 
Sec. 8-26. - Registration of nondomestic exotic, venomous and wild animals; fee. 
It is unlawful for anyone to own, harbor, or permit at large any nondomestic exotic, venomous or wild animal within the areas of the city without the written permission of the city marshal, who may impose upon the owner reasonable conditions of confinement to ensure the protection and safety of the general public. Written permission under this section shall be in the form of registration of the animal with both county animal control personnel and the city marshal. The fee for registration of such animals in the city shall be in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
Sec. 8-27. - Owner responsible for damage to property. 
It is unlawful for any person's animal to cause damage to another person's property. The owners of such animals shall continue to be civilly liable for any damage occasioned by the actions of their animals. Property shall include, but not be limited to, pets, livestock, vehicles, etc. 
Sec. 8-28. - Bird sanctuary. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to hunt, shoot or molest any bird or to destroy any bird's nest, with the exception and proviso that when birds congregate in such numbers that they become a menace to health or destroy property, then such birds shall not be protected by this section. 
(Code 1999, § 14-2; Ord. of 3-12-1957) 
Sec. 8-29. - Keeping livestock. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to have or maintain within the city any stable in which are kept one or more horses, mules or cows unless the stable is not less than 150 feet from any dwelling, place of business or other house belonging to another than the owner of such stable. 
(b)  When any stable for a horse, mule or cow is kept or maintained in any location within the city, the stable shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1999, § 14-3) 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; disposal of impounded livestock, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-7. 
Sec. 8-30. - Keeping swine. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to have within the city any pen for the keeping of hogs in which hogs are kept unless and except the same shall be not less than 150 feet from any dwelling, place of business or other house belonging to another than the owner of such pen. Hogs shall not be kept in pens within the city from April 1 until and including September 30 of each and every year. Any pen used for pigs or hogs shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  If any hog or pig shall be kept in a lot within the city, such lot shall be at least 50 square feet for each hog or pig. 
(Code 1999, § 14-4) 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; disposal of impounded livestock, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-7. 
Sec. 8-31. - Keeping fowl; fowl running at large. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to have or maintain within the city any pen or lot for the keeping of chickens and in which chickens are kept, except that the same shall be sufficient to allow not less than ten square feet per chicken. 
(b)  Any housing facilities for chickens shall be not less than 150 feet from any dwelling, place of business or other house belonging to another than the owner of such housing for chickens. 
(c)  Any housing facilities for chickens shall be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(d)  It is unlawful for the owner or custodian of any chickens or other domestic fowl within the city limits to allow or permit chickens or other domestic fowl to run at large off the premises of the owner or custodian. 
(Code 1999, §§ 14-1, 14-5; Ord. of 4-11-1950; Res. of 7-24-1980) 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; disposal of impounded livestock, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-7. 
Sec. 8-32. - Animals running at large. 
It is unlawful for any person intentionally or otherwise to permit any livestock, fowl, or other animal to go at large. 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; disposal of impounded livestock, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-7. 
Secs. 8-33—8-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-53. - Confinement of female dogs in heat required. 
It shall be the duty of any owner, custodian or harborer of any female dog in heat within the city, when she is left unattended, to securely confine such dog inside a building or other enclosure to prevent such dog from coming into contact with another dog except for planned breeding. 
State Law reference— Permitting dogs in heat to run free prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 
Sec. 8-54. - Removal of dog feces from certain areas. 
The owner, keeper, walker or person in charge of any dog shall not permit solid fecal matter of such animal to deposit on any street, alley, or other public or private property, unless such matter is immediately removed therefrom by said owner or person in charge. This section shall not apply to a person who is visually or physically handicapped. 
Sec. 8-55. - Dog control ordinance—Statement of purpose. 
Sections 8-55 through 8-58 shall be commonly referred to as the City of Clayton's Dog Control Ordinance. The intended purposes of these sections is to promote responsible ownership, management and control of dogs; and to help protect the health, safety and welfare of the public from and against damage and nuisance caused by uncontrolled dogs. 
( Ord. of 3-15-2016(1) ) 
Sec. 8-56. - Same—Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in these sections, shall have the definitions stated below: 
Leash . A line, not exceeding six feet in length, constructed of material sufficient in strength and suitable to securely restrain and control a dog. 
Owner . A person determined to be the lawful owner of a dog. 
Owner's agent . A person authorized by an owner to have possession and control of a dog. 
Private property . A parcel of land that is privately owned and not open and available for access by the general public. 
Public property . All areas of land open and available for access by the general public, including but not limited to public streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks, parks and open green space. 
( Ord. of 3-15-2016(1) ) 
Sec. 8-57. - Same—Prohibition. 
No dog shall be loose and not physically restrained and controlled by the owner or owner's agent using a leash securely attached to the dog at any time while on public property or private property, except in the following specific situations: 
(1)  The dog is upon and within the lawful boundaries of private property which is owned or lawfully possessed and controlled by the dog owner; or 
(2)  The dog is upon and within the lawful boundaries of private property with the knowledge and consent of a person who either owns or holds lawful possession and control of that private property; or 
(3)  The dog is within a fenced area designated by the city as a dog park while in the presence of the dog owner or owner's agent; or 
(4)  The dog is securely contained within an enclosures; or 
(5)  The dog is involved in a specific event which shall have been authorized and made to be subject to terms and provisions by resolution duly adopted by city council. 
( Ord. of 3-15-2016(1) ) 
Sec. 8-58. - Same—Dog owner responsibility. 
The dog owner shall be responsible at all times for management and control of the dog in accordance and compliance with the requirements of these sections. The city shall have authority to charge or impose upon and against the dog owner found to be in violation of section 8-57 of this article a warning for the first occurrence of violation, a monetary fine in the amount of $50.00 for the second, and a monetary fine in the amount of $100.00 for and each subsequent occurrence of violation. the provisions of this section 8-58 shall not be construed to limit the city's rights and remedies under any other provision of the ordinances of the city or laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to animal control. 
( Ord. of 3-15-2016(1) ) 
Secs. 8-59—8-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dog control (Mercedes' Law), O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq.; duties of cities with regard to dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22. 

Sec. 8-75. - Investigation required. 
Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the city, the animal control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this division. 
Sec. 8-76. - Procedure when owner is not known. 
(a)  Where the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is unknown, and cannot be determined after reasonable effort, the dog shall be impounded. Notice of the impoundment shall be given by publication in the official city newspaper once per week for two consecutive weeks. The notice shall contain a general description of the dog, with color and sex thereof, the general vicinity where the dog was found and a number to call to claim the dog. 
(b)  Any impounded dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog may be disposed of on or after the 20th day after publication of the notice of impoundment in the newspaper. Disposal of animals shall be made in an expeditious and humane manner. 
Sec. 8-77. - Investigation of reports; notice to owner. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the animal control officer's jurisdiction from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer, or county board of health, the animal control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Whenever the animal control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, or re-classifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, notice shall be given the dog's owner in writing by certified mail to the owner's last known address of such classification or re-classification. Such notice shall be deemed complete upon its mailing. 
Sec. 8-78. - Contents of notice. 
The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's finding that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog before the city; 
(4)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this section on the day after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(5)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the city and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering said form to the city. 
Sec. 8-79. - Scheduling and conduct of hearing; notice to owner of determination. 
(a)  When the city receives a request for a hearing, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The city shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the city shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the city may find reasonably necessary to make a determination to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(c)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the city shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail, of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify it is effective on the third day following the date of receipt by the owner. 
Sec. 8-80. - Requirements for and issuance of certificates of registration. 
Subject to the requirements of this section, the animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the animal control officer or if the animal control officer finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; 
(2)  The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or the potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the premises. The sign required to be posted must substantially conform to the design provided by the department of natural resources; 
(3)  Payment to the city of a registration fee in the amount established by the city council to defray the costs of administering and enforcing this section; and 
(4)  Proof of a policy of insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business within the state insuring the owner of the dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog or a surety bond in the amount of $100,000.00 or more, issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state, payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
Sec. 8-81. - Term of certificate; renewal; investigation regarding continued compliance. 
Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of an annual renewal of a certificate of registration, an animal control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. 
Sec. 8-82. - Certificate not construed as guarantee of compliance. 
Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the city does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in this division are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
Sec. 8-83. - Owner's duty to notify city of change in status. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(b)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer if the owner is moving from the animal control officer's jurisdiction. 
Sec. 8-84. - Registration requirements for new residents. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the city shall register the dog in the manner provided in this article, within 30 days after becoming a resident. 
State Law reference— Investigation of report of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and notice to owner, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23; requirements of notice and hearing, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24. 
Sec. 8-85. - Prohibited acts; violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the city a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration. 
(b)  It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. 
(c)  It is unlawful for an owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(d)  It is unlawful for the owner of a dangerous dog to fail to post a warning sign on the premises where a dangerous dog is located. 
Sec. 8-86. - Impoundment for certain violations. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, and any person under his employ, to impound the dog if: 
(1)  The owner does not secure a certificate of registration; 
(2)  The owner does not secure liability insurance or meet the bond requirements of this article; or 
(3)  The owner does not keep the dog within a proper enclosure or permits to dog to roam or run free. 
Sec. 8-87. - Redemption of impounded dog. 
(a)  Any dog impounded under the provisions of this section shall be returned to the owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon payment of reasonable impoundment costs, as fixed by a schedule approved by the city, as from time to time amended. 
(b)  Notice of impoundment under this section shall be given to the owner, in writing, by certified mail, at his last known address. 
(c)  The notice shall state that if the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 20 days from receipt of such notice, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner; provided, however, that no dog shall be destroyed under this section unless it has been held a full 20 days, exclusive of the date of giving notice. 
Sec. 8-88. - Liability of owner for damages, injuries and death. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such dog. 
(b)  Under no circumstances shall the city or any employee or official of the city which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this article be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog or by a dog which the city has failed to identify as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or by a dog which has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in this section or by a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required by this section. 
State Law reference— Registration of dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25; muzzling and restraint, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26; confiscation and destruction, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. 
Sec. 8-89. - Penalties. 
Violations of this article shall be punished as provided in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28. 
Secs. 8-90—8-106. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 8-107. - Determination as public nuisance. 
Maintaining a dangerous dog, a dog that has demonstrated vicious behavior, a dog that is not tagged, a dog that is running loose or a dog that is generally classified as a disturbance is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1999, § 14-66; Ord. of 4-16-1986, § 10-2-4) 
Sec. 8-108. - Complaint; hearing. 
Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the city police department, who shall investigate and may place the complaint before the municipal judge for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal judge, after a ten-day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and upon finding that a nuisance does exist, shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the municipal judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(Code 1999, § 14-67; Ord. of 4-16-1986, § 10-2-2) 
Sec. 8-109. - Failure of owner to abate; abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the municipal judge, that it must be immediately abated, the municipal judge may issue an order to the city police department directing the nuisance to be abated. The city police department, in such case, shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating such nuisance and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the code enforcement officers as is necessary in abating nuisances under this division. 
(Code 1999, § 14-68; Ord. of 4-16-1986, § 10-2-3) 
Secs. 8-110—8-126. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RABIES CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Responsibility for control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1. 

Sec. 8-127. - Registration fee for at-large dogs required. 
The owner of each dog in the city and the owner of any dog running loose within the city shall first, before allowing such dog to run loose within the city limits, register the dog at the city hall and pay a registration fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 14-91; Ord. of 3-11-1975, § 2) 
Sec. 8-128. - Prerequisite to registration; exhibition of current rabies inoculation tag. 
As a prerequisite to registering any dog, the owner shall exhibit to the city clerk a current (within the preceding 24 months) rabies inoculation tag or certificate. 
(Code 1999, § 14-92; Ord. of 3-11-1975, § 3) 
Sec. 8-129. - Collar or chain and evidence of compliance required. 
(a)  The owner of each dog running loose within the city shall have a collar or chain with the owner's identification thereon and the receipt for registration and evidence of a current rabies inoculation (within the preceding 24 months) exhibited on the chain. Each of the provisions of this section shall be referred to as evidence of compliance. 
(b)  Any dog within the city running loose and off of the property of the owner that does not have attached thereto the evidence of compliance as described in this section shall be deemed a stray dog, and the owner shall be in violation of this division. 
(Code 1999, §§ 14-93, 14-94; Ord. of 3-11-1975, §§ 4, 5) 
Sec. 8-130. - Impoundment of strays; posting of notice; disposal. 
(a)  The city's humane patrol officer is hereby directed to pick up and impound any and all stray dogs as defined in section 8-129 within the city limits, and to keep such dogs impounded for seven days during which seven days' notice of impoundment and description of such dog shall be posted on the dog impoundment bulletin board plainly visible at all times to the public at the city hall. Reasonable effort shall be made to contact the owner of such stray dog upon any information received by the humane patrol officer. 
(b)  After seven days, such stray dog may be disposed of first to any person who will comply with the requirements of registration, inoculation and identification of this division and promise to provide a good home for such dog. In addition thereto, such person shall pay the cost of pickup and housing and feeding such dog in an amount not to exceed an amount per day set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Upon failure to find a person to accept the responsibility of the stray dog the city humane patrol officer is hereby empowered and directed to dispose of the dog in a humane manner after the expiration of seven days from the date the stray dog was picked up or impounded. 
(Code 1999, § 14-95; Ord. of 3-11-1975, § 6) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; standards and requirements for construction, alteration, etc., of buildings and other structures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; building trade contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; enforcement of adopted codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; state minimum standards codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; county building, electrical, and other codes, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-1 et seq.; local government code enforcement boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-74-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Fees. 
All fees and charges imposed or due under this chapter and under the various construction codes adopted in this chapter shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 14-41; Ord. of 3-9-1976) 
Secs. 10-2—10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING AND TECHNICAL CODES 

Sec. 10-21. - Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the construction or erection of any building, whether commercial, business or residential unless such construction is accomplished in strict compliance with state minimum standards codes, both mandatory and permissive, as set forth below. 
(Code 1999, § 14-37) 
Sec. 10-22. - Adopted by reference; copies to be made publicly available. 
(a)  The city adopts, to the extent applicable in the city, as though fully set forth herein, the following state minimum standards codes and permissive codes, as set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-20 and 8-2-21, as supplemented and amended by the state department of community affairs, and as may be amended by provisions of this chapter or of this Code generally: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2006 Edition. 
(2)  International Residential Code, 2006 Edition. 
(3)  International Fire Code, 2006 Edition. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition. 
(5)  International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition. 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 Edition. 
(7)  National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition. 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition. 
(9)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition. 
(10)  International Existing Building Code, 2006 Edition. 
(b)  Subsequent editions or amendments to the adopted publications and state amendments and errata shall become effective 30 days after the city council receives notice that copies of such publications have been obtained, unless the council within such 30-day period disapproves the subsequent edition or amendment. 
(c)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk and kept on file in the office of the clerk where they shall be available for public inspection. 
(Code 1999, § 14-36) 
Sec. 10-23. - Appendices to technical codes. 
Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
Sec. 10-24. - Referenced standards. 
Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
Sec. 10-25. - Designated enforcement officials. 
When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in the various construction codes adopted by this article, the designated city official shall be deemed to be the responsible official for the enforcement of such codes. 
(Code 1999, § 14-38) 
Sec. 10-26. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this Code or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
Sec. 10-27. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided that any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided that the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
Sec. 10-28. - Codes remedial in nature. 
The city's technical codes are remedial in nature, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
Sec. 10-29. - Conflict of regulations. 
Where in any specific case sections of the technical codes, of this Code, and of state or federal law or regulation specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
Sec. 10-30. - Existing buildings to comply. 
Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
Sec. 10-31. - Change of occupancy. 
If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official. 
Secs. 10-32—10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 

Sec. 10-51. - Required. 
Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
Sec. 10-52. - Contractors to hold valid state license. 
No permit shall be issued to a contractor until the contractor provides proof of valid state licensure. 
Sec. 10-53. - Work begun before issuance of permit. 
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
Sec. 10-54. - Required notice to be included on permits; posting; providing copy to owner. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, any building permit issued under this chapter to a general contractor or homebuilder for residential or commercial construction shall have prominently printed thereon at least one inch apart from any other text on the permit and in type size and boldness equal to or greater than any other type size and boldness in the body of the permit the following: 
"The issuance of this permit authorizes improvements of the real property designated herein which improvements may subject such property to mechanics' and materialmen's liens pursuant to state law. In order to protect any interest in such property and to avoid encumbrances thereon, the owner or any person with an interest in such property should consider contacting an attorney or purchasing a consumer's guide to the lien laws which may be available at building supply home centers." 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, any person or entity which is issued a permit that authorizes improvements to new or existing residential or commercial real property shall be required to post a copy of such permit in a conspicuous place in the vicinity of such property where such improvements are being undertaken or deliver a copy of the permit to the property owner within ten days after the permit is received. 
Sec. 10-55. - Work authorized. 
A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
Sec. 10-56. - Minor repairs. 
Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
Sec. 10-57. - Information required. 
Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building; or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
Sec. 10-58. - Time limitations. 
An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided that the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
Sec. 10-59. - Drawings and specifications. 
When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
Sec. 10-60. - Additional data. 
The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
Sec. 10-61. - Plan review. 
The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicted and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or articles. 
Sec. 10-62. - Building permit valuations. 
If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
Sec. 10-63. - Action on permits. 
The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and articles, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
Sec. 10-64. - Refusal to issue permit. 
If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or articles, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
Sec. 10-65. - Public right-of-way. 
A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in the city's building and construction codes. 
Sec. 10-66. - Contractor's responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
Sec. 10-67. - Posting of permit. 
Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
Sec. 10-68. - Permit intent. 
A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
Sec. 10-69. - Plans. 
When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
Sec. 10-70. - Self-inspection by plumbers and utility contractors. 
The city is exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d) relating to the self-inspection of certain water and sewer lines, and such provisions shall not be applicable in the city. 
(Code 1999, § 14-1) 
Secs. 10-71—10-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY AND COMPLETION 

Sec. 10-99. - Certificate required. 
A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. The certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and articles and released by the building official. 
Sec. 10-100. - Issuance of certificate. 
Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. The fee for issuance of the certificate shall be as set forth in the city's fee schedule. 
Sec. 10-101. - Temporary partial occupancy. 
A temporary partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building that may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
Sec. 10-102. - Existing building certificate of occupancy. 
A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and articles for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
Sec. 10-103. - Certificate of completion. 
Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The fee for issuance of the certificate of completion shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
Secs. 10-104—10-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SERVICE UTILITIES 

Sec. 10-135. - Approval of building official required. 
(a)  No public utility may furnish temporary electrical, water or gas connection for construction purposes, unless the contractor has been issued a construction permit by the building official. 
(b)  No public utility may furnish permanent electrical, water or gas connections until the contractor has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the building official. 
(c)  No public utility may furnish power to a mobile home site until the owner has been issued either a building permit or a certificate of occupancy by the building official. 
(Code 1999, § 14-41) 
Sec. 10-136. - Water supply and sewage disposal facilities. 
(a)  Building permits will not be issued until plans for water supply and sewage disposal have been approved by the county board of health. 
(b)  Certificates of occupancy will not be issued until the completed water supply and sewage disposal facilities have been approved by the board of health. 
(Code 1999, § 14-42) 
Sec. 10-137. - Temporary connection. 
The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
Sec. 10-138. - Authority to disconnect. 
The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure of system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
Secs. 10-139—10-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-160. - Building official appointed to enforce chapter. 
(a)  The city has created and established the office of building official. The building official is appointed by the mayor and city council and serves at their pleasure. The building official is charged with the duty of enforcement of this chapter and shall perform other duties as may be prescribed by the mayor and city council. The building official position may be filled by the city code enforcement officer. 
(b)  In carrying out its duties under this chapter, the building official shall have the following specific duties, in addition to such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the city council: 
(1)  The building official shall receive applications and issue permits and certificates required by this chapter. 
(2)  The building official shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of this chapter are met. 
(3)  The building official shall enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, repair, installation, erection, removal, demolition, use, location, and maintenance of properties, buildings, equipment, appliances, or systems, except as may be otherwise provided for in other ordinances or regulatory measures. 
(4)  The building official shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the interests of the city so require, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in this chapter and render written reports on the same. 
(5)  The building official shall issue notices or orders as may be necessary to enforce compliance with this article, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions or to secure the necessary safeguards. 
Sec. 10-161. - Records. 
The building official shall keep comprehensive records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, inspections made, reports rendered, and notices or orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection at office hours observed by the building official but shall not be removed from the office of the director. 
Sec. 10-162. - Contents and service of notice. 
The notice shall include the following: 
(1)  An enumeration of conditions which the building official has determined are in violation of this chapter. 
(2)  An enumeration of remedial action required for each determined violation. 
(3)  A specified period of time within which such remedial action shall be completed, such period of time for completion to be determined by the building official as the period of time reasonably required under the known circumstances for the completion of the remedial action. 
(4)  A statement adequate to notify the person served that a failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter within the time specified in the notice is unlawful and the penalty for such failure. 
a.  A copy of such notice shall be filed in the office of the director. 
b.  Notice shall be deemed perfected if served upon the owner or occupant as may be appropriate in person or by certified mail with return receipt attached and posting a copy of the notice upon the property. 
c.  Whenever the building official determines that property, buildings, systems, appliances, or equipment, or any work in connection therewith that is covered by this chapter is being erected, installed, altered, repaired, stored, maintained, or demolished in violation of this chapter, the building official shall serve a written notice or order upon the person responsible therefor directing the discontinuance of such illegal action and the remedying of the condition that is in violation. 
Sec. 10-163. - Placarding premises. 
(a)  The building official may place a dated and signed placard on property which is in violation of this chapter, and notify the owner of such property by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner's last known address that the building has been placarded. Such notice shall specify the reason therefor and the owner's right of appeal as provided in this chapter. Such placard shall contain the following words: 
"The city has declared this building dangerous and unfit for human habitation. The use or habitation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person or persons to occupy the dwelling, structure, or premises or for an owner to allow occupancy of a dwelling, structure, or premises which has been placarded, if such dwelling, structure, or premises is, or becomes, vacant after placarding or, in all events, within 60 days from the date of placarding unless the violation has been corrected. 
(c)  The posting of the placard and the recording of same in the records of the building official shall be notice to the general public that it is unlawful for any owner to allow the dwelling or structure to be occupied, as provided herein. No further notice shall be required to be given to any subsequent owner. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to deface, alter, destroy, cover, or remove such placards. The building official shall remove the placards when compliance with this section has been effected. 
Sec. 10-164. - Stopping work. 
Whenever the building official determines defective or illegal work is performed in violation of a provision or requirement of this chapter, it shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped until such defective or illegal work is corrected. 
Sec. 10-165. - Failure of owner to correct; abatement by city; lien on property. 
In the event the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure and clean the premises, or remedy any other condition found to exist in violation of this chapter or any other relevant ordinance of the city, the city may proceed to abate the nuisance as provided in this Code and by state law. 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to license self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1; certain persons required to provide proof of licensure state licensure before issuance of city or county business license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; limitations regarding persons performing investigations related to city and county business licenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9; taxation of insurers, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-1 et seq.; licensing and taxation of certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; municipal and county occupation taxes for certain traveling salespersons, merchants, and dealers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means the component of the occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
Gross direct premiums means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. 
Gross receipts, as applied to financial institutions, has the same meaning as is ascribed to the term "gross receipts" for each such depository financial institution in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
Location or office means any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project, or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business in the city. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations means those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18), but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fee means a fee which approximates the cost of regulatory activity by the city. 
Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. 
Separate public accommodations facility means each building or group of buildings identifiable as a separate business establishment. 
(Code 1999, §§ 62-36, 62-151) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5, 48-6-95. 
Sec. 12-2. - Administrative fee. 
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts. 
(Code 1999, § 62-152) 
Sec. 12-3. - Regulatory fee. 
(a)  Imposed; nonrefundable. Businesses and individuals engaging in any occupation or business in the city shall pay a nonrefundable regulatory fee as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Proration. If a business or individual initially engages in an activity regulated by the city on or after July 1 in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the regulatory fee for the entire year. 
(c)  Display of certificate. Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this section shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer or city clerk upon request. 
(Code 1999, §§ 62-153—62-155) 
State Law reference— Regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8; limitations on imposition of regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
Sec. 12-4. - Disciplinary action regarding business licenses, permits and registrations. 
(a)  Discretion of council. The city council shall have full power and authority to refuse to issue, suspend, revoke, refuse to renew, or place on probation any person holding a city business license, permit or registration, under this or any other chapter of this Code, for violations of this Code, other city rules or ordinances, or state or federal law or regulation, or when the continued operation of the licensed business is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(b)  Grounds. The following shall be considered just cause for refusal to issue, suspension, revocation, refusal to renew a city license, permit or registration: 
(1)  The making of any statement in an application for a license issued or under which shall later be found to be false, inaccurate, or otherwise misleading. 
(2)  The violation by the license, permit or registration holder or any of its agents, employees, or representatives of any federal, state, or local law or regulation, other than traffic violations, which would tend to reflect on the holder's ability to comply with this chapter or render them unqualified to continue to hold a license issued hereunder. The determination of whether any such violation has occurred may be made by the city council by a preponderance of the evidence, and an actual conviction in any court for such offense shall not be necessary in order to take adverse action against the license. 
(3)  The entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the conviction of any licensee, partner, or any officer, director or stockholder of a licensee corporation with respect to a charge of violation of any city, state or federal law states relating to alcohol control, or any crime, whether a felony or not, involving moral turpitude. 
(4)  The suspension, revocation, or any other adverse action taken against the license, permit or registration holder's state retail dealer's license. 
(5)  Any conduct on the part of the license, permit or registration holder or his agents, employees, or representatives that is contrary to the public welfare, health, safety, or morals, to the extent that such conduct affects or impacts the holder's ability to continue to comply with this chapter or renders him or her unqualified to continue to hold a license issued hereunder. 
(6)  The license, permit or registration holder's default on any obligation of any kind whatsoever lawfully owing to the city, or the general failure to demonstrate adequate financial responsibilities regarding the business. 
(7)  With regard to any license permitting consumption on the premises, the occurrence on two or more occasions within any 12-month period of fights, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, breach of the peace, and other similar conduct whether the same is committed by the licensee or by customers or others. 
(8)  Operating or conducting the business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, health, safety, or morals, or in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(9)  Any other act or omission with respect to the operation of a business licensed hereunder which the city council shall find to be contrary to the public interest, or which shall render the licensee or the business location unfit for the continued operation of the business. 
(c)  Rights of holder. Prior to refusal to issue or renew, suspension, revocation, or imposition of probation with regard to a business license, permit or registration issued by the city, the city council shall afford the license, permit or registration holder notice of a hearing and an opportunity to be heard. At the time and place appointed for hearing, the licensee may be represented by counsel. The license, permit or registration holder shall have the opportunity to present testimony, documentary evidence, or any other relevant evidence it may have and cross examine any witnesses presented by the city. 
(d)  Service of notice of hearing. Service of notice of hearing shall be made by personal service at the licensed premises by a city police officer to any employee, agent, or other representative of the license, permit or registration holder; provided that, if personal service cannot be perfected, service may be made by tacking a copy of the notice to the door of the premises and mailing the original to the license, permit or registration holder at the licensed premises with a copy to any other address of the license, permit or registration holder contained in the most recent license application or renewal. 
(e)  Council action; notice. After hearing, the city council shall take action with regard to the licensee's license as may be warranted by the facts, in its sole judgment and discretion. The city shall notify the licensee of its decision in writing within ten days of said hearing. 
(f)  Remedies cumulative. Any adverse action taken by the city with regard to a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall not preclude, and may be in addition to, any criminal prosecution by any proper authority of the city, county, state, or federal government. 
(g)  Investigations incident to disciplinary action. The city council shall have the right to make such inquiry or investigation as it may find to be reasonably necessary to determine the licensee's compliance or noncompliance with this chapter. Such investigation may consist, among other actions, of calling licensees for examination under oath, obtaining evidence under oath from other persons, the procurement of documents and records including records of the licensee, and inspection and examination of records and documents from whatever source obtainable. 
(h)  Fees not refundable. Upon suspension or revocation of a city business license, permit or registration, no fees shall be refunded. 
Sec. 12-5. - License, permit or registration not issued to persons indebted to city. 
No city business license, permit or registration shall be issued to any applicant who has any outstanding indebtedness to the city, including but not limited to property taxes, business license fees, business taxes, utility bills and any other taxes or assessments. 
Secs. 12-6—12-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations in a county or municipality, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6; taxes on businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7; prohibited practices in levying tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-29. - Levied. 
(a)  Generally; calculation based on number of employees. An occupation tax based upon number of employees in the state is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the state in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Estimating number of employees. If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees which are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later than December 31 the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the city clerk. 
(c)  Applicability to real estate brokers. Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(Code 1999, §§ 62-156, 62-160, 62-161) 
State Law reference— Taxation of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations in a county or municipality, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6; taxes on businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7; prohibited practices in levying tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13. 
Sec. 12-30. - Alternative method of taxation for certain professionals. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall pay the occupation tax levied by this article or shall pay an occupation tax as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. On the tax return for 1995 or such later time as the practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Code 1999, § 62-163) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-9, 48-13-10. 
Sec. 12-31. - Multiple locations. 
Each location of a business shall be subject to taxation under this article, but the city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax per location of a business or more than one occupation tax per practitioner. 
(Code 1999, § 62-157) 
Sec. 12-32. - Taxpayers subject to other local governments. 
(a)  A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
(b)  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in the state provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(c)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in this state shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in the state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(d)  A business or practitioner which has locations in the state subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local governments. 
(e)  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(Code 1999, § 62-158) 
Sec. 12-33. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied by this article on the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state. 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness. 
(5)  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(6)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(7)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(8)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(9)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city. 
(10)  Disabled veterans and blind persons with proof of exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-12-1. 
(11)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(12)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(13)  The sale of alcoholic beverages governed by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq. 
(14)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by state law or the United States. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this section shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Code 1999, § 62-164) 
State Law reference— Exempt businesses and practitioners, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16. 
Sec. 12-34. - Proration. 
If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(Code 1999, § 62-159) 
Sec. 12-35. - Evidence of state registration. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq. by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Code 1999, § 62-165) 
Sec. 12-36. - Evidence of qualification. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Code 1999, § 62-166) 
Sec. 12-37. - Certificate; display and possession. 
Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this article shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer upon request. 
(Code 1999, § 62-162) 
State Law reference— Duty to post license in place of business, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-23. 
Secs. 12-38—12-62. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REPORTING AND PAYMENT 

Sec. 12-63. - Filing returns; other information. 
(a)  On or before November 1 of each year, an individual business or practitioner subject to this article shall file with the city clerk, on a form approved by and available from the city, a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. 
(b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available within 30 days such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax or regulatory fees. 
(Code 1999, § 62-167) 
Sec. 12-64. - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. Such information may be provided to the governing body of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(Code 1999, § 62-168) 
State Law reference— Confidentiality of information and penalties for violation, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-15, 33-8-10. 
Sec. 12-65. - Date due. 
Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually on December 31. If any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax or fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity. 
(Code 1999, § 62-169) 
State Law reference— When payment due, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20; penalty and interest on default in payment, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
Secs. 12-66—12-88. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 12-89. - Duties of city clerk. 
It is the duty of the city clerk to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The city clerk may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(Code 1999, § 62-171) 
Sec. 12-90. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioners liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. 
(b)  The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code and the ordinances and charter of the city and state law. 
(c)  The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the city charter or state law in regard to tax executions. 
(Code 1999, §§ 62-170, 62-172) 
State Law reference— When payment due, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20; penalty and interest on default in payment, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
Sec. 12-91. - Effect of nulla bona. 
When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(Code 1999, § 62-173) 
Sec. 12-92. - Penalties. 
(a)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this article shall be subject to fine or imprisonment not to exceed the limitations of the city Charter. 
(b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to suspension of the right to conduct business. 
(c)  All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such person business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain, make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. 
(Code 1999, § 62-174) 
Sec. 12-93. - Public hearing prior to increase in taxes. 
After January 1, 1996, the city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax rate specified in this article. 
(Code 1999, § 62-175) 
Secs. 12-94—12-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to levy and collect a business license tax from depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 12-115. - Tax levied. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is levied for each year, upon each state and national bank, each federal savings and loan association, and each state building and loan association located in the city, not exempted by state law, an annual business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of each such institution, or $1,000.00, per annum, whichever amount is greater. The taxes levied in this section for each year shall be levied on the amount of gross receipts received by each such depository financial institution during the immediately preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1999, § 62-37; Ord. of 12-22-1983, § 1) 
State Law reference— Municipal and county business license tax on financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Sec. 12-116. - Returns. 
Each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file with the city not later than March 1 of each year a return of its gross receipts received by it during the immediately preceding calendar year. The returns shall be made in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Code 1999, § 62-38; Ord. of 12-22-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 12-117. - When taxes due and payable. 
The taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable on April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1999, § 62-39; Ord. of 12-22-1983, § 2) 
Secs. 12-118—12-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— License fees of insurance companies generally, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-3; county and municipal corporation tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; county and municipal corporation tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 12-148. - Levied generally; multiple locations. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city and for each separate business location in excess of one, not covered by section 12-149, that is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 62-71; Ord. of 11-8-1983, § 1; Ord. of 10-9-2001, § 1) 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 12-149. - Insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, the insurer shall pay an additional annual license fee per location per year in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 62-72; Ord. of 11-8-1983, § 2; Ord. of 10-9-2001, § 2) 
State Law reference— Local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 12-150. - Additional locations of independent agencies and brokers. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by either section 12-148 or 12-149, for each such location within the city, in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1999, § 62-73; Ord. of 11-8-1983, § 3) 
Sec. 12-151. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed under this article. 
(Code 1999, § 62-74; Ord. of 11-8-1983, § 4; Ord. of 10-9-2001, § 3) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to impose license fee on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 38-8-8. 
Sec. 12-152. - Gross premiums tax on all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within this state in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed under this article. 
(Code 1999, § 62-75; Ord. of 11-8-1983, § 5; Ord. of 10-9-2001, § 4) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 12-153. - Due date. 
License fees imposed in this article shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. 
(Code 1999, § 62-76; Ord. of 11-8-1983, § 6; Ord. of 10-9-2001, § 5) 
Secs. 12-154—12-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of counties and municipalities to impose excise tax on lodging and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 

Sec. 12-175. - License fee. 
There is hereby levied upon any person or legal entity operating a public accommodation facility, such as a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodging or accommodations are regularly furnished for rental or use value, an annual license fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule for each separate public accommodations facility operated and maintained within the city. 
(Code 1999, § 62-111; Ord. of 2-10-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 12-176. - Excise tax. 
(a)  Levied; rate. There is hereby levied upon any person or legal entity operating a public accommodations facility, such as a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for rental or use value, an excise tax equal to five percent of the charge to the public for the accommodations or furnishings, exclusive of state sales and use taxes. The proceeds of this tax will be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(b)  Limit on tax. No tax shall be levied hereby upon the charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of more than ten consecutive days, nor for the use of meeting rooms, nor shall the aggregate of city and state taxes levied upon the charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations, exceed eight percent of the charge to the public for such furnishings. 
(c)  Tax in addition to license fee. The tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fee imposed under this article. 
(Code 1999, § 62-112; Ord. of 2-10-1987, § 3; Ord. of 8-23-2007) 
State Law reference— Authority of counties and municipalities to impose excise tax on lodging and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 12-177. - Records; filing of returns; payment. 
(a)  Return due date. Each person or legal entity liable for the tax provided in this article shall, on or before the 20th day of each month, transmit returns and tax to the city or its designated agent showing the gross rental charges from all rentals subject to this tax during the preceding calendar month. The city, upon application, may permit a return to be filed on a quarterly basis if found advisable by the city. The returns required by this section shall be made upon forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the city. 
(b)  Due date extension. The city for good cause may extend the time for making any returns under provisions of this article for not more than 30 days. 
(c)  Estimated taxes. If any person or legal entity subject to this tax fails to make a report and pay the tax as provided by this article or makes a grossly incorrect report or a report that is false or fraudulent, the city shall make an estimate for the taxable period of charges for use of accommodations subject to this article. Based upon this estimate, the city shall assess and collect tax, interest and penalty, as accrued, on the basis of the assessments. The city's assessment shall be considered prima facie correct, and the burden to show the contrary shall rest upon the person or legal entity subject to the tax. 
(d)  Recordkeeping. Each person or legal entity subject to this tax shall keep and preserve: 
(1)  Suitable records of the charges for accommodations taxable under this article. 
(2)  Other books of account which are necessary to determine the amount of tax due. 
(3)  Other information as required by the city. 
(4)  For a period of three years, all invoices and other records of charges subject to this article. 
(5)  All books, invoices and other records required to be kept by this section shall be open to examination at all reasonable hours to the city or any of its duly authorized agents. 
(Code 1999, § 62-113; Ord. of 2-10-1987, § 3) 
Sec. 12-178. - Collection. 
Persons and legal entities operating public accommodations facilities subject to this article are hereby authorized to collect the tax provided for on behalf of the city and transmit the same to the city. Such persons or legal entities collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if and provided such amount is not delinquent at time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
(Code 1999, § 62-114; Ord. of 2-10-1987, § 4) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
Sec. 12-179. - False information. 
It is hereby declared to be a violation of this article for any person knowingly to give false or incomplete information on any report required to be filed by this article. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1987, § 5) 
Sec. 12-180. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Administrative penalty for failure to file return or pay taxes due. When any person or legal entity subject to this tax fails to make any return or pay the full amount of the tax required by this article, there shall be imposed, in addition to other penalties provided by law, a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than 30 days, and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional 30 days or fraction of 30 days during which the failure continues. The penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater. If the failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the city in affidavit form attached to the return and remittance is made within ten days of due date, the return may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. 
(b)  Administrative penalty for filing false or fraudulent return. In the case of a false or fraudulent return or the failure to file a return, where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due under this article, a specific penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be assessed. In addition to the penalties called for in this section, the amount of tax due shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month on the outstanding balance. 
(c)  Additional penalty for code violation. In addition to all other penalties provided herein, and unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, any person who shall conduct business within the municipal corporate limits without having obtained a license therefor as required by this article, or who shall violate any other provision of this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished according to section 1-13. 
(d)  Enforcement by execution. The tax levied by this article may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. 
(e)  Enforcement by injunction. The mayor and council, in their sole discretion, may authorize the city attorney to seek an injunction against the operation of a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodging, or accommodations are regularly furnished for rental or use value against any person conducting business within the city limits without a public accommodations license or if such a person continues to do business after such license is revoked. 
(f)  Denial of license issuance. The city shall be authorized to refuse to issue a public accommodations license to any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who, at the time the application for such license, shall be in arrears and the payment of the hotel and motel excise tax required to be paid under this article. 
(g)  Revocation of license. Any person who shall fail to pay the public accommodations tax for a period of more than 90 days after its due date shall be subject to have its public accommodations license or its city business license revoked. Any person who fails to pay such tax for a period of 90 days from its due date shall be cited to show cause before the municipal court of the city why its public accommodations license or city business license should not be revoked, and such citation shall require that such person show cause at the next session of the municipal court of the city why such license should not be revoked for nonpayment of the public accommodations tax. 
(Code 1999, § 62-116; Ord. of 2-10-1987, § 4) 
Sec. 12-181. - Effect of levied license fees and taxes on other ordinances. 
The license fees and taxes levied on public accommodations facilities in this article shall be in lieu of all other business or occupation licenses or taxes levied on such businesses. 
(Code 1999, § 62-117; Ord. of 2-10-1987, § 7) 
Secs. 12-182—12-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; municipal and county ordinances for issuance of permits to charitable organizations for solicitation of contributions on streets and highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97.1; charitable solicitations, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1; municipal and county occupation taxes for certain traveling salespersons, merchants, and dealers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means a solicitor or transient merchant, and means any person who engages in the business of selling any goods, wares, merchandise or services or who solicits orders for such goods, wares, merchandise or services by going from house to house or place to place, and who does not have a permanent place of business in the city and is not employed by any person having a permanent place of business in the city; provided, however, that the term "peddler" shall not include persons selling, distributing or soliciting orders for newspapers or selling, distributing or soliciting orders for milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs and other farm and garden produce raised by the vendor or members of his family insofar as the sale of such commodities is authorized by law. 
(Code 1999, § 46-1) 
Sec. 12-202. - Exceptions to article. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the usual course of business. 
(2)  Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers selling goods, wares and merchandise according to law. 
(3)  Bona fide residents of the state selling fruits, vegetables, dressed meats, fowl or farm products which were produced on land within the state owned or controlled by such vendor. 
(4)  Solicitations, sales or distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations which have their principal place of activity within this city. 
(Code 1999, § 46-2) 
Sec. 12-203. - Refusing to leave. 
Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises, or his agent, to leave the premises and not return thereto shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1999, § 46-3) 
Sec. 12-204. - Entrance to posted premises. 
It is unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises when such premises are posted with a sign stating, "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitations Allowed" or other words to that effect. 
(Code 1999, § 46-4) 
Sec. 12-205. - Misrepresentations concerning goods or services. 
It is unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality or nature of his goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. 
(Code 1999, § 46-5) 
Sec. 12-206. - Hours of business. 
It is unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling within the city between the hours of one-half hour before sunset and 9:00 a.m., except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer, or at any time on Sunday. 
(Code 1999, § 46-6) 
Secs. 12-207—12-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PEDDLER PERMIT 

Sec. 12-236. - Fees, taxes and bond. 
Peddlers shall be subject to the administrative fee, regulatory fee and occupation tax provisions of this chapter. In addition, each peddler shall furnish a good and sufficient penal bond in the amount of $1,000.00, conditioned that if such peddlers comply with the provisions of this article and other ordinances relating to such provisions, such obligation shall be void; otherwise, it shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Code 1999, § 46-41) 
Sec. 12-237. - Limitation on issuance. 
No peddler's permit shall be issued to a corporation, partnership or other impersonal legal entity, but each individual person engaging in the business of peddling within the city shall be required to have a permit whether acting for himself or as an agent or representative of another. 
(Code 1999, § 46-42) 
Sec. 12-238. - Permit required; application. 
Applicants for peddler permits shall file with the city clerk a sworn application giving the following information: 
(1)  The name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  The address, legal and local; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
(5)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle, together with the license number or other means of identification; and 
(6)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any city ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(Code 1999, § 46-43) 
Sec. 12-239. - Driver's license. 
The applicant, at the time of filing his application for a permit required by this division, shall present his driver's license, if he has one, to the chief of police. 
(Code 1999, § 46-44) 
Sec. 12-240. - Giving false information on application. 
It is unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading information in connection with his application for a permit required by this division. 
(Code 1999, § 46-45) 
Sec. 12-241. - Agent for service of process. 
Before any permit shall issue under this division, there shall also be filed with the city clerk an instrument in writing, signed by the applicant under oath, nominating and appointing the city clerk as the applicant's true and lawful agent, with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of such applicant, and service of summons in any action brought upon the applicant's bond shall be deemed made when served on the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 46-46) 
Sec. 12-242. - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this division, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(Code 1999, § 46-47) 
Sec. 12-243. - Denial authorized; notice. 
If, as a result of the investigation authorized by this article, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for such disapproval, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. 
(Code 1999, § 46-48) 
Sec. 12-244. - Issuance. 
If, as a result of the investigation authorized by this article, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and return the permit, along with the application, to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed privilege license fee, deliver to the applicant his permit and issue a license. 
(Code 1999, § 46-49) 
Sec. 12-245. - Contents. 
Every permit issued under this article shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name and address of the permittee, the class of permit and license issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance and the length of time such permit shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such peddling. 
(Code 1999, § 46-50) 
Sec. 12-246. - Recordkeeping. 
The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued under the provisions of this division to the extent required by the state records retention rules and schedules. 
(Code 1999, § 46-51) 
Sec. 12-247. - Disposition of receipts. 
The taxes and penalties collected under this division shall be paid into the city general fund in the same manner as other taxes collected by the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 46-52) 
Sec. 12-248. - Display. 
Every peddler having a permit issued under the provisions of this division and doing business within the city shall display his permit upon the request of any person, and failure to do so shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1999, § 46-53) 
Sec. 12-249. - Duration. 
Every permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be valid for the period of time stated therein, but in no event shall any such permit be issued for a period of time in excess of 12 months. 
(Code 1999, § 46-54) 
Sec. 12-250. - Revocation. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked for the violation by the permittee of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance. Upon such revocation, such permit shall immediately be surrendered to the city clerk, and failure to do so shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1999, § 46-55) 
Sec. 12-251. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the city clerk in the denial of an application for a peddler's permit or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a peddler's permit as provided in this division shall have the right of appeal to the mayor and council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the mayor and council, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The mayor and council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant. 
(Code 1999, § 46-56) 
Sec. 12-252. - Transfer. 
No peddler's permit shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1999, § 46-57) 
Sec. 12-253. - Alteration. 
It is unlawful for any person to alter or deface any permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1999, § 46-58) 
Secs. 12-254—12-284. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOLICITOR REGISTRATION 

Sec. 12-285. - Solicitation in the right-of-way of city streets; registration required. 
Any person who wishes to solicit donations or contributions in the right-of-way of a city street on behalf of, or under the sponsorship of, any charitable, religious, social, patriotic, or civic club or organization shall be required to register the activity with the city clerk at least one week in advance of the event and to obtain a registration therefor. 
(Code 1999, § 46-7; Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 46-7) 
Sec. 12-286. - Application. 
The registration application shall be in writing, shall be signed by the chief officer of the club or organization and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address (headquarters), phone number, and object of the charitable, religious, social, patriotic or civic club or organization conducting or sponsoring the solicitation to which this registration relates; 
(2)  The day or days on which the solicitation will take place; 
(3)  The purpose and object for which the funds to be derived from the solicitation will be utilized; 
(4)  The name, address and phone number of the chief officer of the club or organization in direct control of conducting or sponsoring the solicitation and of the person preparing this registration form; 
(5)  Whether or not the club or organization, if not exempt under state law (O.C.G.A. § 43-17-18), has registered with the state; 
(6)  Whether or not the club or organization is classified as a 501(c)(3) charitable organization by the Internal Revenue Service; 
(7)  An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitation; 
(8)  The estimated cost of the solicitation; 
(9)  The amount of any wages, fees, or commissions to be expended or paid to any person in connection with the solicitation and the name and addresses of all such persons receiving payment; 
(10)  A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected by the applicants may be required and, if required, the statement shall give the amount of money so raised together with the cost of raising it and the final distribution thereof; and 
(11)  A statement to the effect that if a registration is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city, or by any department or officer thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 46-8) 
Sec. 12-287. - Fee for registrations. 
Before a registration is issued, the applicant shall pay a registration fee and an additional sum for each facsimile copy of the registration that is desired, the amounts of which are provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 7-26-2001; Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 46-13) 
Sec. 12-288. - Issuance of registration. 
The city clerk shall issue the registration provided for in this article whenever he finds the following facts to exist: 
(1)  All of the statements made in the application are true; 
(2)  The control and supervision of the solicitation will be adequate to prevent fraud and danger to the public or to the solicitors; 
(3)  The applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise; 
(4)  The solicitation will not be a fraud on the public; and 
(5)  The solicitation is to finance and promote the purpose or object described in the application and will not be conducted primarily for private profit. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 46-10) 
Sec. 12-289. - Time period of registration. 
The registration under this article shall be valid only for the days on which the solicitation will take place. Any club or organization obtaining a registration as required by this article shall be limited to a maximum of two days of solicitation privileges for each year. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 46-9) 
Sec. 12-290. - Duty to exhibit. 
Solicitors shall be required to carry on their person and exhibit their registrations or copies thereof provided by the city at the request of any person. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 46-11) 
Sec. 12-291. - Unlawful acts. 
It is unlawful for any person to execute a registration which contains any false statement, and it is unlawful for any person to solicit donations or contributions on the streets of the city purportedly on behalf of or under the sponsorship of any charitable, religious, social, patriotic, or civic club or organization which does not in fact exist. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 46-12) 
Secs. 12-292—12-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PAWNSHOPS AND PRECIOUS METAL EXCHANGES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-316. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this definition. 
Precious metal exchange establishment and precious metal exchange mean any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or goods made from precious metals from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals and any person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or goods made from precious metals are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
Sec. 12-317. - License required; fees. 
Each pawnbroker or precious metal exchange establishment doing business within this municipality shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. Application for licensure shall be as provided for occupational tax registration. The application for licensure as a pawnbroker or precious metal exchange establishment shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable administrative fee, to defray in part the city's costs in conducting the investigation required herein, and an annual business license fee, both in amounts established by the city council. If the application for license is denied, the annual business license fee shall be refunded. 
Sec. 12-318. - Review of application. 
No action on any application for a pawnbroker or precious metal exchange establishment's license shall be taken by the city council until the chief of police has reviewed the application, conducted a criminal background check, and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the city clerk, in the manner specified in this chapter. 
Sec. 12-319. - Limitation on issuance. 
No pawnbroker or precious metal exchange establishment's license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or of burglary or robbery. 
Sec. 12-320. - Pawnbroker recordkeeping and reporting requirements. 
(a)  Each pawnbroker licensed hereunder shall furnish to the police chief each week a list of every article pledged with him or sold to him during the previous week, giving a full and accurate description of the article, from whom it was received, and the hour of the day received. 
(b)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent record book in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each loan, purchase, or sale: 
(1)  The date of the transaction; 
(2)  The name of the person conducting the transaction; 
(3)  The name, age, and address of the customer; a description of the general appearance of the customer; and the distinctive number from the customer's driver's license or other similar identification card; 
(4)  An identification and description of the pledged or purchased goods, including, if reasonably available, the serial, model, or other number, and all identifying marks inscribed thereon; 
(5)  The number of the receipt or pawn ticket; 
(6)  The price paid or the amount loaned; 
(7)  If payment is made by check, the number of the check issued for the purchase price or loan; 
(8)  The maturity date of the transaction; and 
(9)  The signature of the customer. 
Entries shall appear in ink and shall be in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(c)  The record of each pawn or purchase transaction provided for in this section shall be maintained for a period of not less than four years. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-132—44-12-134. 
Sec. 12-321. - Precious metals exchange recordkeeping and reporting requirements. 
(a)  Every dealer in precious metals shall maintain a book, in permanent form, in which shall be entered at the time of each purchase of precious metals or goods made from precious metals the following: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase; 
(2)  The name of the person making the purchase from the seller; 
(3)  The name, age, and address of the seller of the items purchased and the distinctive number from such seller's driver's license or other similar identification card containing a photo of the seller; 
(4)  A clear and accurate identification and description of the purchased goods, including the serial, model, or other number, and all identifying marks inscribed thereon; 
(5)  The price paid for the goods purchased; 
(6)  The number of the check issued for the purchase price, if payment is made by check; and 
(7)  The signature of the seller. 
(b)  The permanent record book required by this section shall be in legible English. Entries shall appear in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals or goods made from precious metals for at least two years. The book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(c)  Dealers exclusively engaged in buying or exchanging for merchandise scrap dental gold and silver from licensed dentists by registered or certified mail or statutory overnight delivery may record the post office record of the mailed parcel in lieu of the seller's age and driver's license number and seller's signature as required in this section. 
(d)  Every dealer in precious metals shall make a report in writing to the chief of police, on forms approved by the city council, of all precious metals or goods made from precious metals purchased on the day previous to the date of the report. The report shall contain the information specified in this section and shall be typewritten or handwritten in legible English and mailed or delivered to the chief of police within 24 hours after the day on which the transactions occurred. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 43-37-3, 43-37-4. 
Sec. 12-322. - Weapons. 
No pawnbroker or precious metal exchange establishment shall receive as a pledge or purchase any revolver, pistol, blackjack, or sawed-off shotgun, and no pawnbroker or precious metal exchange establishment shall display in his window or shop any such weapons for sale. 
Sec. 12-323. - Minors. 
No pawnbroker or precious metal exchange establishment shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker or precious metal exchange establishment with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker or precious metal exchange establishment's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker or precious metal exchange establishment employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
Sec. 12-324. - Stolen goods. 
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker or precious metal exchange establishment to report to the police any article pledged with him, or which is sought to be pledged with him, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. 
Secs. 12-325—12-351. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TAXICABS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to require certificate of public necessity and convenience as prerequisite to operation of taxicab within local government's geographical boundaries, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-25. 

Sec. 12-352. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driver means any person in charge of or operating a cab or taxicab whether as owner, agent, employee or otherwise. 
Highway means any of the public streets, boulevards, avenues, drives or alleys in the city. 
Owner means any person having control of the operation, maintenance, or collection of the revenue derived from cabs and taxicabs. 
Permit means the written authority granted by the city council to engage in the cab or taxicab business in the city. 
Taxicab, taxi or cab means a motor-driven vehicle of distinctive color or design, with a seating capacity of not less than five nor more than seven persons, including the driver, operated for hire from a fixed stand in the street, or from garages, the destination of which is under the direction of the passenger or passengers transported therein. 
Taximeter means a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
Sec. 12-353. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating cabs or taxicabs on the highways of the city until he has complied with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 12-354. - Application for permit. 
Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating cabs or taxicabs shall first make application to the city council for a permit to operate such vehicle on the highways of the city. The application shall be in writing, addressed to the council, and shall be filed with the city clerk. It shall contain the full name and address of the applicant and, if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of its officers. It shall also state the business to be engaged in, the location from which the business is to be operated, the type of equipment to be used, the maximum number of passengers each vehicle is manufactured to carry, the number of vehicles to be operated, and any other information required by the city council. The application shall be submitted with a nonrefundable administrative fee and an annual permit fee in the amount established by the city council. 
Sec. 12-355. - Hearing and report. 
Upon the filing of the application, the city council shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. At the hearing, testimony shall be heard for or against the granting of the permit. If the application is approved, a permit shall be issued. No person shall operate any such vehicle upon the highways of the city until a permit has been granted and issued after such application and hearing. 
Sec. 12-356. - Transfer of permit. 
Any permit granted under this article to any person may be sold, assigned, transferred, leased, or mortgaged by the holder with the approval and consent of the city council. 
Sec. 12-357. - Suspensions. 
The chief of police may suspend from operation any cab or taxicab found to be unsafe; and any vehicle so suspended shall not be operated again until repaired and put in proper condition for use, and then only after its condition has been approved by the chief of police. 
Sec. 12-358. - Display of name, address and telephone number of owner. 
Every cab or taxicab shall display inside the cab, at a convenient place visible to passengers, a card not less than two inches in width by four inches in length which shall have printed thereon the name, business address and telephone number of the owner of such vehicle. Every car shall have displayed on each side thereof the name and telephone number of the owner in letters and numerals of such size as to be readily visible to the public. 
Sec. 12-359. - Inspections. 
(a)  No taxicab shall be permitted to be used or operated in this municipality until such vehicle has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined under the supervision of the chief of police and has been found to comply with such reasonable rules and regulations respecting safety and sanitation as may be prescribed by said chief of police. These rules and regulations shall be promulgated to assure safe and sanitary transportation and shall specify such equipment and regulatory devices as the chief of police shall deem necessary therefor. 
(b)  When it has been determined that a vehicle has met the standards established by the chief of police, a certificate to that effect shall be issued, which certificate shall also state the authorized seating capacity of said vehicle. Such certificate may be withdrawn and the vehicle relating thereto suspended from operation at any time by the chief of police if such vehicle is found to be unsafe or not in compliance with any regulations promulgated by such officer or imposed by this section. 
(c)  Periodic inspections of taxicabs shall be made at such intervals as shall be established by the chief of police to ensure that such vehicles are kept in a condition of continued fitness for public use. 
Sec. 12-360. - Taximeters. 
(a)  All taxicabs operating in this municipality shall be equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times of day and night; and, after sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. Said taximeter shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism and each shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect a correct reading and recording. 
(b)  Each taximeter shall have thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed; and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag of such taximeter into a non-recording position at the termination of each trip. 
(c)  The said taximeters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the police department. Any inspector or other officer of said department is authorized either on complaint of any person, or without such complaint, to inspect any meter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to notify the person operating said taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon, said taxicab shall be kept off the public roads until the taximeter is repaired. 
Sec. 12-361. - Receipts. 
The driver of any taxicab shall upon request by the passenger render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt, on which shall be the name of the owner, license number of motor number, amount of the meter reading or charges, and the date of the transaction. 
Sec. 12-362. - Solicitation, acceptance, and discharge of passenger. 
(a)  No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curbside thereof. The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to his vehicle at all times when such vehicle is upon the public street, except that, when necessary, a driver may be absent from his taxicab for not more than ten consecutive minutes, and provided further that nothing herein shall be held to prohibit any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle. 
(b)  No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice or by sign, or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any person, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage. 
(c)  Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible, or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets where passengers may be discharged at either the right or left-hand sidewalk or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. 
(d)  No driver shall cruise in search of passengers except in such areas and at such times as shall be designated by the chief of police. Such areas and times shall only be designated when said officer finds that taxicab cruising would not congest traffic or be dangerous to pedestrians and other vehicles. 
(e)  Solicitation of other common carrier passengers is prohibited. No driver, owner, or operator shall solicit passengers at the terminal of any other common carrier, nor at any intermediate points along any established route of any other common carrier. 
(f)  No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in said taxicab, unless the person first employing the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of additional passenger or passengers. No charge shall be made for an additional passenger except when the said additional passenger rides beyond the previous passenger's destination, and then only for the additional distance so traveled. 
Sec. 12-363. - Regulation of rates. 
The city council reserves the right, at any time, and from time to time, to regulate the rates and fares to be charged by taxicabs in the city. 
Sec. 12-364. - Vehicles to be operated from fixed points. 
All vehicles operated as cabs or taxicabs shall be operated only from public or private garages or from fixed stands in the streets. Before using the streets for stands or parking places, the owner or operator of such vehicle must first make known to the city clerk the stand or parking place selected and receive a permit for the use thereof, which permit shall state the place to be used. No such parking permit shall be granted except by and with the consent of the property owners abutting on such space. The space or area reserved for such stand shall be designated and marked by the police department. No cab or taxicab shall run along the streets advertising themselves as taxicabs or solicit passengers along said streets, provided this shall not prevent any taxicab from answering a call to any person at any place in said city. 
Secs. 12-365—12-386. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SPA, MASSAGE AND BODYWORK THERAPY 

Sec. 12-387. - Purpose; applicability. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate spa, massage and bodywork therapy businesses in the interest of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this article apply only to those establishments that do not hold a state license pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-100) 
Sec. 12-388. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article regulating spa, massage and bodywork therapy businesses shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Business license means the certificate issued upon payment of the administrative fee, and the payment of the occupation tax. Only one business license certificate shall be issued, which shall demonstrate that the fees and tax have been paid. 
Employee means any person over 18 years of age who renders any service in connection with the operation of a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business and who receives compensation from the owner, operator or patrons of the business. For the purpose of this article, the term "employee" includes the terms "spa, massage and bodywork therapist" and "independent contractor." 
Good moral character means a person who has not been convicted of a sex-related crime, or convicted of an attempt to commit such offense, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punished as a sex-related crime, in the past ten years. 
Home office means any residence which a person may use as a base of operation to include making appointments, receiving phone calls, mail, or engaging in management activity related to a business. This, however, would not permit the practice of the business at the home office, any signs, or any visible evidence from the exterior that any type business activity is being conducted at the location. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Operator means the manager or other natural person principally in charge of a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business. 
Owner or owners means the proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all partners (general and limited) if a partnership, or all officers, directors and persons holding ten percent or more of the outstanding shares if a corporation. 
Patron means any person over 18 years of age, or a minor with verified written consent of at least one parent or guardian, or who is accompanied by at least one parent or guardian, who receives a spa, massage and bodywork or reflexology therapy under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he will give money or any other consideration thereof. 
Recognized school means a state-licensed school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, and work of massage and bodywork, including, but not limited to: physiology, anatomy, hygiene, applied kinesiology, AIDS awareness, ethics, and statutes and rules of massage and bodywork therapy, and which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 500 hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school following the successful completion of such course of study or learning; or a state-licensed school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, and work of reflexology, and which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 200 hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. 
Reflexology means the application of specific pressure by the use of the therapist's hands, thumbs, and fingers to reflex points limited solely to the patron's hands, feet, and ears and which practice does not involve or require the patron to undress beyond the removal of the shoes and socks and does not require the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, hot packs or cold packs with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, water, liniments, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations but may include the application of antiseptics to the patron's feet. 
Spa, massage and bodywork means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, range of motion stretches, soft tissue manipulation or stimulating of the external parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, hot packs or cold packs with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, water, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. This definition shall also include treatment by baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy. This definition excludes the term "physical therapy" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-33-3(7). 
Spa, massage and bodywork therapist means any individual who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of spa, massage and bodywork or reflexology as defined in this section, whether as an owner, operator or employee of a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business. 
Spa, massage and bodywork therapy business means any business or location operated by any person, firm, association or corporation, who engages in, carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the activities defined under spa, massage and bodywork therapy or reflexology herein. Spa, massage and bodywork therapy or reflexology businesses shall not include any occupations, businesses or professions exempted by section 12-400. 
Spa or massage parlor means any building, structure, or place used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation, prostitution, or masturbation for hire. 
Specific anatomical regions means and includes the genitals, anus, perineum, and female breast. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-101) 
Sec. 12-389. - Facilities. 
No spa, massage and bodywork therapy business establishment shall be issued a license, nor be advertised, operated, established or maintained in the city unless an inspection by the city code enforcement officer reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers shall be made water impervious with approved materials and shall be installed in accordance with all codes and ordinances of the city. 
(2)  All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, and steam or bath areas shall have surfaces which may be disinfected. 
(3)  The premises shall have equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing non-disposable instruments, and such instruments shall be disinfected after each use on each patron. 
(4)  All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean linen and towel storage areas. 
(5)  Toilet facilities shall be provided for use by employees and patrons. 
(6)  Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule immediately adjacent thereto. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels or dryers. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-102) 
Sec. 12-390. - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the county, a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business without a license to do so. It shall also be unlawful to be a massage and bodywork therapist, owner, operator or employee of a spa, massage and body work therapy business without a valid employee license issued under terms of this article. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-103) 
Sec. 12-391. - Qualifications for licenses. 
Owners, operators, and employees of a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business shall be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any owner, operator, or employee who is convicted of a crime specified under good moral character as defined herein, while employed as an owner, operator, or employee of a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business shall not thereafter work as an owner, operator, or employee of any spa, massage and bodywork therapy business in the city for a period of ten years from the date of such conviction unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, or a bond forfeiture. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-104) 
Sec. 12-392. - Procedure. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership, or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any spa, massage and bodywork therapy business shall make application to the city clerk. A nonrefundable new application fee shall be paid to the city clerk with the application and all required supporting documentation. The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, or carrying on of any spa, massage and bodywork therapy business. 
(b)  An employee license must be secured by each employee who shall work in the business as required in this article. Upon payment of the appropriate fee by the applicant, the city code enforcement officer or the police department shall complete an investigation and upon the applicant meeting the requirements, the city clerk shall issue the employee license. 
(c)  The amount of all fees authorized in this article shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-105) 
Sec. 12-393. - Application required—Contents. 
Each application for a license to operate a spa or massage therapy business shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's full true name, social security number, date of birth, place of birth, aliases, sex, nationality, and citizenship. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(4)  Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation. 
(5)  The business license history of the applicant and where such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business or similar type business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its ordinances of incorporation or charter, together with the date and place of incorporation and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the same, the residence address and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more partners are a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant, corporation, or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(7)  If the applicant, any partners, or any corporate officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, have been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past ten years, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether any terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(8)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including ordinances of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any. 
(9)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(10)  Whether the premises are owned or rented. 
(11)  Each applicant for a license to operate a spa, massage and bodywork therapy establishment or business shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, by the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If by a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(12)  In addition to the information required herein, the application shall disclose the name, address, social security number, and date of birth of any and all persons who have a financial interest in the entity applying for the license, and must consent for the city to obtain his criminal history record information. 
(13)  The application must be accompanied by a certificate or diploma from a recognized school as defined in section 12-388 for each person working in the business of performing massage or reflexology. This subsection does not apply to clerical or administrative personnel. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-106) 
Sec. 12-394. - Same—Investigation. 
The city shall have 45 calendar days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. The application will be referred to the city clerk for consideration of the issuance of a business license upon the completion of the investigation and verifying that the application meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  Application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted within ten years of the date of the application, in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving moral character as defined herein. 
(6)  The applicant has not had a license or permit to operate a spa, massage and body work therapy establishment or business denied or revoked for cause involving lack of good moral character in this city or any other local government jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by applicant complies with all applicable zoning and distance laws code. 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-107) 
Sec. 12-395. - Licenses nontransferable. 
No license to operate a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee to any other person. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the license upon notification to the business license director shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-108) 
Sec. 12-396. - Change of name or location. 
No licensee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. Any application for an extension or expansion of a building where a spa, massage therapy business is located shall require inspection and shall comply with all provisions and regulations of this Code. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-109) 
Sec. 12-397. - Employee licenses. 
(a)  Before any person may work as an owner, operator, or employee of a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business, such person shall pay a nonrefundable fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule and file a notice of intended employment with the business license director on forms provided by the city. 
(b)  The application form shall disclose applicant's full name, current address, social security number, date of birth, birth place, sex, telephone number, address for the last five years, business occupation and employment history for the last five years, proof of age (photo I.D. from a governmental agency), complete information concerning the conviction of any crime within the past ten years, citizenship and consent for the city to obtain criminal history record information. If such applicant will engage in any activities of massage and bodywork or reflexology as defined in this article, such applicant shall provide a required diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school as defined by this article, provide a current license from another state whose licensure requirements meet or exceed those set forth in this article, or provide proof of successful completion of the National Certification Examination for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork. 
(c)  Upon the filing of the notice and any other required documents with the city clerk, the applicant may become a conditional employee and work on the licensed premises. The city shall have 45 calendar days to investigate the information furnished by the applicant. Each applicant shall furnish a consent form authorizing the city to receive criminal history information as may be contained in the files of the GCIC. 
(d)  If the applicant is found to be of good moral character and otherwise qualifies under this article, the city clerk shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the applicant shall be issued an employee license. The license shall be with the owner, operator or employee while on a licensed premises or while engaged in or carrying on any activities of massage or reflexology. 
(e)  All notices to applicants or license holders issued pursuant to this article shall be mailed certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address set forth in the notice of intended employment. Applicants and license holders shall have the duty to furnish the city clerk a new mailing address if the applicant's or license holder's address shall change during the investigation period or term of employment. 
(f)  Employee licenses issued pursuant to this section shall remain valid until or unless otherwise suspended, revoked or in such case or circumstance where the employee would not otherwise qualify for the granting of a new license under this article. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-110) 
Sec. 12-398. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation may appeal any action, order, decision, or determination of the city clerk or any other administrative official to the city council. The appeal is limited to an alleged error of the official from which the appeal is taken. 
(b)  The appeal shall be filed in writing with the clerk of the city within 15 days following the date on which the alleged error was made. Upon receiving the appeal, the clerk shall schedule a hearing before the mayor and city council and notify all parties to the appeal by mail at their business address of the time and date of the appeal hearing. 
(c)  All parties to the appeal may appear in person or be represented by counsel. 
(d)  The city council shall conduct the hearing as the mayor shall see fit. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall enter an order making a finding of fact and shall have all the powers of the official from which the appeal was taken. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-111) 
Sec. 12-399. - Renewal of licenses. 
(a)  All licenses for spa, massage and bodywork therapy businesses shall expire on December 31 of each year, including the year of issue, but may be reissued by the business license director for the following year upon renewal application being made, payment of the appropriate fee designated in the city fee schedule, and a determination by the city clerk that the applicant remains qualified as set forth in this article. Renewal applications shall be submitted and renewal fees shall be paid by November 15. Licenses not renewed by December 31 shall be void and such license holder must reapply as a new applicant in order to obtain a license. 
(b)  All licenses for an employee license shall expire on December 31 of each year, including the year of issue, but may be reissued by the business license director for the following year upon renewal application being made, payment of the appropriate fee and a determination that the applicant remains qualified as set forth in this article. Renewal applications shall be submitted and renewal fees shall be paid by November 15. Employee licenses not renewed by December 31 shall be void and such license holder must reapply as a new applicant in order to obtain a license. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-114) 
Sec. 12-400. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective occupations, business or professions: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, occupational therapists, or physical therapists that are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state. 
(2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of the state who practice nursing only. 
(3)  Barbers, cosmetologists and nail technicians who are duly licensed under the laws of the state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging and bodywork of the neck, face, scalp, feet, hands, and hair of the customer or client for cosmetic purposes. 
(4)  A recognized school as defined in section 12-388. 
(5)  Any person actively enrolled in and pursuing a course of study leading to a degree or certificate as a massage and bodywork therapist in an educational program in a recognized school, not to exceed one year beyond the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(6)  None of the provisions of this article shall be construed so as to limit or prevent any person duly licensed under the laws of this state to practice the profession for which he was licensed. 
(7)  Persons licensed as a home office shall be exempt from requirements of section 12-389. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-116) 
Sec. 12-401. - License required prior to advertising. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business without a valid spa, massage and bodywork therapy license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-117) 
Sec. 12-402. - Minimum age of spa, massage and bodywork therapist. 
No spa, massage and bodywork therapy business or owner or operator shall employ or contract with, as a massage and bodywork therapist, a person under the age of 18 years or any person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-118) 
Sec. 12-403. - Hours of operation. 
A spa, massage and bodywork therapy business shall be closed between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and closed on Sunday. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-119) 
Sec. 12-404. - Patrons not to administer massage and bodywork. 
No massage and bodywork business or employee, owner or operator thereof shall offer to permit or permit any patron to administer any act of massage and bodywork or reflexology to any person. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-120) 
Sec. 12-405. - Price rates to be posted. 
Price rates for all services performed at a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective patrons. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-121) 
Sec. 12-406. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed to be brought into or served, stored, kept, or consumed on the premises of a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-122) 
Sec. 12-407. - Massage of specific anatomical areas prohibited. 
No owner, operator or employee shall intentionally touch or massage, or offer to touch or massage, any specific anatomical region of any patron. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-123) 
Sec. 12-408. - Patron coverings required. 
(a)  Each spa, massage and bodywork therapy business shall provide to each patron clean, sanitary and opaque coverings capable of covering the patron's specific anatomical regions. Reuse of such covering is prohibited unless the covering has been adequately cleaned. No massage and bodywork shall be administered unless the patron is covered by such covering of the specific anatomical regions. 
(b)  With the exception of bathrooms and dressing rooms, no spa, massage and bodywork therapy business, owner, operator or employee thereof shall permit any person within the spa, massage and bodywork therapy business unless the specified anatomical regions are covered. 
(c)  Opaque coverings shall not be required to be furnished to patrons receiving only reflexology therapy. Patrons receiving reflexology therapy shall not undress beyond the removal of shoes and socks. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-124) 
Sec. 12-409. - Proper owner, operator, employee clothing required. 
Each owner, operator, and employee of a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business shall, while in the presence of another person, while on the premises of a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business, wear clothing of an opaque material, and it is unlawful for such person to fail to fully conceal his specific anatomical regions or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-125) 
Sec. 12-410. - Compliance with laws and ordinances. 
No patron, owner, operator, or employee of a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business shall violate any federal, state or local law or ordinance while engaged in or carrying on any of the activities of massage and bodywork or reflexology as defined in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-126) 
Sec. 12-411. - Authority to inspect premises. 
Spa, massage and bodywork therapy businesses shall be open at reasonable times for inspection by city employees to ensure compliance with this Code. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-127) 
Sec. 12-412. - Minors as patrons unlawful. 
(a)  It is unlawful to allow a person who is under the age of 18 years to become a patron of a spa, massage and bodywork therapy business unless such person possesses verified written permission from at least one parent or guardian or is accompanied by at least one parent or guardian. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner, operator or employee of each spa, massage and bodywork therapy business to ensure that no person under the age of 18 years becomes a patron of the business unless such person possesses verified written permission from at least one parent or guardian or is accompanied by at least one parent or guardian. It shall be presumed that an owner, operator, or employee knew a person was under the age of 18 unless such owner, operator or employee asked for and was furnished photo identification issued by a governmental agency reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-128) 
Sec. 12-413. - Proper diploma or certificate required. 
It is unlawful for any owner, operator, or employee possessing a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school, only for the work or practice of reflexology, to engage in activities beyond those defined under reflexology herein. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-129) 
Sec. 12-414. - Prohibited devices and preparations in reflexology. 
It is unlawful for any owner, operator, or employee engaged in the activities of reflexology, to apply to any patron any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, hot packs or cold packs, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, water, liniments, oils, powder, creams, ointments, or other similar preparations. Antiseptics may be applied only to a patron's feet. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-130) 
Sec. 12-415. - Prohibited businesses; masseurs or massage parlors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any masseur or masseuse to massage any person in any building, structure, or place used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation, prostitution, or masturbation for hire. 
(b)  Activities in accordance with this article may be licensed, and physical therapy conducted by a licensed physical therapist or conducted under the supervision of licensed medical personnel is permitted. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-131) 
Sec. 12-416. - Suspensions and revocations. 
(a)  If the code enforcement officer or chief of police for the city shall find that a spa, massage therapy business or a massage therapist is in violation of a law of the state or in violation of a law or resolution of the city and that the continued operation of the business would create a clear and present danger to the health, safety and general welfare and security of the city, the code enforcement officer or chief of police shall be empowered to seize and temporarily suspend the business license of the business. The code enforcement officer or chief of police shall deliver the business license to the city clerk upon the next working day of the city clerk. The mayor and city council shall then schedule a special hearing of the city council to consider further action upon the order within five days of the date upon which the city clerk received the business license from the code enforcement officer or chief of police. 
(b)  The council may suspend or revoke the license for any one of the following reasons: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original or renewal application process. 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed the violation of this Code or the violation of laws of the state to occur on the premises. 
(3)  A licensee fails to maintain good moral character as defined herein. 
(4)  A licensee fails or refuses to provide consent for the city to obtain criminal history record information. 
(5)  A licensee fails to pay any fee or any other amount of money due to the city under this article or any other section. 
(6)  Violations of any city codes or laws of the state that demonstrate the owner's further conducting the business would be a detriment to the community or surrounding area. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-132) 
Sec. 12-417. - Hearing on revocation of business license. 
(a)  When a matter is transmitted to the city clerk for possible suspension or revocation, the clerk shall schedule a hearing before the mayor and city council. The mayor and city council shall make such investigations as it deems necessary and shall conduct the hearing as the mayor shall see fit. 
(b)  The licensee shall be notified in person or by mail at his business address of the date and time of the hearing. The licensee may appear in person or be represented by counsel. 
(c)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council, based upon evidence submitted at the hearing, shall enter an order making a finding of fact and then: 
(1)  Find that the evidence does not authorize revocation or suspension; 
(2)  Issue a warning to the licensee; 
(3)  Suspend the business license and probate the suspension; 
(4)  Revoke the business license and probate the revocation; 
(5)  Suspend the business license; 
(6)  Revoke the business license; or 
(7)  Take any other appropriate action regarding the license. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010, § 67-133) 
Chapter 14 - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 14-1. - Adoption of state rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations promulgated by the state election board that pertain to municipal elections, together with the provisions of the state municipal election code contained in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. are adopted as the rules, regulations and provisions that shall govern the conduct of municipal general and special elections in the city. 
(Code 1999, § 26-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Expenses. 
Such funds as are necessary for the conduct of elections and for the performance of the duties that are specified by this chapter shall be budgeted and appropriated annually, and from time to time when required. 
(Code 1999, § 26-2) 
Chapter 16 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; state Emergency Management Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; authority to promulgate local rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28; mutual aid, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; dispatch centers to have trained communications officers on staff, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-19; mutual aid, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; war on terrorism local assistance, O.C.G.A. § 36-75-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor or the President of the United States. 
Emergency means any natural or manmade event requiring the activation of the local emergency operations plan. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the state governor to head the state emergency management agency. 
State of emergency means, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. State of emergency may also be a condition declared by duly authorized city or county officials. 
(Code 1999, § 22-31; Ord. of 8-14-1990, § I; Ord. of 2-9-2009, § I) 
Sec. 16-2. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1999, § 22-87; Ord. of 8-14-1990, § VI; Ord. of 2-9-2009, § VI) 
Sec. 16-3. - NIMS adopted. 
The city has adopted the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under federal law and rules and O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations in the city train and exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Res. of 12-13-2005) 
Secs. 16-4—16-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 16-25. - Joint county-city agency created; director. 
(a)  In agreement with the governing officials of the cities within the county, there has been established and the city participates in the Rabun County Emergency Management Agency. 
(b)  The chairperson of the county commissioners, with the concurrence of officials of the cities within the county, shall nominate, for appointment by the state emergency management director, a director of the Rabun County Emergency Management Agency. Upon appointment, the local emergency management agency director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the executive officer or governing body and shall serve at the pleasure of such executive officer or governing body. 
(c)  When appointed, the local emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist local officials in organizing county departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, an emergency operations plan for emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities within the county for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as required by governmental officials in keeping with good management practices (e.g., financial, daily activities, etc.). 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center. 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating staff during periods of emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2009, § II) 
State Law reference— Local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; authority to promulgate local rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28. 
Sec. 16-26. - Emergency support functions. 
(a)  The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing county and city departments. The emergency support functions (ESFs) and department and agency assignments are as follows: 

 
(b)  The department and agency assignment listed in the table in this section are examples only. It is the responsibility of local governments to make assignments based upon local capabilities. 
(c)  Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing appropriate annexes and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to the emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes or SOPs will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Code 1999, § 22-84; Ord. of 8-14-1990, § III; Ord. of 2-9-2009, § III) 
State Law reference— Qualifications of emergency management personnel, oath, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-34. 
Sec. 16-27. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster or any other emergency which may effect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairperson of the board of county commissioners separately, or jointly with the mayors of participating cities, or, in their absence, their legally appointed successors may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such periods as such emergency or disaster continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes; 
(2)  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans set by the federal and state emergency management agencies; 
(3)  To appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers; 
(4)  To establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster; 
(5)  Subject to the order of the state governor or the chief executive of the political subdivision, to assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the subdivision relating to firefighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, and to police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes, within or outside of the physical limits of the subdivision; 
(6)  In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease, or otherwise, sites required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims; and to enter into whatever arrangements, including purchase, of temporary housing units and payment of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such sites to utilize the housing units. 
(Code 1999, §§ 22-83, 22-57, 22-85; Ord. of 8-14-1990, §§ II, IV; Ord. of 2-9-2009, § IV) 
State Law reference— Powers of local governments regarding emergencies, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 16-28. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. Immunity does not apply in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith. 
(Code 1999, § 22-86; Ord. of 8-14-1990, § V; Ord. of 2-9-2009, § V) 
State Law reference— Immunity of emergency management personnel, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-35; rights, privileges, and immunities of emergency aid workers, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-30. 
Secs. 16-29—16-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEM MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 16-60. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means a person designated by the city to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this article. 
Alarm company means a person or business entity subject to the licensing requirements or engaged in selling, leasing, installing, servicing or monitoring alarm systems. 
Alarm signal means a detectable signal, audible or visual, generated by an alarm system, to which law enforcement is requested to respond. 
Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which law enforcement is requested to respond, but does not include motor vehicle or boat alarms, fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. 
Alarm user means any person leasing or operating an alarm system or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
Automatic dial protection device means an automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates to the police department a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for law enforcement response. 
Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company designated by the alarm user notifies the police department that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no penalty will be assessed. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his employees or agents, and signals activated to summon law enforcement personnel unless law enforcement response was cancelled by the alarm user or his agent before law enforcement personnel arrive at the alarm location. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm that can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent conditions of nature, nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. 
Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user. 
Runaway alarm means an alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. The police department may in its discretion discontinue police responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway alarm. 
Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company or its representative to contact the alarm site or alarm user by telephone or other electronic means, regardless of whether actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. 
Sec. 16-61. - Duties of the alarm user. 
(a)  An alarm user shall maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms. 
(b)  An alarm user must respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within 20 minutes when notified by the police department to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system. 
(c)  An alarm user shall not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report or to perform routine maintenance as prescribed by an alarm system provider. 
(d)  To attempt to ensure that an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, telephone verification shall require, at a minimum, that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify himself. 
Sec. 16-62. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It is unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises or when no medical emergency is occurring on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. 
(b)  It is unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than ten minutes. 
(c)  Three or more false alarms within any rolling 12-month period is deemed excessive, constitutes a public nuisance and is unlawful. 
Sec. 16-63. - Civil penalties for violations. 
A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a civil violation and shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction. Civil penalties for false alarms shall be established by resolution of the city council to be kept on file by the city clerk. Violations will be enforced through the assessment of a civil penalty in an amount established by resolution of the city council, to be kept on file by the city clerk. Civil penalties shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the invoice. 
Sec. 16-64. - Appeals. 
(a)  Procedure. Assessments of civil penalties and other enforcement decisions made under this article may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the alarm administrator within ten days after the date of notification of the assessment of the civil penalty or other enforcement decision. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of the civil penalties or other enforcement decision. Appeals shall be heard through an administrative process established by the city. The hearing officer's decision is subject to review in the manner provided by state law. 
(b)  Standard. The hearing officer shall review an appeal from the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decisions using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decision, the hearing officer shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalties or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted. 
Sec. 16-65. - Confidentiality. 
In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered through the alarm registration applications, no response records, applications for appeals and any other alarm records shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the city. 
Sec. 16-66. - Government immunity. 
The provisions of this article are not intended to, nor will they, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. The alarm user acknowledges that the police department response may be influenced by factors such as the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Conservation and natural resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; control of soil erosion and sedimentation, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; control of water pollution and surface water use, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20; Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-440 et seq.; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.; local ordinance governing land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD PREVENTION AND CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city marshal's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the federal emergency management agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 18-22. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before September 5, 1984. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 5, 1984. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the federal insurance administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduces or eliminates flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the federal department of the interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after September 5, 1984, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced after September 5, 1984, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after September 5, 1984. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Accessory structures are not exempt from any the requirements of this article.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. (The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.) 
(2)  The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(3)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement officer, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(4)  Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means circumstances in which the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 6) 
Sec. 18-20. - Findings, purpose, intent and objectives. 
(a)  Findings. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this article to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(c)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 1, §§ B—D) 
Sec. 18-21. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction the city. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 18-22. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by the city through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto for unincorporated county areas are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(d)  The flood insurance study (FIS) and accompanying maps and other supporting data is available for inspection at the city hall. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 18-23. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 18-24. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 18-25. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the city, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 18-26. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 18-27. - Penalties. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 18-28—18-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 18-58. - Designation of administrator. 
The city marshal is hereby appointed as administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 18-59. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-22, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 18-78(a)(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 18-78(a)(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 18-78(a)(1)c and section 18-101(2) or 18-103(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data and analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 18-60—18-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT PERMITS 

Sec. 18-77. - Required. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 18-78. - Procedure. 
(a)  Generally. Application for a development permit shall be made to the administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 18-101(2); and 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
(b)  Review of certification data. The administrator shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 3, § B) 
Secs. 18-79—18-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 18-100. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater: 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 18-101. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-100(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 18-59(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on individual lots or parcels, in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. See section 18-100(6). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a and (3)c of this section. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-22 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, provided, however, that it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 18-102. - Standards for A zones. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-22, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-22, then the administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this division. Only if data are not available from these sources, then subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-100(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 18-103. - Standards for AE zones. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-22, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 18-101. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 18-104. - Standards for AO zones. 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-22 may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-100(4). The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in sections 18-78(a)(1)c and 18-78(a)(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 18-105. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  For subdivisions or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 18-106. - Standards for critical facilities. 
Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 4, § G) 
Secs. 18-107—18-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 18-126. - Procedures. 
(a)  The city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the administrator office in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010, art. 5) 
Secs. 18-127—18-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-151. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the blue ridge soil and water conservation district. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section IV.C. of this ordinance. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 18-152(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the blue ridge soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and Code subsection 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Code 1999, § 30-191; Ord. of 10-13-2009, § II; Ord. of 4-17-2018(3) ) 
Sec. 18-152. - Exemptions. 
This ordinance shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968;" 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 18-153(c)(15) and (c)(16) of this ordinance, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service (nRCS) of the federal department of agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Code 1999, § 30-192; Ord. of 10-13-2009, § III; Ord. of. 4-17-2018(4) ) 
Sec. 18-153. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this ordinance shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 18-153(b) and 18-153(c). The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections 18-153(b) and 18-153(c) shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection 18-153(b)(2) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections 18-153(c)(15), 18-153(c)(16) and 18-153(c)(17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 18-153(b)(2); 
(15)  Except as provided in subsections (c)(16) and (c)(17) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with chapter 5 of title 12 of the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970. And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a minor buffer impact as defined in Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 91-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the Division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 18-153(b) and 18-153(c). 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § IV; Ord. of 4-17-2018(5) ) 
Secs. 18-154—18-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 18-175. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the zoning administrator to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city zoning officer and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 18-175(c). Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of sections 18-153(b) and 18-153(c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. § 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-17(9) or 12-7-17(10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by sections 18-153(c)(15), (c)(16), and (c)(17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 18-175(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in sections 18-153(b) and 18-153(c), or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this ordinance. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this ordinance, any variances required by sections 18-153(c)(15), (c)(16), and (c)(17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 18-175(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this ordinance, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this ordinance. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Code 1999, §§ 30-227—30-229; Ord. of 10-13-2009, § V; Ord. of 4-17-2018(6) ) 
Sec. 18-176. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city zoning officer will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this ordinance, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The city zoning officer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 (a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § VI; Ord. of 4-17-2018(7) ) 
Secs. 18-177—18-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 18-206. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this ordinance without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this ordinance, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 18-175(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this ordinance shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this ordinance under county ordinances approved under this ordinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Code 1999, §§ 30-198—30-200; Ord. of 10-13-2009, § VII; Ord. of 4-17-2018(8) ) 
Sec. 18-207. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2009, § VIII; Ord. of 4-17-2018(9) ) 
Sec. 18-208. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the city zoning officer upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city municipal court within 45 days after receipt by the city zoning officer of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Rabun County. 
(Code 1999, §§ 30-201, 30-202; Ord. of 10-13-2009, § IX; Ord. of 4-17-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 18-209. - Damages to persons or properties. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the state law. 
(Code 1999, § 30-203; Ord. of 10-13-2009, § X) 
Sec. 18-210. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This ordinance shall become effective on the 17th day of April, 2018. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this ordinance, nor the compliance with provisions of this ordinance shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. No provision of this ordinance shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2018(2) ) 
Secs. 18-211—18-226. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOUNTAIN PROTECTION 

Sec. 18-227. - Purpose. 
The mountains of the state are characterized by steep slopes, thin soils, and, because of the natural stresses placed on such environments, they require special protection. Land disturbing activity on the high-elevation, steep-slope mountains of Georgia potentially threatens the public health, safety, welfare, and economic progress of the state. Such land disturbing activity: 
(1)  May endanger the quality of surface water by increasing erosion and stream sedimentation; 
(2)  Has the potential to induce landslides; 
(3)  Has the potential to adversely affect groundwater due to the difficulty in providing proper sewage disposal in areas of steep slope and high elevation; 
(4)  May damage the habitat for some species of wildlife (both plants and animals); and 
(5)  May detract from the mountains' scenic and natural beauty which is vital to the recreation and tourism industry of North Georgia. 
The purpose of this article is to establish measures to guide future growth and development in the areas within protected mountains as defined herein. 
(Code 1999, § 30-276; Ord. of 11-13-2001, § I) 
Sec. 18-228. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste that has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the federal environmental protection agency pursuant to the federal act, codified as 40 CFR 261.3. 
Land disturbing activity means any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; and any construction, rebuilding, or alteration of a structure. Land disturbing activity shall not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations, individual home gardens, yard and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions or minor modifications to a single-family dwelling, and the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Multi-family dwelling means a structure that contains multiple dwelling units. 
Plat map means a large-scale map that shows the location of tracts of land within a jurisdiction, and the tax status of such tracts. 
Protected mountain means all land area 2,200 feet or more above mean sea level that has a percentage slope of 25 percent or greater for at least 500 feet horizontally, and shall include the crests, summits, and ridge tops which lie at elevations higher than any such area. 
Quadrangle map means the most recently published U.S. Geological Survey 7.5-minute topographic map prepared at a scale of 1:24,000. 
Reforestation plan means a plan, prepared by a registered forester, for replacing of harvested timber by replanting (as described in the Recommended Best Management Practices for Forestry in Georgia, published by the state forestry commission) or by natural regenerative processes (such as coppicing, seed trees, etc.). 
Sensitive natural area means any area, as identified now or hereafter by the department of natural resources, which contains one or more of the following: 
(1)  Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
(2)  Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
(3)  Significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; or 
(4)  Other areas so designated by the department of natural resources, and which is sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
Single-family dwelling means a dwelling structure that is designed for the use of one family. 
(Code 1999, § 30-277; Ord. of 11-13-2001, § II) 
Sec. 18-229. - Establishment of a protected mountain district. 
The mountain protection district is hereby designated and shall comprise all land area within the jurisdiction of the city, that is 2,200 feet or more above mean sea level that has a percentage slope of 25 percent or greater for at least 500 feet horizontally. The district shall also include the crests, summits, and ridge tops which lie at elevations higher than any such area. This district shall be further defined and delineated on the mountain protection district overlay map. The map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference. 
(Code 1999, § 30-278; Ord. of 11-13-2001, § III) 
Sec. 18-230. - Protection criteria. 
(a)  Proposed land disturbing activity shall meet all applicable requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., and all applicable local ordinances on soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(b)  Where one or more septic tanks are to be used for individual sewage disposal, the proposed land disturbing activity shall meet all applicable requirements imposed by the local governing authority. 
(c)  Where one or more wells are to be used for individuals' water supply, the proposed land disturbing activity shall meet all applicable requirements of the Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq., the requirements of the rules and regulations of the department of human resources regarding individual or nonpublic wells and any more stringent requirements imposed by the local governing authority. 
(d)  If sewage treatment is to be provided by any means other than one or more individual septic tanks, the sewage treatment shall meet all applicable requirements of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. 
(e)  If a public water supply system is to be provided, the water supply system shall meet all applicable requirements of the state Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977, 42 USC 300f et seq. 
(f)  Single-family dwellings shall not be constructed at a density of more than one per acre and no such acre shall be less than 100 feet wide at the building site. This density restriction shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any lot of less than one acre, if such a lot was, as of the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, owned and described as a discrete parcel of real property according to the instrument of title of the person or persons owning the lot on the date. 
(2)  Any lot of less than one acre, if such a lot was, as of the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shown as a discrete parcel of real property on a plat of survey properly recorded in the real property records of the clerk of superior court by the person or persons owning the lot on the date. 
(3)  Any land, or part of any land, which was contained in or subject to any master plan, planned unit development plan, special approved development plan, or any other development plan if such plan was filed with and approved by the local governing authority prior to the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, pursuant to a duly enacted planning and zoning ordinance; provided further, that any such planning and zoning ordinance must have provided for rules and procedures and governed lot sizes, density, types of buildings, and other limitations usually associated with the implementation of local zoning ordinances. 
(g)  Multi-family dwellings, in the absence of a public water supply and sewerage system, shall not be constructed at a density of more than four dwelling units per acre. If there is a public water supply and sewage system available to this property, then the density may be increased to no more than six dwelling units per acre. Regardless of which type of system, no such acre shall be less than 100 feet wide at the building site. 
(h)  Structures shall not extend more than 40 feet, as measured from the highest point at which the foundation of such structure intersects the ground, above the uppermost point of the crest, summit, or ridge top of the protected mountain on which the structure is constructed. This height restriction shall not apply to water, radio, or television towers; to any equipment for the transmission of electricity, to minor vertical projections of a parent building, including chimneys, flagpoles, flues, spires, steeples, belfries, cupolas, antennas, poles, wires; or to windmills. 
(i)  Any application for a building permit to construct a commercial structure shall contain a detailed landscaping plan. Such landscaping plan: 
(1)  Shall identify all trees which are to be removed that exceed eight inches in diameter as measured at a point on the tree 4½ feet above the surface of the ground; and 
(2)  Shall contain a plan for replacement of any such trees that are removed. 
(3)  Shall include a topographical survey of the project site and an assessment of the effect that the project will have on the environment of the protected mountain after the project has been completed and is in operation. 
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require commercial structures to comply with the density provision of subsections (f) and (g) of this section. 
(j)  No person engaging in land disturbing activity shall remove more than 50 percent of the existing trees that exceed eight inches in diameter as measured at a point on such a tree 4½ feet above the surface of the ground, unless such person has filed with the application a plan of reforestation developed by a registered forester. 
(k)  Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste are prohibited from protected mountains. 
(l)  Hazardous waste or solid waste disposal facilities are prohibited from protected mountains. Disposal facilities permitted by the environmental protection division prior to the promulgation of a mountain protection plan shall be exempt from this criterion. 
(m)  All roads on protected mountains shall be designed and constructed to minimize the potential for landslides, erosion, and runoff. 
(Code 1999, § 30-279; Ord. of 11-13-2001, § IV) 
Sec. 18-231. - Exemptions. 
Following are the exemptions to this article: 
(1)  Agriculture and forestry on protected mountains, provided that: 
a.  Agriculture and forestry activities are consistent with the best management practices established by the state forestry commission or the state soil and water conservation commission; and 
b.  Agricultural and forestry activities are consistent with all state and federal laws, and all regulation promulgated by the state department of agriculture. 
(2)  Mining activity on protected mountains if such activity is permitted by the department of natural resources. 
(Code 1999, § 30-280; Ord. of 11-13-2001, § V) 
Sec. 18-232. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Site plans. Application for a local development permit within the city mountain protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch = 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(b)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of the site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the city building official or designated appointee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(c)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(d)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the city building official and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the city. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the building official. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the building official. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the building official. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the building official may be appealed to the city council. 
(e)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the city building official. 
(f)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the building official. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the building official. 
(3)  If the building official discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the city council shall issue written notification of the violation to the federal environmental protection agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation. The building official may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The building official shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(h)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the county superior court. 
(2)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the county superior court, the city council or its designee may, within the time specified by the county superior court, elect to: 
a.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
b.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
c.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city council. 
(i)  Amendments. These regulations and the city mountain protection map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(j)  Relief assessment. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(k)  Separability and abrogation. All sections and subsections of this article are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this article be declared by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph, or part of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 30-281; Ord. of 11-13-2001, § VI) 
Secs. 18-233—18-257. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 18-258. - Purpose. 
(a)  The wetlands in the city are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the state. 
(b)  Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
(c)  The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(Code 1999, § 30-301; Ord. of 11-13-2001, § I) 
Sec. 18-259. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands inventory maps for the city. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344 et seq., as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S., excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344 et seq., as amended. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Code 1999, § 30-302; Ord. of 11-13-2001, § II) 
Sec. 18-260. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
(a)  The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands inventory maps. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
(b)  The generalized wetlands map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344 et seq. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Code 1999, § 30-303; Ord. of 11-13-2001, § III) 
Sec. 18-261. - Protection criteria; requirement for local permit or permission. 
No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the city. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the city planning official using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Code 1999, § 30-304; Ord. of 11-13-2001(1), § IV) 
Sec. 18-262. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance. The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein: (The activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, 33 USC 403 et seq., a permit may be required in some circumstances.) 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344 et seq. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Code 1999, § 30-305; Ord. of 11-13-2001, § V) 
Sec. 18-263. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district. 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Code 1999, § 30-306; Ord. of 11-13-2001, § VI) 
Sec. 18-264. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Site plans. Application for a local development permit within the city wetlands protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch = 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(b)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of the site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the city planning official or designated appointee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(c)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans. 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(d)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the planning official and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the city. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the planning official. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the planning official. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the planning official. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the planning official may be appealed to the city council. 
(e)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the planning official. 
(f)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the city planning official. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the city planning official. 
(3)  If the planning official discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the city council shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation. The planning official may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The planning official shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(h)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the county superior court. 
(2)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the county superior court, the city council or its designee may, within the time specified by the superior court, elect to: 
a.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
b.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
c.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city council. 
(i)  Amendments. These regulations and the generalized city wetlands map may, from time to time, be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(j)  Relief assessment. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(k)  Separability and abrogation. All sections and subsections of this article are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this article be declared by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph, or part of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 30-307; Ord. of 11-13-2001, § VII) 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and protection generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; minimum requirements for local fire departments, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-20 et seq.; authority of local government units to enact fire prevention regulations, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1; regulation of blasting generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-8-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; volunteer firefighters for counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-23. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Protection. All water fire hydrants in the city system are hereby protected from any type of entry, tampering, damage or adjustment of any kind except as authorized by the city fire department, and the mayor and council. 
(b)  Permission to utilize required. Any other individual or entity seeking access to water at a hydrant must first apply for and receive written permission from the city fire department or the mayor and council and shall only be permitted entry or use of the hydrant for approved purposes when accompanied by a member of the city fire department or water superintendent of the city in order to ensure proper use of the hydrant. 
(Code 1999, § 34-1; Ord. of 12-13-1983) 
Secs. 20-2—20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT (RESERVED) 

Secs. 20-21—20-40. - Reserved. 
Chapter 22 - HEALTH AND PUBLIC WELFARE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General municipal authority for health and welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-4; state health care and planning, O.C.G.A. § 31-6-1 et seq.; county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq.; smoke free air, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1 et seq.; smoking prohibited in local government buildings, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-2; promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Health officer means the county director of health or his authorized representative and such other city, county and other officials as may be designated from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1999, § 38-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - County health department rules and regulations adopted. 
The city adopts the rules and regulations of the Rabun County, Georgia, health department as fully as if set forth in full in this chapter. A copy of the county health department rules and regulations shall be available in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 22-3. - State rules and regulations adopted. 
Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. ch. 290-5-26, On Site Sewage Management Systems; Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. ch. 290-5-14, Food Service; and Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. ch. 290-5-18, Tourist Accommodations are hereby adopted. 
(Code 1999, § 38-2; Ord. of 2-14-2006, § 38-2) 
Secs. 22-4—22-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 22-25. - Issuance of citation. 
(a)  Upon information of a violation of any of the rules and regulations adopted in the ordinance from which this chapter is derived being made known to the county health officer or his designee, there shall cause a citation to be issued requiring such violator to appear before the judge of the city court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for such violation. 
(b)  Citations issued under this section shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and shall be personally served upon the person accused of such violation. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(Code 1999, § 38-3; Ord. of 2-14-2006, § 38-3) 
Sec. 22-26. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be punished as provided in section 1-13. Separate offenses shall be deemed to be committed on each day during on or which a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)  In addition to all other provisions of this article, any violation of this chapter is hereby deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application for injunction in the superior court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1999, § 38-4) 
Chapter 24 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Law enforcement generally, O.C.G.A. § 35-1-1 et seq.; compensation of law enforcement officers on commission basis prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; dispatch centers to have trained communications officers on staff, O.C.G.A. § 36-26-19. 

Chapter 26 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal and magistrate courts regarding nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-12-5; misdemeanor nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-6; placement of posters, signs, and advertisements on public or private property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58; abatement of nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq.; dogs as nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7; unlawful junkyards as nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-246. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Defined. 
The following terms whenever used or referred to in this article shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer that: 
(1)  Has been left by the owner or some person acting for the owner with an automobile dealer, repairman, or wrecker service for repair or for some other reason and has not been called for by such owner or other person within a period of 30 days after the time agreed upon; or within 30 days after such vehicle is turned over to such dealer, repairman, or wrecker service when no time is agreed upon; or within 30 days after the completion of necessary repairs; 
(2)  Is left unattended on a public street, road, or highway or other public property for a period of at least five days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(3)  Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a law enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim thereto; 
(4)  Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without the owner's having made claim thereto; or 
(5)  Has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim thereto. 
Building means any structure or part thereof not a dwelling as defined in this section. 
Dwelling means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, and including any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. 
Junk means worn-out or discarded material having little or no value, including, but not limited to, household appliances or parts thereof, tools, discarded building material or any other unsightly debris, the accumulation of which has an adverse affect upon a neighborhood's health, safety or general welfare. 
Junk motor vehicle means any automobile, motorcycle or other motor operated transportation device which: 
(1)  Has been discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, or ruined. 
(2)  Does not have a valid registration. 
(3)  Is not fully intact due to such missing parts or deflated tires. 
(4)  Is for some other reason in an inoperable, non-running condition. 
Junk motor vehicle parts means any discarded automobile parts not currently in use on an operable vehicle with a current tag and vehicle tag registration; including, but not limited to, any motors or component parts, doors, hoods, trunk lids, windshields, tires, wheels, seats, and any and all other similar automobile parts. 
Motor vehicle or vehicle means motor vehicle or trailer. 
Nuisance means anything within the city that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as provided in this article. 
Occupant means any person over eight years of age living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling. 
Owner means the owner, lessor, lessee, security interest holders, and all lienholders as shown on the records of the state department of revenue. 
Undeveloped property means any property that has not been improved or maintained by the construction or installation of a building, residence, or any other structural improvements. 
(Code 1999, §§ 30-66, 30-156; Ord. of 7-24-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 26-2. - Prohibited nuisances; nonexclusive compilation. 
(a)  General regulation. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. 
(b)  Certain conditions deemed offensive. The various nuisances described and enumerated in this chapter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. Without limitation of the generality of this section, the following are hereby declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the community. 
(2)  Obnoxious, offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood thereof. 
(3)  Discharging of offensive matter. The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(4)  Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. 
(5)  Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, as published and used by the United States Geological Survey, shall be the standard for such grading, and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(6)  Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  Nonconforming structures and machines. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or city ordinance. 
(8)  Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. 
(9)  Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city. 
(10)  Depositing trash, garbage and refuse on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish or trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the city or which unreasonably annoys others. 
(11)  Unoccupied buildings. Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleansed. 
(12)  Unsafe vehicles, machinery and equipment. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards). The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junked. 
(13)  Gutters or spouts. Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any street, lane or alley of the city. 
(14)  Unfit structures. A dwelling, building, or structure that is unfit for human habitation; that is not in compliance with the applicable city or state minimum standard building codes relative to safe use of real property and real property improvements; is a general nuisance; that constitutes a hazard to health, safety, and welfare to the people of this city and a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwelling, building, or structure; or that due to its condition or use, render adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such that the use of that dwelling, building, or structure is dangerous and could be injurious to health, safety, and welfare. 
(15)  Delinquent structures. Any mobile or manufactured home, building, or structure that has failed to purchase or display the Georgia Mobile Home Location permit upon the body or window. 
(Code 1999, §§ 30-67, 30-68; Ord. of 7-24-1989, § 3; Ord. of 5-15-2018 ) 
Secs. 26-3—26-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OBNOXIOUS WEEDS AND OVERGROWN VEGETATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Plant disease, pest control and pesticides, O.C.G.A. § 2-7-1 et seq.; forest resources and other plant life, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-1 et seq.; timber harvesting and removal requirements, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-23 et seq. 

Sec. 26-23. - Certain weeds, grasses and plants; exemptions. 
(a)  Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city, and any weeds, grasses or plants other than trees, brushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the city are hereby declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this article. 
(b)  Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, and to the original city lots. They shall not apply to undeveloped areas of unsubdivided land within the city. 
(Code 1999, § 30-96) 
Sec. 26-24. - Height restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property, or responsible for its management, maintenance or upkeep, to permit the growth and accumulation of weeds, grass or other vegetation to a height in excess of 12 inches above the ground. 
(Code 1999, § 30-97) 
Sec. 26-25. - Notice to abate. 
(a)  For a violation of this article, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove such excess growth within seven days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, or may be served by registered or certified mail, or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. 
(b)  Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address could not be made. 
(Code 1999, § 30-98) 
Sec. 26-26. - Abatement of city; notice of abatement. 
(a)  Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified pursuant to this division, the city is authorized to have the contractor enter upon the property, and the contractor is authorized to enter such property, and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. The city shall issue a lot clearing order to the contractor, who shall promptly perform the work and submit his bill to the city. The city shall inspect the work, and if satisfactory, shall approve the bill for payment and forward it to the city treasurer for payment. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment thereof on or before a date named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than 15 days or later than 45 days after payment to the contractor. 
(c)  If payment shall not have been made on or before the date named, the city treasurer shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the municipal judge, notifying such owner to show cause before the judge at a time and place and on a date named therein why execution should not issue against the property for its approval amount. 
(d)  If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this article, that the notice required in this article was given, that the work was performed and the cost thereof paid by the city, and that the city has not been reimbursed, execution shall issue for such amount, signed by and shall be executed by the chief of police in the same manner as tax executions are executed. 
(e)  If the owner of the property is unknown, or cannot be located, alternatively to the notice procedure provided in this section, a notice shall be published once a week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, which notice shall be addressed "To Whom It May Concern," shall describe with reasonable particularity the property involved, a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation, and shall notify all persons interested to show cause before the municipal judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue in rem against the property for such amount. In such event, subsection (a) of this section will apply, but the execution shall issue against the property in rem. 
(Code 1999, § 30-99) 
Sec. 26-27. - Remedies are cumulative. 
The remedies provided in this article are cumulative of all other remedies the city has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code, all ordinances, laws or regulations of the city, or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance, and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1999, § 30-10) 
Sec. 26-28. - Award of contracts for clearing of lots by city. 
Prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, the city shall obtain bids from contractors or other qualified persons for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation not in excess of two inches in diameter, and for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation in excess of two inches but not in excess of four inches in diameter, and the mayor and council shall award a contract to the lowest and best bidder, such contract to remain in effect during the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Code 1999, § 30-101) 
Secs. 26-29—26-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 

Sec. 26-60. - Keeping water in which mosquitoes may breed. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city, any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is so treated as to effectually prevent such breeding. 
(b)  The collections of water prohibited by subsection (a) of this section shall be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, or other similar water containers. 
(Code 1999, § 30-127) 
Sec. 26-61. - Treatment of collections of water. 
The method of treatment of any collections of water that are specified in this article directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes, shall be approved by the health officer and may be one or more of the following: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way, or with any other material that will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers together with their thorough drying and cleaning. 
(3)  Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the health officer. 
(4)  Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven days. 
(5)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish. 
(6)  Filling and draining to the satisfaction of the health officer, his agent or accredited representative. 
(7)  Proper disposal by removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
(Code 1999, § 30-128) 
Sec. 26-62. - Mosquito larvae as evidence of breeding. 
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there, and failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the health officer, his authorized agent or representative, shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
(Code 1999, § 30-129) 
Sec. 26-63. - Failure to remedy conditions after notice. 
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent such conditions, within three days after due notice has been given to him, the health officer or his authorized agent is hereby authorized to do so, and all necessary costs incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending, as the case may be. 
(Code 1999, § 30-130) 
Sec. 26-64. - Right of entry of health officer. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the health officer, or his duly accredited agent under his authority, may at all reasonable times lawfully enter in and upon any premises within his jurisdiction. 
(Code 1999, § 30-131) 
Secs. 26-65—26-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler that causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 

Sec. 26-87. - Loud, unnecessary and unusual noises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise that unreasonably or unnecessarily annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses that are noncommercial in character. 
(Code 1999, § 30-31) 
Sec. 26-88. - Specific sounds and acts prohibited; listing nonexclusive. 
The following acts, among others, shall constitute a violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns; signaling devices. 
a.  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city except as a danger warning; 
b.  The creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an unreasonable period of time; 
c.  The use of any signaling device, except a police whistle or one operated by hand or electricity; 
d.  The use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and 
e.  The use of any such signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, other machines or devices that produce or reproduce sound. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers; amplifiers; other devices for production or reproduction of sound for advertising. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instruments, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure without a special permit from the city. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer, in person, and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(4)  Vehicle radios or other electronic sound-producing equipment. It is unlawful for any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street or highway to operate or amplify the sound produced by a radio, tape player, or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within the motor vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the motor vehicle in violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14. 
(5)  Yelling; shouting; hooting; whistling; singing. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird that will disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise. 
(7)  Steam whistle. The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(8)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(9)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(10)  Loading; unloading; opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(11)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except on urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the city building official, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed by the mayor and council for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the city council determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., and further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the council may grant permission for such work to be done from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., upon application made at the time the permit for the work is applied for or during the progress of the work. 
(12)  Schools, courts; churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while they are in session or adjacent to any hospital, and which unreasonably interferes with the work of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed about such institutions indicating the presence of such institutions. 
(13)  Hawkers; peddlers; vendors. The shouting and crying of hawkers, peddlers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(14)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, or sale by creation of noise. 
(15)  Transportation of metal rails, pillars or columns. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. 
(16)  Piledrivers, hammers and other such appliances. The operation from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise without a special permit from the city council. 
(17)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(18)  Sound trucks. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes; the use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during such hours or in such places or with such volume as would constitute such use a public nuisance. 
(Code 1999, § 30-32; Ord. of 7-8-1941) 
Secs. 26-89—26-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED AND JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 

Sec. 26-120. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant, or otherwise, to store or deposit, or cause or permit to be stored or deposited, any abandoned motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 30-157) 
Sec. 26-121. - Removal from public property. 
Any abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicle left on public property for a period of five consecutive days shall be removed as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-3. 
Sec. 26-122. - Removal from private property. 
(a)  Any abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicle left on private property shall be removed upon ten days' written notice to the owner or occupant of any premises upon which the motor vehicle is stored or deposited, or to the owner thereof if the identity of such owner of the motor vehicle can be ascertained through license plates or otherwise. 
(b)  If such motor vehicle is not removed after ten days' written notice, the police department of the city shall remove same or cause the removal and sale at the cost of the owner or occupant of the premises, or the owner of such motor vehicle or motor vehicles, if such owner can be ascertained. Sale shall be made to the highest of two bids obtained from dealers in such property. 
(Code 1999, § 30-158) 
Sec. 26-123. - Contents of abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "contents" means only prescription drugs or eyewear; personal documents, including, but not limited to, birth records, passports, or death records; firearms; medical devices; child safety restraining devices; or keys, except the keys to the abandoned motor vehicle. 
(b)  Any person who stores an abandoned motor vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this article shall allow the owner of such vehicle to retrieve the contents from such vehicle, and the owner of a motor vehicle shall be allowed to retrieve contents and any other item from such vehicle if such retrieval occurs within the first 30 days that such vehicle is stored. 
(c)  Prior to the sale or other final disposition of an abandoned motor vehicle, if the person who stores such vehicle locates contents, as defined in this section, in such vehicle, such person shall surrender the contents to the nearest law enforcement agency. 
Sec. 26-124. - Duty of police department to determine ownership. 
(a)  Within 72 hours from the time of removal of a motor vehicle under this article by the police department, or within 72 hours of notice to the police department of removal of an abandoned vehicle from private property, and if the vehicle owner is unknown, the police department shall attempt to determine vehicle ownership through official inquiries to the state department of revenue vehicle registration and vehicle title files. These inquiries shall be made from authorized criminal justice information system network terminals. 
(b)  If the name and address of the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle is obtained from the Georgia Crime Information Center, the police department shall, within three calendar days, make available to the person removing such motor vehicle the name and address of the last known registered owner of the vehicle, the owner of the motor vehicle as recorded on the title of such vehicle, and all security interest holders or lienholders. If such information is not available, the police department shall, within three calendar days, notify the person removing or storing such vehicle of such fact. 
(c)  Law enforcement agencies shall make record entries in state criminal justice information system files through authorized criminal justice information system network terminals after an unsuccessful attempt to obtain vehicle ownership information and shall remove the record entries when ownership is determined. 
(Code 1999, § 30-159) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-3. 
Sec. 26-125. - Duty of person who removes or stores a motor vehicle. 
(a)  Any person who removes a motor vehicle from public property at the request of a law enforcement officer or stores such vehicle shall, if the owner of the vehicle or some person acting for the owner is not present, seek the identity of and address of all known owners of such vehicle from the law enforcement officer requesting removal of such, from such officer's agency, from a local law enforcement agency for the jurisdiction in which the remover's or storer's place of business is located, or from this state by direct electronic access as provided through its agencies and authorities within three business days of removal. The local law enforcement agency shall furnish such information to the person removing such vehicle within three business days after receipt of such request. 
(b)  Any person who removes a motor vehicle from private property at the request of the property owner or stores such vehicle shall, if the owner of the vehicle or some person acting for the owner is not present, notify in writing a local law enforcement agency of the location of the vehicle, the manufacturer's vehicle identification number, license number, model, year, and make of the vehicle within three business days of the removal of such vehicle and shall seek from the local law enforcement agency or from this state by direct electronic access as provided through its agencies and authorities the identity and address of all known owners of such vehicle and any information indicating that such vehicle is a stolen motor vehicle. The local law enforcement agency shall furnish such information to the person removing such vehicle within three business days after receipt of such request. 
(c)  If any motor vehicle removed under conditions set forth in subsection (a) or (b) of this section is determined to be a stolen motor vehicle, the local law enforcement officer or agency shall notify the Georgia Crime Information Center of the location of such motor vehicle within 72 hours after receiving notice that such motor vehicle is a stolen vehicle. 
(d)  If any motor vehicle removed under conditions set forth in subsection (a) or (b) of this section is determined not to be a stolen vehicle or is not a vehicle being repaired by a repair facility or is not being stored by an insurance company providing insurance to cover damages to the vehicle, the person removing or storing such motor vehicle shall, within seven calendar days of the day such motor vehicle was removed or one business day after the information is furnished to the remover or storer pursuant to subsection (a) or (b) of this section, whichever is later, notify all owners, if known, by written acknowledgment signed thereby or by certified or registered mail or statutory overnight delivery, of the location of such motor vehicle, the fees connected with removal and storage of such motor vehicle, and the fact that such motor vehicle will be deemed abandoned under this article unless the owner, security interest holder, or lienholder redeems such motor vehicle within 30 days of the day such vehicle was removed. 
(e)  If none of the owners redeems such motor vehicle as described in subsection (d) of this section, or if a vehicle being repaired by a repair facility or being stored by an insurance company providing insurance to cover damages to the vehicle becomes abandoned, the person removing or storing such motor vehicle shall, within seven calendar days of the day such vehicle became an abandoned motor vehicle, give notice by electronic means as provided by the state through its agencies and authorities, in writing, or by sworn statement, on the form prescribed by the state revenue commissioner, to the state department of revenue with a research fee as fixed by rule or regulation payable to the state department of revenue, stating the manufacturer's vehicle identification number, the license number, the fact that such vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle, the model, year, and make of the vehicle, the date the vehicle became an abandoned motor vehicle, the date the vehicle was removed, and the present location of such vehicle and requesting the name and address of all owners of such vehicle. If the form submitted is rejected because of inaccurate or missing information, the person removing or storing the vehicle shall resubmit, within seven calendar days of the date of the rejection, a corrected notice form together with an additional research fee as fixed by rule or regulation payable to the state department of revenue. Each subsequent corrected notice, if required, shall be submitted with an additional research fee as fixed by rule or regulation payable to the state department of revenue. If a person removing or storing the vehicle has knowledge of facts which reasonably indicate that the vehicle is registered or titled in a certain other state, such person shall check the motor vehicle records of that other state in the attempt to ascertain the identity of the owner of the vehicle. Research requests may be submitted and research fees made payable to the office of the tax commissioner and deposited in the general fund for the county in which the remover's or storer's place of business is located in lieu of the state department of revenue, but in like manner, if such office processes motor vehicle records of the state department of revenue. 
(f)  Upon ascertaining the owners of such motor vehicle, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall, within five calendar days, by certified or registered mail or statutory overnight delivery, notify all known owners of the vehicle of the location of such vehicle and of the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(g)  If the identity of the owners of such motor vehicle cannot be ascertained, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall place an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where such vehicle was obtained, or, if there is no newspaper in such county, shall post such advertisement at the county courthouse in such place where other public notices are posted. Such advertisement shall run in the newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks or shall remain posted at the courthouse for two consecutive weeks. The advertisement shall contain a complete description of the motor vehicle, its license and manufacturer's vehicle identification numbers, the location from where such vehicle was initially removed, the present location of such vehicle, and the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(h)  The state department of revenue shall provide to the Georgia Crime Information Center all relevant information from sworn statements described in subsection (e) of this section for a determination of whether the vehicles removed have been entered into the criminal justice information system as stolen vehicles. The results of the determination shall be provided electronically to the state department of revenue. 
(i)  Any person storing a vehicle under the provisions of this section shall notify the state department of revenue if the vehicle is recovered, is claimed by the owner, is determined to be stolen, or for any reason is no longer an abandoned motor vehicle. Such notice shall be provided within seven calendar days of such event. 
(j)  If vehicle information on the abandoned motor vehicle is not in the files of the state department of revenue, the department may require such other information or confirmation as it determines is necessary or appropriate to determine the identity of the vehicle. 
(k)  Any person who does not provide the notice and information required by this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor, shall not be entitled to any storage fees, shall not be eligible to contract with or serve on a rotation list providing wrecker services the city, and shall not be licensed by the city to provide removal of improperly parked cars under O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 
Sec. 26-126. - Disposal of vehicles. 
Vehicles removed pursuant to this article shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-6, unless the vehicle is a derelict motor vehicle as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-9, in which event the vehicle shall be disposed of in according with the procedure provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-9. 
Secs. 26-127—26-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ABATEMENT 

Sec. 26-151. - Applicability. 
The abatement procedure provided in this article is intended to apply generally to all nuisances identified in this or any other chapter of this Code, except in those instances where a specific abatement procedure is otherwise provided. 
Sec. 26-152. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without issuance of summons and notice as otherwise required in this article. 
(Code 1999, § 30-72) 
Sec. 26-153. - Issuance of summons for abatement. 
(a)  Whenever any nuisance exists within the city, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the city that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the city, and the owner or other person responsible therefor refuses or fails after reasonable notice to demolish, remove or abate the nuisance, the chief of police, or the officer having responsibility for the enforcement of this article, may issue a summons. 
(b)  Summons issued under this article shall be served upon such owner or other person responsible for such condition, describing the condition complained of and specifying the ordinances or parts thereof claimed to be violated thereby, and requiring such person to appear before the municipal judge at a time, date and place specified therein, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
(Code 1999, § 30-69) 
Sec. 26-154. - Order for abatement. 
(a)  If the municipal judge at the hearing required by this article shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this Code or the ordinances of the city is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his order and judgment so finding and shall order the property owner or other person responsible therefor to demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. 
(b)  The order shall provide how the condition is to be abated including, but not limited to, rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. The order shall further provide that if the property owner or other person responsible therefor shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the city shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever action deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition, and the expense shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for city taxes. 
(c)  Execution shall issue for such costs as in the case of city taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as in the case of city taxes. 
(Code 1999, § 30-70; Ord. of 7-24-1989, § 4) 
Sec. 26-155. - Service on nonresidents and others. 
(a)  If the owner or other person responsible for violation of this chapter resides outside the city limits or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required in this article shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the property involved and by publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the city once a week for four consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten days nor less than one day prior to the hearing. 
(b)  Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the person at such address by certified mail. 
(c)  In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person within the city limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
(Code 1999, § 30-73) 
Sec. 26-156. - Other powers preserved. 
Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish for any violations which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply with his order. 
(Code 1999, § 30-74) 
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Tampering with public property. 
No person in the city shall tamper with, injure, deface, destroy, or remove any sign, notice, marker, fire alarm box, fire-plug, topographical survey monument or any other personal property erected or placed by the city. 
State Law reference— Damaging municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 28-2. - Posting bills; defacing property. 
No person shall post any bills, advertisements or other notices of any kind on any public or private building, property or grounds in the city, nor write, paint, draw, carve, or cut any letters, words or devices on any such property in this city without the owner's consent. 
State Law reference— Damaging municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; placement of posters, signs, and advertisements on public or private property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58. 
Sec. 28-3. - Unnecessary noise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. 
Sec. 28-4. - Use of skates and skateboards restricted. 
It is unlawful for any person to use skates or skateboards on city streets, sidewalks, and public parks, or on private property without the permission of the owner of the property. 
Sec. 28-5. - Littering streets and sidewalks. 
Any person charged with the offense of throwing trash, beverage cans or other litter on the streets or sidewalks of the city shall be charged with the offense of disorderly conduct. 
State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-40 et seq., 40-6-249; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 28-6. - Hazardous excavations. 
No person shall leave any well, hole or pit in the ground uncovered or insecurely covered on any unenclosed premises in this city, or leave such well, pit or hole in the ground in such condition as to be dangerous to any persons or domestic animals. 
Sec. 28-7. - Unlawful assembly; failure to disperse. 
It shall be unlawful for any two or more persons, after having assembled on private property of any other person within the corporate limits of the city in the absence of, and without first having obtained the permission of, the owner, tenant in possession, or person in charge of such private property to assemble thereon, or to fail to disperse and cease such assembly upon being directed to do so by any police officer of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 42-1; Ord. No. 91-2, § 1, 2-12-1991) 
State Law reference— Unlawful assembly, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-33; inciting to riot, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-31. 
Sec. 28-8. - Trespass on business property during prohibited hours. 
(a)  Signposting. Any private property owner or operator of a business establishment or person managing a business establishment who desires to have his property to come under the provision of this section shall place a sign upon his private property plainly visible to the public from the adjacent street, highway or alley, which sign shall be in print and shall state the hours the property is closed to the general public and that persons are forbidden to enter thereon during such hours. Such property is protected by the city private property security ordinance. 
(b)  Written permission required; penalty for violation of section. It is unlawful for any person other than the owner or person having management and control over the private property thus brought under the city private property security ordinance to enter upon the private property without written permission in his possession from the owner or other person having control over such private property during prohibited hours and as posted on the sign. A person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(c)  Enforcement. The police officers of the city are hereby directed to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Exceptions. Members of an emergency organization such as the fire department, rescue squad, civil defense and law enforcement officers while and at such times they are actively engaged in protection of persons and property or law enforcement shall not be guilty of a violation of the terms of this section. 
(Code 1999, § 42-2; Ord. of 10-14-1980) 
Sec. 28-9. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to violate any of the following provisions of this section: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health. 
(2)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct as so to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another. 
(4)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with one or more persons for the purpose or with the intent of gaming. 
(5)  Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, artifices or devises. 
(6)  Any person who assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city or who shall aid or abet therein. 
(7)  Any person who shall accost or force his company upon any person. 
(8)  Any person who frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated. 
(9)  Any person who shall use fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil. 
(10)  Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(11)  Any person who shall congregate with one or more persons in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and who refuses to clear such public way when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority. 
(12)  Any person who shall disrupt, by excessive noise or disorderly actions, the undisturbed activities of any institution of learning, house of worship or any hospital. 
(13)  Any person who shall throw any bottle, paper, can, glass, stick, stone, missile or any other debris on public property. 
(14)  Any person who shall commit an act of public indecency tending to debauch the morals of any person. 
(15)  Any person who shall be found in a state of drunkenness or intoxication upon the public rights-of-way, city or other publicly owned property or any public park. 
(16)  Any person who commits any act against public safety, morality and decency, or who exhibits any other conduct that is manifestly disorderly that tends to disturb other persons anywhere in the city. 
(Code 1999, § 42-3) 
State Law reference— Reckless conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-60; riot, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-30; fighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-32; loitering, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36; profanity, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 28-10. - Creating a hazardous condition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the City of Clayton to act in such a manner, in his/her own person, in the operation of a motor vehicle or other transportation device, or through the placement or construction of any movable or permanent fixture to create a hazardous condition detrimental to the public welfare and safety. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2017(1) ) 
Sec. 28-11. - Alcoholic beverages in outdoor public spaces; prohibitions and exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or publicly exhibit any opened vinous, malt, or distilled alcoholic beverage while upon any street sidewalk, alleyway, parking lot, or other public area located within the incorporated area of the city; no distinction shall be made if beverage is contained in original or alternate container. 
(b)  Businesses located within the incorporated area that possess proper alcohol licensure, may allow patrons to consume alcoholic beverages in outdoor dining areas provided that patrons do not exit the curtilage of the outdoor dining area. 
(c)  Alcoholic beverages may be consumed in public areas at events, celebrations, ceremonies, or festivals that are approved by the city, and only within the areas specified by permit. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2018 ) 
Secs. 28-12—28-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 28-37—28-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 28-61. - Applicability; exceptions. 
It is unlawful for any minor 17 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon or be upon public streets, sidewalks, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult over the age of 18 years having lawful parental authority over such minor or an adult who is the lawful guardian of such minor, between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity or entertainment, and school sponsored or school related events, including recreational activities or dances; 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent or the consent of the lawful guardian for normal travel with interstate travel through the city excepted in all cases from the curfew; and 
(7)  When the minor is on the property of the building in which he resides. 
Sec. 28-62. - Parental responsibility for compliance; penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child 17 years of age or younger to permit or by insufficient control to allow such child to be in violation of this division. Upon conviction of this section for the first time, a person shall be given a warning by the court. Such warning shall be entered on the court records for filing. Second and subsequent violations shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-13. 
Chapter 30 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City and county recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; gifts of public parks or pleasure grounds to municipality, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1; park and recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; establishment of city and county supervised recreation, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-3; political subdivisions to have environmental testing on property acquired for park or recreational area, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-18. 

Chapter 32 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.; municipal business improvement districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.; redevelopment authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1; city and county development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; county and municipal urban development, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; city and county zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local zoning proposal review procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning and service delivery by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.; downtown development authority created, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-4. 

Sec. 32-19. - Adoption of state law. 
The city adopts the Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq. 
(Code 1999, § 50-36; Ord. of 10-2-1981) 
Sec. 32-20. - Creation. 
The area within the city limits as they now exist and as they may be annexed from time to time, or changed as provided by law, shall be the geographical area served by the downtown development authority pursuant to state law. The mayor and council declare that there is a need for a downtown development authority to function in the city. Such authority is hereby activated as defined in state law and shall be known as the city downtown development authority. 
(Code 1999, § 50-37; Ord. of 10-2-1981) 
Sec. 32-21. - Membership; powers, rights, duties and immunities. 
The downtown development authority shall be governed by a board of seven members who shall be the directors of the authority, and each director shall be a resident of the city. The directors shall be vested with all the powers, rights, duties and immunities set forth in state law. 
(Code 1999, § 50-38; Ord. of 10-2-1981) 
State Law reference— Qualifications of directors and officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-7. 
Sec. 32-22. - Terms of members after initial terms. 
After expiration of the respective initial terms of all members of the board of directors, all subsequent terms shall be for six years. 
(Code 1999, § 50-39; Ord. of 10-2-1981) 
Sec. 32-23. - Areas exempted from article provisions. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary stated in this article, the areas within the city limits of the city presently having a zoning classification or designation other than central business district are expressly excluded from the geographical area to be served by the downtown development authority. 
(Code 1999, § 50-40; Ord. of 10-2-1981) 
Chapter 34 - SIGNS AND OTHER ADVERTISING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The following regulations are designed to promote the public health, safety, order, aesthetics and general welfare of the community by: controlling the number, placement, size and height of signs to prevent excessive and undue distraction to motorists and pedestrians and to prevent traffic hazards; avoiding an environment that encourages visual blight; and encouraging a more attractive urban environment. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 801) 
Sec. 34-2. - Definitions. 
The definitions in chapter 44 shall apply to words and phrases used in this chapter. 
Secs. 34-3—34-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGNS 

Sec. 34-23. - Exemptions. 
Any sign designed, erected or maintained for a public purpose by a public agency or authority is exempt from the provisions of this article. Public signs include, but are not limited to, the following: signs denoting routes to any city, town, village, historic place, shrine or hospital; signs directing or regulating traffic; notices of any railroad bridge, airport or other transportation activity necessary for the direction or safety of the public; legal notices or other official instruments denoting time and place of civic meetings; signs denoting street names and street number, address or unit designations, flags of the United States, state, county, municipality or other public authority; flags, banners and other devices for celebrations, conventions, commemorations, events, festivals and other community activities authorized by the city council, and public memorial signs and tablets. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 808) 
Sec. 34-24. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. Except as otherwise excepted by the provisions of this article, it is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, replace or convert any sign without first obtaining a permit from the zoning administrator; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to require a permit for the repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure. 
(b)  Application procedure. Applications for permits to erect, construct, enlarge, move or convert signs shall be made to the zoning administrator upon forms furnished by him. The application for permit shall include information such as, but not limited to, ownership information, location, construction cost, scaled site plans and elevation drawings, structural details or other information necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of these regulations and all applicable codes. 
(c)  Fees. No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed and fees have been paid as established by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 1993, §§ 804—806) 
Sec. 34-25. - Signs shall meet applicable codes. 
Signs and other advertising structures shall be constructed and maintained in strict conformity with building and electrical codes and all other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 802) 
Sec. 34-26. - Inspection required upon construction, expansion or remodeling of building. 
When a building is constructed, remodeled, or expanded, all signs shall be approved by the appropriate official before an occupancy permit is issued. Drawings containing dimensions of signs or descriptions of sign dimensions, construction materials, and methods of erection or design and stress diagrams may be approved by the building official or other appropriate official, when, in his best judgment, erection of the sign will not constitute a safety hazard and upon determination that the sign meets all the requirements of this article and the building code of the city. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 812) 
Sec. 34-27. - Signs are permitted accessory uses. 
Signs and other advertising structures are permitted as accessory uses, subject to all applicable limitations as specified in these regulations. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 803) 
Sec. 34-28. - Requirements for signs in all zoning districts. 
Signs, regardless of the zoning district in which they are located, shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Compliance with state law. All signs within the city shall comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75 including, but not limited to, the provisions thereof regarding illuminated, flashing, or moving light signs. 
(2)  Repair and maintenance. Signs, together with any supporting members, shall be kept in good repair and maintained so as to present a neat, clean appearance and be in a safe state of preservation. Painted areas and sign surfaces shall be kept in good condition, and illumination if permitted shall be maintained in safe and good working order. 
(3)  Minimum setback requirements. Signs shall be setback a minimum of two feet from any public street right-of-way. 
(4)  Obstruction of vision along rights-of way prohibited. No sign shall be erected where it will interfere with vision clearance along any street or obstruct the vision of either drivers or pedestrians. 
(5)  Illumination not to cast on other properties. Any illuminated sign shall be placed so that the rays and illumination therefrom shall not be cast upon neighboring properties. 
(6)  Installation of marquee and projecting signs to be supervised by building inspector. All permitted marquee or projecting signs shall be erected under the supervision of the building inspector. Other attached signs shall be inspected for safety and compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 812) 
State Law reference— Restrictions on certain signs providing information in the interest of the traveling public and multiple message signs, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75. 
Sec. 34-29. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are prohibited in the city, except as otherwise specifically provided: 
(1)  Animated signs. Signs erected on or over public property including public rights-of-way, other than signs erected by public authority for a public purpose. 
(2)  Signs attached to vehicles. Signs attached to or painted onto a vehicle parked adjacent to and visible from a street for the sole purpose of advertising onto the street. 
(3)  Glaring illuminated signs. No sign shall give off light, which glares, blinds, or has any other such adverse effect on traffic. The light from all illuminated sighs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that the light shall not be of any intensity or brightness, which will interfere with the peace, comfort, convenience and general welfare of residents or occupants of adjacent properties and roadways. 
(4)  Flashing signs; signs imitating warning signals. Flashing signs or signs imitating warning signals or signs resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, or rescue vehicles and signs using word slogans, dimensional shapes or sizes or colors of governmental traffic signs. 
(5)  Signs resembling or conflicting with traffic control devices. Signs or graphics which by color, location, or design resemble or conflict with traffic control signs or signals. 
(6)  Sign emitting colors that may be confused with emergency vehicle lights. Signs that electronically emit or use the colors that could be confused with emergency vehicles (red and blue). 
(7)  Portable animated signs with motion or sound. Animated signs involving the scrolling or flashing of messages, motion or sound, except time, temperature, and date signs as provided in this article. 
(8)  Signs placed on or over public right-of-way. Signs that are placed on or over public right-of-way to include utility poles, traffic control boxes, trashcans; attached to any street sign or markers, traffic control sign or device. 
(9)  Signs on natural features. Signs that are erected or painted on rocks, trees, or other natural features. 
(10)  Obscene signs. Any lewd, vulgar, profane, or sexually oriented messages, pictures, paintings, drawing, or structure used for the purpose of advertisement. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 807; Ord. of 2-12-2008; Ord. of 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 34-30. - Signs permitted in A-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts. 
The following signs are permitted in A-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts: 
(1)  Holiday lights and decorations, not to exceed 60 days of display in any one calendar year. 
(2)  One identification sign per premises at the entrance drive of each individual residence, estate, farm, ranch and plantation which does not exceed four square feet of area. 
(3)  One identification sign or project identification monument for each entrance to a residential subdivision or complex or other nonresidential permitted use, not exceeding 32 square feet of area, provided that such signs are not internally illuminated. 
(4)  Identification sign or bulletin board for churches, places of worship, fraternal organizations or other similar permitted institutional uses, provided that only one sign not exceeding 32 square feet of area located on site is permitted per premises and provided that such signs are not internally illuminated. 
(5)  Political signs not exceeding four square feet in area. 
(6)  Real estate signs, non-illuminated, located on site, pertaining to the rent, lease or sale of the premises, not exceeding four square feet of area, provided that only one sign per premises is permitted. 
(7)  Signs, non-illuminated, for permitted sales, rental and leasing offices, and manager's residences that do not exceed four square feet of area. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 809) 
Sec. 34-31. - Signs permitted in NS, HB, CBD and M-1 zoning districts. 
The following signs are permitted in NS, HB, CBD and M-1 zoning districts: 
(1)  Any sign permitted as specified in A-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, but not subject to limitations on number, area, or lighting. 
(2)  One identification sign per premises, freestanding, not exceeding 100 square feet in area, on which the name and nature of the business or other establishment operated on the premises as the principal use are shown. On no occasion shall more than one sign under subsections (2) or (6) be allowed per property. No sign permitted under subsections (2) or (6) shall be allowed within 100 feet of any preexisting sign on any neighboring, or non-adjoining property. 
(3)  One secondary identification sign per premises, freestanding, attached or window, not exceeding eight square feet in area, on which the name and nature of a business or other establishment operated on the premises are shown. 
(4)  Attached signs with a total sign area not exceeding 25 percent of the area of the building wall to which the sign or signs are attached. 
(5)  Directional signs. 
(6)  Off-site signs (billboards) not exceeding 100 square feet in area. On no occasion shall more than one sign under subsection (2) or (6) be allowed per property. No sign permitted under subsections (2) or (6) shall be allowed within 100 feet of any preexisting sign on any neighboring, or non-adjoining property. 
(7)  Window signs not exceeding 25 percent of the total area of the window. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 810; Amend. of 7-19-2016(1) ) 
Sec. 34-32. - Illuminated LED signs. 
Illuminated LED signs that incorporate time, date and temperature or any other combination of advertisement for that business are permitted and may incorporated into the maximum 100 square feet of the sign. The width of such signs shall not to exceed 36 inches, and the length of such signs shall not to exceed 78 inches. Prior approval of the state department of transportation is required. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2008; Ord. of 11-10-2009(a)) 
Sec. 34-33. - Temporary signs. 
Temporary signs are permitted in the city only if they meet all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The sign shall not exceed a maximum area of eight square feet per side (two-sided). 
(2)  The sign shall not exceed a maximum height of 48 inches (four feet) nor be less than a minimum height of 36 inches (three feet). 
(3)  The placement of sign must not impede the flow of traffic on sidewalks as determined by judgment of the city police. 
(4)  There shall be no more than one temporary sign per business. 
(5)  The temporary sign can only advertise the business located at that location. 
(6)  The sign must be put out and taken back in each day and may not to be left out at night. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 34-34. - Maximum sign height. 
No permitted sign, regardless of type, shall exceed a height of ten feet in the A-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts or a height of 30 feet in the NS, HB, CBD and M-1 districts. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 811) 
Sec. 34-35. - Variances permitted. 
(a)  Recognizing that the strict application of the provisions of this article may, in limited instances involving unique or unusual physical conditions or other such unanticipated situation, pose an unnecessary hardship to the owner or user of a sign, the city council is authorized to permit variances from the provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, an increase in the height of a sign, reduction of the required two-foot setback for a sign, an increase in the maximum area of a sign, and authority for temporary signs and sign devices. 
(b)  Any application for a variance from the terms of this article shall be filed and heard in accordance with variance procedures and shall require the filing of an elevation drawing of the sign or signs proposed to be erected, constructed, modified or continued, along with written justification that unusual conditions warrant such consideration. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 813) 
Sec. 34-36. - Procedure for dangerous or unlawful signs. 
(a)  Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or becoming otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the building inspector, the owner thereof, or the person or firm maintaining the sign, shall, upon written notice from the building inspector forthwith in the case of immediate danger, and, in any case within ten days, secure the sign in a manner to be approved by the building inspector, in conformity with the applicable provisions of the building code of the city. If such order is not complied with in ten days, the sign shall be removed under instruction of the appropriate official at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. 
(b)  In case any sign shall be installed, erected or constructed in violation of any of the terms of this article, the building inspector shall notify, by certified mail or written notice served personally, the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign, secure the necessary permit, make required alterations, or remove the sign. If such order is not completed within 24 hours from the time of notice being received, the sign shall be removed under instruction of the appropriate official at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 814) 
Chapter 36 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid waste management generally, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1; hazardous waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-79; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings and disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; authorization for local government units to enforce collection of taxes, fees, or assessments for solid waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.3; authority of local governments to adopt and enforce local regulations for the handling and disposal of solid waste, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - City to provide for periodic collection. 
The storage, collection and disposal of solid wastes in the city shall be in compliance with rules and regulations promulgated therefor by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the city clerk. Fees required for the collection and disposal of solid wastes shall be as provided in the city fee schedule . 
(Code 1999, §§ 54-1, 54-2; Ord. of 10-1-1973, § 1) 
Secs. 36-2—36-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTERING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

Sec. 36-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse, or the shores thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area; and any vacant areas, commercial, industrial, residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
(Code 1999, § 54-36) 
Sec. 36-22. - Dumping or depositing of litter. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw, leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this city, or any waters in this city, unless the litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed or placed on such property and specifically designated for the use of the general public, or the property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or by the city for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the owner or renter of any private property, or any person acting with the consent of such owner or renter, from the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter upon such property or in any private receptacle or container maintained by the owner or renter of such private property for the sole and exclusive use of the household or business of such owner or renter. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave, or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any private property in the city, in any litter receptacle thereon, or any waters in this city, unless the person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or such person has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in such lawful possession. 
(Code 1999, § 54-38; Ord. of 10-1-1973, § 3) 
Sec. 36-23. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any articles including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the articles belong or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated section 36-22. 
(Code 1999, § 54-39) 
Sec. 36-24. - Duties of business owners and occupants. 
(a)  Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place of business located within the city shall exercise reasonable diligence at all times to keep his premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or waste materials thrown or left on those premises by his customers, and to take reasonable measures to prevent them from drifting or blowing to adjoining premises. 
(b)  Receptacles. Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be placed on the premises accessible to the customers of the business where the articles of waste generated at such business may be disposed of. 
(c)  Signs. Each business establishment shall place upon its premises in a conspicuous place in close proximity to the receptacle required by subsection (b) of this section, a sign which shall, in essence, convey to its customers a request that they use such receptacle for the disposal of waste material. 
(Code 1999, § 54-40) 
Sec. 36-25. - Duty of customers. 
It is unlawful for any customer going upon the premises of another to in any manner dispose of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or waste materials except in receptacles provided for such purpose. 
(Code 1999, § 54-41) 
Chapter 38 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to grant right to erect obstructions in streets, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; enclosures of lanes or alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-11; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Construction and maintenance. 
All streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public ways in the city shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications promulgated therefor by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1999, § 58-2) 
Secs. 38-2—38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 38-21. - Use of bicycles and skateboards on sidewalks and other walking areas. 
The use of bicycles and skateboards on the sidewalks and other public walking areas of the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1999, § 58-1; Ord. of 9-10-1996) 
Sec. 38-22. - Storage or sale of goods, wares and merchandise or services. 
It is unlawful to store and sell goods, wares, merchandise or services on the public streets of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 58-3; Ord. of 9-13-1966) 
Secs. 38-23—38-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-48. - Enforcement. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the authority of any officer to arrest a person engaged in any acts or activities for which a permit has been granted under this article, if the conduct of such person violates the laws, or if such person obstructs the public streets and sidewalks of the city or engages in acts that cause a breach of the peace. 
(Code 1999, § 42-36) 
Sec. 38-49. - Dispersal of activity. 
Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the city shall be obstructed by a crowd, congregation, parade, meeting, assembly or procession, or the conduct of two or more persons, except as authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this article, the persons comprising such group shall disperse or move when directed to do so by a police officer. It is unlawful for any person to refuse such direction to move or disperse and such refusal shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1999, § 42-37) 
Secs. 38-50—38-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 38-72. - Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to organize or hold or participate in any parade, meeting, assembly or procession of persons or vehicles on the streets or sidewalks within the city unless such activity shall have first been authorized by a written permit therefor. 
(Code 1999, § 42-61; Ord. No. 91-1, § 1, 2-12-1991) 
Sec. 38-73. - Application. 
Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this division shall make application therefor to the chief of police, which application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and local and permanent address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the person the applicant represents. 
(3)  The exact time and date of commencement and termination of each act or activity desired. 
(4)  The purpose, location and route of such act or activity, if applicable. 
(5)  The person, group, association or body to be authorized under the permit to do such act or activity and the number of persons to participate. 
(6)  The age of any minors who may participate in such activity, and the name of the person who will be responsible for such minors. 
(7)  Such other relevant information as the chief of police may require for the investigation of the applicant. 
(Code 1999, § 42-62) 
Sec. 38-74. - Determination of issuance. 
In deciding whether to issue a permit under the provisions of this division, the chief of police shall consider: 
(1)  The number of persons to participate; 
(2)  Anticipated traffic conditions at the time and date proposed for the activity; 
(3)  Schedule of other similar activities for which permits may have been issued; 
(4)  Adequacy of adult supervision for any minors scheduled to participate; 
(5)  Availability of city personnel whose presence on duty may be required by the activity and by the necessity to protect the general public; and 
(6)  Adequacy of public facilities in the location proposed for the activity to accommodate the proposed activity and the normal public use of public facilities in the proposed location. 
(Code 1999, § 42-63) 
Sec. 38-75. - Issuance. 
The permit required by this division shall be issued by the chief of police upon application therefor; provided, however, that such permit may be denied or refused if it shall appear that the applicant therefor or the act or activity requested by such application shall be violative of law. 
(Code 1999, § 42-64) 
Sec. 38-76. - Denial; modifications. 
(a)  If the chief of police determines from the application for a permit under this division that the proposed parade or march will unduly interfere with and impede traffic on the public streets, alleys and ways over which the parade or march will pass, or the public streets, alleys and ways that intersect the public streets, alleys and ways over which the parade or march will pass, he shall so advise the applicant in writing and give, in reasonable details, the reason he will not issue a permit for such parade or march, and shall suggest such modifications in the application which, if made, will not unreasonably interfere with and impede normal traffic on the public streets, alleys and ways by such parade or march. Such modifications may include: 
(1)  Changing or altering the route of the march or parade; 
(2)  Changing the date or time of day the parade or march will be made; 
(3)  Changing or altering the length of the march or parade; 
(4)  Changing the width of the parade or march (i.e., from requiring the whole width of the public street, alley or way to a lesser part of the width) to be specified; 
(5)  Any combination of the foregoing suggested areas of modifications; and 
(6)  Any other modification that will cause such parade or march to not unduly interfere with and impede normal traffic on such public streets, alleys and ways of the city. 
(b)  If such suggested modifications shall be incorporated in an amended application for a permit, the chief of police shall forthwith issue a permit for such parade or march. 
(Code 1999, § 42-65) 
Sec. 38-77. - Deviation from conditions of permit. 
It is unlawful for any person participating in any act or activity for which a permit has been granted under the provisions of this division to deviate from or alter any of the terms or conditions of such permit. 
(Code 1999, § 42-66) 
Sec. 38-78. - Display. 
Every person having a permit issued under the provisions of this division shall have such permit in his possession during the activity permitted thereby, and shall display such permit upon the request of any law enforcement officer. Failure to display such permit shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1999, § 42-67) 
Sec. 38-79. - Revocation. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked by the chief of police for the violation by the permittee of any law. 
(Code 1999, § 42-68) 
Sec. 38-80. - Contents; filing of copy. 
Upon issuance of a permit required by this division, the permit shall contain therein all information contained in the application therefor and shall be signed by the chief of police, and a signed copy of such permit shall be kept with the application, both on file in the office of the chief of police. 
(Code 1999, § 42-69) 
Secs. 38-81—38-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY 

Sec. 38-90. - Construction activity involving public right of way encroachment. 
This section is to provide for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and the public where interactions with projects or activities involving construction and right of way encroachment may occur. 
(1)  A permit shall be required for activities requiring the closing or altering of normal traffic flow or normal public access to the sidewalks within the city. Such permit shall be obtained at city hall for a fee amount approved by the city council. The fee shall include costs that shall be incurred for signage and publication of notice of street or sidewalk closing one week in advance of any proposed closing. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for construction activity, regardless of the type, to occur that encroaches upon public access to streets and sidewalks that does not meet and provide the following requirements: 
a.  Parking for activity vehicles or equipment shall not occupy more than two public parking spaces at any given time, a provisional parking permit is required at a fee of $50.00 per day, per space utilized. No additional parking spaces may be occupied over and above these two without a request having first being presented to and approved by the mayor and council (such permission would be subject to such additional fees and time limitations as determined by the council); 
b.  Activities that require the closing of a city street or section thereof, shall provide safety and directional equipment to include safety cones, reflective barrels and barricades for the closure. The permittee shall also provide a minimum of two off-duty certified state law enforcement officers, at permittees expense, posted at both sides of the closure to safely redirect traffic and maintain safety at the activity site. 
c.  Activities that require the closing of the sidewalk shall provide safety cones, safety tape, and a minimum of two personnel directing pedestrians safely around the activity site; 
d.  In the event that activity will require materials or equipment to be suspended by cable or moved overhead of the public, all areas where this may occur will be roped off with safety devices and activity personnel will be present to keep the public at a safe distance from activity. 
(3)  Allowable hours and times of operation. This division shall only apply to the central business district within the city. Due to the congestion of the public and vehicles that occurs during the end of week business days within this confined area, construction activities shall only occur between the days of Sunday and Thursday. 
(4)  Advanced notice required. All activity that will require the closing of a city street or section thereof, sidewalk or section thereof, shall be required to obtain a permit for such closure ten days in advance of closure to allow for public notification. 
(Ord. of 7-25-2018(1) ) 
Chapter 40 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal annexations, O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter and its rules and regulations are intended to serve the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city; 
(2)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
(3)  To ensure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments in conformance with public improvement plans of the city; 
(4)  To ensure adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments, especially for the purposes of ensuring that all building lots will be accessible to firefighting equipment and other emergency and service vehicles; 
(5)  To ensure the provision of needed open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; 
(6)  To ensure the adequate provision of water supply, stormwater drainage, sanitation, lighting, and other necessary improvements; 
(7)  To ensure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for the subdivider and land developer; 
(8)  To ensure, in general, the wise development of new land areas, in harmony with the comprehensive plan of the community; 
(9)  To ensure the accurate description of property and adequate and proper identification of property in public records; 
(10)  To help conserve and protect the natural, economic and scenic resources of the community; 
(11)  To help eliminate the costly maintenance problems which develop when streets and lots are laid out without proper consideration given to various public purposes; and 
(12)  To protect lot purchasers who generally lack the specialized knowledge to evaluate subdivision improvements and design. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 102) 
Sec. 40-2. - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to powers vested in cities by the state constitution, home rule powers, state administrative rules for the adoption and implementation of comprehensive plans, and the protection of vital areas of the state. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 103) 
Sec. 40-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative officer means the zoning administrator of the city, or his authorized representative. 
Alley means a private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to a building or abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Appeal means a request for a review of an administrative official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter, or an action taken by an administrative official in the application or enforcement of this chapter. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets. 
Comprehensive plan means those coordinated plans or portions thereof which have been prepared by or for the city council for the physical development of the jurisdiction; or any plans that designate plans or programs to encourage the most appropriate use of the land in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
Conservation areas, primary, means any property qualifying as conservation use property under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.4 and any steep slopes, floodplains, wetlands, water bodies, upland buffers around wetlands and water bodies, critical wildlife habitat, and sites of historic, cultural, or archaeological significance, located outside of building envelopes and lots established for building purposes. 
Conservation areas, secondary, means prime farmland, natural meadows, mature woodlands, farm fields, localized aquifer recharge areas, and lands containing scenic views and sites, located outside of building envelopes and lots established for building purposes. 
Conservation easement means a legally enforceable agreement between a property owner and the holder of the easement, with content meeting requirements of state law and in a form acceptable to the city attorney of a participating municipality with jurisdiction and recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county. A conservation easement restricts the existing and future use of the defined tract or lot to conservation use, agriculture, passive recreation, or other use approved by the city council of a participating municipality with jurisdiction and prohibits further subdivision or development. Such agreement also provides for the maintenance of open spaces and any improvements on the tract or lot. Such agreement cannot be altered except with the express written permission of the easement holder and any other co-signers. A conservation easement may also establish other provisions and contain standards that safeguard the tract or lot's special resources from negative changes. 
Conservation (open space) subdivision means a subdivision, as defined by this chapter, where open space is the central organizing element of the subdivision design and that identifies and permanently protects all primary and all or some of the secondary conservation areas within the boundaries of the subdivision. 
Corridor map means a map adopted by a city council which designates land to be reserved for the construction of future or improvement of existing transportation facilities. The corridor map establishes the width and termini of corridors as necessary to allow flexibility in planning the design of a transportation facility. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turn-around. 
Cul-de-sac, temporary, means a non-permanent vehicular turn-around located at the termination of a street. 
Curb cut means a provision for vehicular ingress or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
Deceleration lane means an added roadway lane, of a specified distance and which may include a taper, as approved by the city engineer, that permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use or purpose, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. 
Dedication plat means a plat that indicates property to be dedicated for public right-of-way or land for public use. 
Development means any manmade change of improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Easement means a non-possessory interest in land; a grant by a property owner for the use by the public, a corporation or persons, of a portion of land for a specified purpose or purposes. 
Escrow account means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee where the subdivider deposits cash, a note, a bond, or some other instrument readily convertible to cash for specific face value specified by the city engineer to cover the costs of required improvements. 
Habitat for endangered or threatened species means an area verified by the state department of natural resources as actually containing naturally occurring individuals of a species that has been listed as endangered or threatened under the federal Endangered Species Act, 16 USC 1531 et seq., and being likely to support the continued existence of that species by providing for a significant portion of that species' biological requirements, and that meets the definition of "natural conditions" as defined by this chapter. 
Homeowners' association means an organization formed for the maintenance and operation of the common areas of a development, where membership in the association is automatic with the purchase of a dwelling unit or lot within the development, with the ability to legally assess each owner of a dwelling unit or lot and which has authority to place a lien against all dwelling units and lots within the development. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands of the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, scraping, excavating, transporting, or filling of land; and any construction, rebuilding or alteration of a structure, but specifically excluding agricultural and gardening practices. 
Lane means a street designed for primary access to no more than ten residential dwelling units, where the residential environment is dominant and traffic is completely subservient to residential use. 
Letter of credit means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee whereby a subdivider secures an instrument from a bank or other institution or from a person with resources sufficient to cover the cost of improvements required by the city. The instrument pledges the creditor to pay the cost of improvements in case of default by the subdivider. 
Lot means a portion or parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development, or both, intended to be devoted to a common use or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, and having principal frontage on a public street or an approved private street. In determining the area and dimension of a lot, no part of the right-of-way may be included. 
Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of public street rights-of-way. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot depth means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot other than a corner lot which has frontage upon two or more streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 

Lot, flag, means a tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a public street is less than the required minimum width for construction of a building or structure on that lot. 
Lot frontage means the width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Lot of record means a parcel of land within the city limits which was properly platted and recorded in the clerk of superior court of the county's plat and deed records which existed prior to the adoption of zoning regulations in the city, or which has been lawfully subdivided in accordance with the city zoning regulations and subdivision regulations since their adoption or amendment, or which was lawfully subdivided prior to annexation into the city limits. 
Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the regulatory/required building line. 
Metes and bounds means a system of describing and identifying land by distances or measures (metes) and bearings or direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference, such as a monument or other marker or the corner of intersecting streets. 
Open space means any combination of primary conservation areas and secondary conservation areas, as defined in this chapter, that together form a permanent, undivided or relatively undivided, undeveloped area. As much as 25 percent of the open space may be devoted to active recreational facilities, as defined. Easements for electric transmission lines or any other above-ground improvement shall not be considered open space except as may be otherwise provided by this chapter. Stormwater management features such as lakes, ponds, and ways may be considered open space at the discretion of the administrative officer, provided that such areas are designed and maintained in a manner that contributes to open space and the aesthetics of the subdivision or land development. 
Performance bond means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee in the form of a bond, secured by the subdivider from a bonding company, in an amount specified by the city engineer to cover the costs of required improvements, and payable to the city. The city may call in the performance bond in the event the subdivider defaults on required improvements. 
Plat, final, means a finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information, certification, and all other elements and requirements set forth in this chapter, prepared for filing for record with the clerk of the county superior court. 
Plat, preliminary, means a drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate its general design. 
Professional engineer means an engineer duly registered or otherwise authorized by the state to practice in the field of civil engineering. 
Professional surveyor means a surveyor duly registered or otherwise authorized by the state to practice in the field of land surveying. 
Protective covenants means contracts made between private parties as to the manner in which land may be used, with the view toward protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. 
Recreation, active, means leisure activities that are facility oriented, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and ball fields. 
Recreation, passive, means leisure activities that are natural resource oriented, such as hiking trails, conservation areas, and nature preserves. 
Reservation means a method of holding land for future public use by showing proposed public areas on a subdivision plat. 
Reserved land means land shown on the corridor map as "reserved." 
Right-of-way means that area, distinguished from an easement, which is owned in fee-simple title by the city council or other government for the present or future use of roads, streets and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
Scenic views and sites means those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in a comprehensive plan of a participating municipality, or by other reasonable means. 
Sensitive natural areas means any area, as identified now or hereafter by the state department of natural resources, which contains one or more of the following: habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; rare or exemplary natural communities; significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; or other areas so designated by the department of natural resources; and which is sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
Shade tree means a tree in a public place, street right-of-way, or special easement, planted to provide canopy that will obscure the sun and heat from the ground. 
Sidewalk means a hard-surfaced pedestrian access area adjacent to or within the right-of-way of a public road. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare which is open to the general public and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, arterial, unless otherwise defined by the comprehensive plan of the city, means a major street connecting two or more towns or communities, connecting two highways of equal or greater capacity, or serving as the primary access to a large land area. A major arterial may also serve a large traffic generator (e.g., an industrial area) and perform a secondary function of providing local access. 
Street, collector, unless otherwise defined by the comprehensive plan of the city, means a public street whose function is to collect traffic from neighborhoods and local streets and which connects to another public street of equal of greater classification. A collector street also may provide direct access to adjacent properties. 
Street, half, means a portion of the ultimate width of a road or street where the remaining portion of the road or street shall be provided at a future date. 
Street, private, means a road or street that has not been accepted for maintenance by the city and that is not owned and maintained by a state, county, city, or another public entity. 
Street, public, means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Subdivision means the division of a parcel or tract of land into two or more lots for the purposes of creation of lots for development, the rearrangement of existing lot lines, or for the purpose of transfer of ownership. 
Subdivision, minor, means the subdivision of a tract of land into not more than five lots in which there are no street, drainage, or other requirements, and where each lot has minimum required frontage on a public street, and where there is adequate provision for potable water supply and wastewater management for each lot, and where all lots comply with the city zoning regulations. 
Transportation facilities means streets, highways, bikeways, sidewalks, and trails. 
Variance means a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of these regulations as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, §§ 302, 1002, 1102) 
Sec. 40-4. - Zoning regulations applicable. 
No land shall be platted and no land shall be developed except in accordance with chapter 46, the zoning regulations of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 201) 
Sec. 40-5. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations applicable. 
No land shall be platted and no land shall be developed except in accordance with the soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations of the city. Compliance with those regulations shall be coordinated by the applicant for subdivision or land development approval and the city with the development permitting requirements of the city zoning regulations and with the land development and improvement requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 202) 
Sec. 40-6. - Utility connections. 
No connections to city water and sewer shall be permitted except in compliance with applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 203) 
Sec. 40-7. - Reference to state and federal land subdivision laws. 
The subdivision of land within the city shall comply, as applicable, with the Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act, 15 USC 1701 et seq., and with the state Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. All subdivision plats shall also comply with applicable state laws regarding accuracy and content of all such subdivision plats. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 204) 
Sec. 40-8. - Special review of subdivisions along state routes. 
No subdivision plat containing land which abuts a state route shall be approved until such plat has been submitted for review and comment by the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 205) 
Sec. 40-9. - Delegation of authority to administrative officer. 
The mayor and city council hereby delegates to the administrative officer the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove exemption plats, preliminary plats, final plats, lot combination plats, boundary line adjustments, and dedication plats; provided, however, that such delegation does not authorize the administrative officer to accept public improvements for the city council. The administrative officer is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove land development and construction plans. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 401) 
Sec. 40-10. - Delegation of authority to city engineer. 
The city engineer is vested with the authority to require and approve, conditionally approve, or deny approval of preliminary plats, final plats, land development applications, and subdivision and land development improvements. The city engineer shall require improvement guarantees for public improvements as specified in this chapter. The city engineer is further authorized to promulgate additional technical standards and construction specifications for land development improvements not already specified by this chapter or the city's zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, water systems, sanitary sewer systems, streets, storm drainage systems, utilities, driveways, curb cuts, and parking lots. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 402) 
Sec. 40-11. - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall apply to all lands within the corporate limits of the city, as they existed at the time the ordinance from which this chapter is derived was adopted, and all lands subsequently annexed into the corporate limits. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 403) 
Sec. 40-12. - Land is one tract until subdivided. 
Until property proposed for subdivision has received final plat approval and been properly recorded, the land involving the subdivision shall be considered as one tract, or as otherwise legally recorded. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 404) 
Sec. 40-13. - Subdivision of land. 
No person shall subdivide land except in accordance with this chapter. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, owner, agent or subdivider, by deed or map, to sell, transfer, or subdivide any land until a preliminary plat, if required, and final plat have been approved by the administrative officer and final plat recorded in accordance with this chapter. The restriction applies to lands subdivided for nonresidential as well as residential uses. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from this chapter or from the penalties established herein. The city through its attorney or other designated official may enjoin such transfer of, sale, or agreement by appropriate action. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 405) 
Sec. 40-14. - Development of land. 
No person shall disturb or develop land except in accordance with this chapter. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, owner, agent or subdivider, by deed or map, to disturb or develop any land until a land development plans have been approved by the administrative officer in accordance with this chapter and chapter 46. No person shall commence construction of any improvements on any lot, prior to the approval of a preliminary plat if required by this chapter, nor prior to approval of construction plans and engineering plans for the improvements as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 406) 
Sec. 40-15. - Building and other permits. 
No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building, structure, or use, nor shall any excavation, grading, or land disturbance applications be approved, on any parcel of land regulated by this chapter that has not been approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 407) 
Sec. 40-16. - Public streets and lands. 
No land dedicated as a public street or for other public purpose shall be opened, extended or accepted as a public street or for any other public purpose unless required improvements are constructed in accordance with the specifications of this chapter and accepted by the city council. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 408) 
Sec. 40-17. - Lots must comply with the zoning regulations. 
No person shall subdivide land, and the administrative officer shall not approve any subdivision of land, unless the lots created pursuant to the subdivision meet or exceed all applicable requirements of chapter 46, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 409) 
Sec. 40-18. - Preliminary plat, development plans and development permit required. 
No person shall commence development, land disturbing activity, or construction of any improvements on any lot or land except in compliance with this chapter. No development permit shall be issued for land disturbance or the installation of improvements, prior to the approval of a preliminary plat of such land, if required by this chapter, and the approval of a development permit if required by chapter 46, nor prior to approval by the administrative officer and the city engineer of engineered plans for land disturbance and installation of improvements. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 410) 
Sec. 40-19. - Recording of subdivision plats. 
No subdivision plat, nor part thereof, shall be recorded in the superior court of the county, unless such plat has been approved for recording by the administrative officer. The clerk of the superior court of the county shall not record a plat of a subdivision, whether evidenced as a plat or as an attachment to a deed, unless such plat is a final plat approved by the administrative officer or designated representative and contains the administrative officer's signature thereon. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 411) 
Sec. 40-20. - Exemptions from plat approval. 
The following types of land subdivisions, transfers, and sales are specifically exempted from the plat approval requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that such exemptions shall not apply to land development requirements and improvement requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  The creation and sale of cemetery plots. 
(2)  The sale of lots consistent with previously approved and recorded plats or deeds. 
(3)  The creation of leaseholds for space within a multiple-occupancy building or the division of property into leaseholds (but not for sale) for commercial, industrial, or institutional use. 
(4)  The creation of leaseholds (but not for sale) for the agricultural use of property where the use does not involve the construction of a building to be used as a residence or for other purposes not directly related to agricultural use of the land or crops or livestock raised thereon. 
(5)  Any division of land to heirs through a judicial estate proceeding, or any division of land pursuant to a judicial partition, or any division of land occurring from the foreclosure of a deed of trust; provided, however, that such exemption shall not require the city to issue permits if the resulting lots or parcels fail to meet any applicable zoning ordinance provisions in chapter 46 regarding lot size, lot width, and other dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 412) 
Sec. 40-21. - Exemption from plan approval. 
The land development plan requirements specified in this chapter shall not apply to any individual lot which was platted in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and is to be used for a detached, single-family, fee-simple residence or two-family dwelling (duplex). Nor shall such land development plan requirements apply to any individual lot that lawfully existed (see definition of lot of record) that is (or is to be) developed for a detached, single-family, fee-simple residence or a two-family dwelling (duplex). A development permit, as required by the city zoning regulations, and the submission of land development plans pursuant to this chapter shall not be required for detached, single-family, fee-simple residences or two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 413) 
Sec. 40-22. - Pre-application conference. 
Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land, or a land development, is proposed to be made, the subdivider or land developer is encouraged (but not required) to consult early and informally with the administrative officer. The subdivider or land developer may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and its vicinity, and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision or land development. This preapplication conference is intended to permit an early evaluation of the subdivider's or land developer's intentions and coordination with the comprehensive plan of the city, and to provide the subdivider or land developer with the necessary regulations in order to properly accomplish the proposed project. No fee shall be charged for the preapplication review, and no formal application shall be required. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 501) 
Sec. 40-23. - Application for preliminary plat approval. 
The purpose of this section is to ensure compliance with the basic design concepts and improvement requirements of subdivisions through the submittal of a preliminary plat. Any subdivision involving the dedication of a public street or public land, and any subdivision involving a new private street, shall require the submission of a preliminary plat to the administrative officer for review by the administrative officer, city engineer, and design review board, and approval by the city council. Applications for preliminary plat approval shall meet the requirements of table 40.1. 
TABLE 40.1. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 

 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 502) 
Sec. 40-24. - Plat and plan specifications. 
Preliminary plats, land development plans, and final plats shall meet the following specifications as shown in table 40.2. 
TABLE 40.2. PLAT AND PLAN SPECIFICATIONS 

 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 503) 
Sec. 40-25. - Transmittal of preliminary plat to review agencies. 
The administrative officer shall transmit for review and comment a copy of the preliminary plat to the city engineer and, when involving property abutting a state route, to the state department of transportation. At his discretion, the administrative officer may transmit for review and comment a copy of the plat to applicable internal and external review agencies, such as but not limited to: the city attorney, the city fire chief, the city building inspector, the county health department, the state department of natural resources, and any other agency that may have an interest in or jurisdiction over the proposed subdivision. The administrative officer shall consider such comments and may recommend conditions of preliminary plat approval to be consistent with the comments. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 504) 
Sec. 40-26. - Review by the design review board. 
Upon receipt of a completed preliminary plat application, the administrative officer shall schedule the application for the next public meeting before the design review board and forward all pertinent materials in the application to the design review board for review. An application for preliminary plat approval must be submitted at least 30 days before the regular meeting date of the design review board to be considered on that agenda. The design review board shall have 30 days from the date it is first considered at a public meeting of the commission to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the preliminary plat application. The basis of the design review board's review of and action on a preliminary plat shall be whether the preliminary plat meets the purposes and requirements of this chapter and chapter 46. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 505) 
Sec. 40-27. - Approval by the city council. 
As soon as practicable after the design review board has made a recommendation, the preliminary plat application shall be scheduled for consideration by the city council. The city council may deny, approve, approve with conditions, or postpone action for a definite period on the preliminary plat. Approval of a preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of two years, after which time a complete application for development plan approval must be submitted. If a completed application for development plan approval is not submitted during that time, preliminary plat approval shall expire and be null and void. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 506) 
Sec. 40-28. - Amendments to preliminary plat approval. 
The administrative officer, in consultation with the city engineer when engineering considerations are involved, is authorized to approve minor amendments to preliminary plats (i.e., those that do not affect the public or private street configuration or that reconfigure lots and which do not increase the number of lots). The application requirements and procedures for amending preliminary plats, unless minor in nature, shall be the same as for preliminary plat applications. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 507) 
Sec. 40-29. - Submittal of land development plans. 
Following approval of the preliminary plat for a land subdivision, or if subdivision is not proposed, upon proposing a land development, the subdivider or land developer shall submit an application for land development approval per the requirements of table 5.1 for land development plans. The land development plans shall at minimum include information specified in table 5.2 for land development plans. The plans shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Utility plans providing information regarding the location, size, length and type of all water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage improvements showing their minor structures, appendages and connections with existing systems, and the approximate location of service lines from the lots to the proposed utility lines. 
(2)  Street plans providing information as follows: street profiles and cross sections as required by the city engineer, type of sub-base, type of paving base, type curb and gutter; type street paving and type improvements within the street right-of-way outside of the paved area. 
(3)  Grading plans and soil sedimentation and erosion control plans. 
(4)  In addition to utility, street, grading and erosion control plans, the administrative officer or city engineer may require a hydrological study or other engineering studies as may be necessary, depending upon the scope and extent of the development project. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 508) 
Sec. 40-30. - Review and approval of plans. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the completed land development plans by the administrative officer, he shall review them for compliance with this chapter, the zoning regulations in chapter 46, and any other applicable local regulations. The administrative officer shall have ten working days to certify compliance with planning and zoning requirements and non-engineering aspects of the land development plans. The only basis upon which the administrative officer may deny a development plan is the failure of the application to meet the requirements of this chapter or the city zoning regulations, or any other applicable local regulations or the failure of the development plans to be consistent with preliminary plat approval, if required. 
(b)  Upon such certification of compliance, the administrative officer shall stamp them with the date approved and forward all three sets of plans to the city engineer. The city engineer shall have ten working days to review and approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the plans. If approved or conditionally approved, the city engineer shall provide his signature on the approved plans indicating the approval, retain one copy of the plans for records, return one copy to the applicant, and submit one copy to the administrative officer. If disapproved, the city engineer shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for the disapproval. If the city engineer requires changes, they shall be rerouted to the administrative officer for review. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 509) 
Sec. 40-31. - Issuance of development permit. 
Upon approval or conditional approval of development plans, the administrative officer shall issue a development permit as required by chapter 46. Issuance of a development permit shall constitute authorization for the applicant to begin land disturbing activities and the construction of improvements, subject to any grading permits, soil erosion permits, or other permits and permissions as may be required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 510) 
Sec. 40-32. - Application for final plat approval. 
In the case of a subdivision, after approval of a preliminary plat and upon completion of required improvements, the subdivider may then submit an application for final plat approval. The application shall meet the requirements for final plat applications as specified in table 5.1, and the final plat shall meet the specifications for final plats shown in table 5.2. In addition, the applicant for final plat shall submit to the administrative office the following: 
(1)  One time-stable reproducible film copy or original of the plat; 
(2)  A letter from the city engineer certifying that all required improvements have been constructed and meet the specifications of the city. The subdivider shall, upon completion of the required improvements outlined in this chapter, request in writing that the city engineer report by letter that all improvements required by this chapter have been completed according to city specifications. When such improvements comply, the city engineer shall write a letter of compliance addressed to the subdivider with a copy to the administrative officer stating the subdivision complies with the provisions of this chapter. Prior to writing such letter, the administrative officer or building inspector shall inspect all underground installations, sub-grades, bases or courses of asphalt, and such improvements shall not be covered or hidden before they are inspected and accepted by the administrative officer or building inspector; 
(3)  A letter from the applicable electricity service company may be required indicating that service points for individual lots and street lights, if required, have been installed; 
(4)  A performance bond for those required improvements not yet completed (e.g., pavement topping), if such delay in completion of required improvements is permitted by the administrative officer. The performance bond shall be: 
a.  Conditioned upon the faithful performance by the subdivider or developer of all work required within a specified time; 
b.  Payable to, and for the indemnification of, the city; 
c.  In an amount equal to the cost of construction of the required improvements not yet completed, plus an additional ten percent of the costs, as calculated by the city engineer; 
d.  With surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the state; and 
e.  Approved as to form and content by the city attorney; 
(5)  A maintenance bond, cash deposit, escrow account or other guarantee/instrument of financial security as approved by the city attorney to ensure maintenance of required improvements in the subdivision for a period of one year, payable to the city and in the amount of ten percent of the city engineer's estimate of actual construction cost. If, upon being notified of failure of required improvements, the subdivider does not correct the deficiency or commence work within 30 days of notice, it shall be deemed to be a failure on the bond, and the city shall have the right to make the necessary repairs, either by public work or by private contract, and the bond or instrument of financial security shall be liable for the full amount of the cost of the repairs, as determined by the city engineer; 
(6)  As-built drawings acceptable to the city engineer of all streets showing the planned and actual location of all utility lines; centerline profile of all streets with final grades; and horizontal and vertical alignment including profiles and invert elevations of all storm and sanitary sewer lines; provided, however, the administrative officer may waive this final plat submittal requirement for a set period of time if improvements or as-built drawings are not complete, subject to subsequent denial of building permits should the drawings not be submitted. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 511) 
Sec. 40-33. - Final plat specifications and certificates. 
The final plat shall be drawn to comply with the specifications in table 5.2 for final plats. Certificates shall be included on the final plat, as follows: 
(1)  Final surveyor's certificate. 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that this plat meets all requirements of the city subdivision and land development regulations and zoning regulations. 

 
(2)  Certificate of ownership and dedication. 
(State) 
(City) 
The owner of record of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that he owns the land shown on this plat to be subdivided and hereby dedicates to the public forever, subject to formal acceptance by the city council, the following: 

 

 
(3)  Certificate of approval. 
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL 
The administrative officer and city engineer of the city certify that this plat complies with the city zoning regulations, conditions of zoning, and the subdivision and land development regulations of the city, and that this plat is hereby approved and released for recording purposes. 

 
(4)  Certification of health department approval. 
This is to certify that this plat and proposed water and sewerage facilities are acceptable. 

 
(5)  Certificate of recording. 
This plat has been recorded in plat book ____________ , page ____________ , in the records of the Clerk of Superior Court, Rabun County, Georgia. 

 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 512) 
Sec. 40-34. - Action on the final plat. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the completed final plat application, the administrative officer may transmit for review and comment a copy of the plat to applicable review agencies. The administrative officer shall have ten working days to approve or disapprove of the plat. The administrative officer may grant final plat approval if the following conditions, as applicable, are met: 
(1)  A preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, if required, has been previously approved by the city council. 
(2)  Where new improvements are involved in the subdivision, development plans have been approved by the administrative officer and the city engineer, all improvements have been installed, improvements have been inspected by the city engineer, and subdivision improvement guarantees as required by this chapter have been submitted. 
(3)  The final plat meets all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  A complete final plat application has been submitted, including all supporting materials required by this chapter for final plats. 
(b)  Final plats and applications that meet the above-referenced conditions shall be considered a ministerial action by the administrator. Denial of a final plat shall be permitted only upon specific findings that one or more of the above-referenced conditions have not been met. 
(c)  If the plat is in conformance with the preliminary plat and is approved by the administrative officer and the city engineer, the signatures of the administrative officer and city engineer shall be placed on the reproducible film copy or original of the plat. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 513) 
Sec. 40-35. - Recording of final plats. 
Upon approval and without undue delay, the administrative officer shall have approved final plats recorded in the records of the clerk of the superior court of the county, and a time-stable reproducible film copy or original filed in the office of the administrative officer. The copy of the original shall not require an engineer or surveyor's stamp to protect the liability of the professionals involved. Recording fees shall be included in the fee charged for final plats and therefore paid by the city. The clerk of the superior court shall indicate on the filed copy, as well as the time-stable reproducible film copy or original, the book and page number in the county records where the final plat is recorded. Recordation of a final plat constitutes approval to begin the sale or transfer of subdivision lots. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 514) 
Sec. 40-36. - Assignment of street addresses. 
At the time a building permit is proposed, the administrative officer shall ensure that the property has been assigned a street address. Addresses shall be as assigned or approved by the county 911 staff. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 515) 
Sec. 40-37. - Dedications of public streets and acceptance of improvements. 
(a)  At any date after one year has passed since the date of final plat approval, the subdivider may petition in writing to the administrative officer for the city council by resolution to accept public streets and other dedications, in whole or in part, within the subdivision. The improvements shall not be accepted for maintenance until approved by resolution by the city council. Any instrument of financial guarantee shall be returned to the subdivider upon acceptance of public streets and improvements by the city council. 
(b)  Subdivision streets and rights-of-way and other lands to be dedicated to the public shall be accepted by the city only upon the delivery to the city council of a general warranty deed conveying fee-simple title of such rights-of-way and lands. The warranty deed shall be accompanied by an attorney's certificate of title and a tax transfer form addressed to the city council certifying that the grantor in such deed is vested with marketable fee-simple title to the property conveyed thereby, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, and further that the individual executing such deed has full authority to do so. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 516) 
Sec. 40-38. - Minor subdivisions. 
The administrative officer is authorized to review and approve or deny applications for minor subdivisions as defined by this chapter, as a final plat, provided that application is made for minor subdivision approval in accordance with all specifications for final plats as required by this chapter. The county health department shall also review and approve the plat. The administrative officer shall not approve a minor subdivision if any portion of the land to be subdivided was part of a minor subdivision approved by the city within the last three years prior to application. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 517) 
Sec. 40-39. - Lot combinations and boundary line adjustments. 
(a)  An existing lot line forming the boundary between two conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision or a lot line between lots or parcels that have merged to form one building lot may be removed or eliminated through a final plat revision process which conforms to the final plat requirements of this chapter. Where separate lots of land are proposed to be combined, they shall be submitted to the administrative officer as a final plat for review, approval and recording. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat depicting all lots involved in the lot combination shall be required to be approved by the administrative officer and recorded as a final plat. Such combination plat shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision, if applicable, and shall indicate thereon that the replat is for the purpose of removing the lot lines between specific lots. 
(b)  One or more existing lot lines forming boundaries between conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision or one or more lot lines between abutting lots or parcels may be adjusted through a final plat revision process that requires the approval of the administrative officer and recording of a plat meeting the specifications of a final plat. In case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat of the entire lots involved in the boundary line adjustment shall be required to be approved by the administrative officer and recorded. 

(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 518) 
Sec. 40-40. - Distribution of recorded final plat. 
(a)  The final plat is a source of essential information to tax officials, public safety officials, and utility officials, among others. The administrative officer shall be responsible for ensuring that each agency listed in this section receives a copy of the final recorded plat with assigned addresses: 
(1)  The county tax commissioner. 
(2)  The county tax assessor. 
(3)  The county health department. 
(4)  The city police department. 
(5)  The city fire department. 
(6)  The city building inspector. 
(7)  The city engineer. 
(8)  The Unites States Postal Service (local postmaster). 
(b)  At the discretion of the administrative officer, additional agencies or persons may be added to the list in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 519) 
Secs. 40-41—40-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORM DRAINAGE AND UTILITIES 

Sec. 40-69. - Easements. 
Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage easement of minimum 20 feet in width. Easements for storm pipes shall be at least ten feet wide, and all easements shall be provided for all drainage facilities as approved by the city engineer. Where easements are needed for utility locations, they shall be provided by the subdivider or land developer to the appropriate utility provider. Easements having a minimum width of 15 feet shall be provided where required for utility lines and underground mains and cables. Where easements are needed for public water or sanitary sewer lines, they shall be provided as determined appropriate by the city engineer but shall be no less than 20 feet wide. All easements required pursuant to this section shall be shown on the preliminary plat if required, final plat if required, and land development plans. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 901) 
Sec. 40-70. - Storm drainage system. 
Storm drainage is handled by meeting the state environmental protection division's requirements for soil erosion and sediment control. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 902) 
Sec. 40-71. - Water system. 
All water mains shall be installed along with a service connection for each lot or land development and be in operating condition prior to final plat approval if required and paving installation. The water system shall be connected to the city water system unless another source approved by the county health department is accepted by the city council. All pipes, valves, and other components shall conform to city and county health department specifications and regulations and city engineer. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 903) 
Sec. 40-72. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Fire hydrants shall be located and set in accordance with city specifications. Fire hydrants shall be required for all nonresidential land developments and all subdivisions. Fire hydrants with appropriate water pressure at appropriate intervals throughout the subdivision or land development shall be provided by the subdivider or land developer as required by the city fire department. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 500 feet apart and within 250 feet of any principal dwelling. Hydrants, fittings, valves and fire department connections shall be approved by the fire department. 
(b)  Fire department connections shall be not less than 18 inches or more than 36 inches above the level of the adjoining ground or paving. The thread of such connections shall be uniform with that used by the fire department. To eliminate the repavement of streets, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street within the right-of-way shared by such underground utilities. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 904) 
Sec. 40-73. - Sanitary sewerage system. 
(a)  When, in the written opinion of the city engineer, public sanitary sewers are within reasonable access of the subdivision or land development, the subdivider or land developer shall provide sanitary sewer services to each lot within the bounds of the subdivision or land development. All street sewers serving lots in the subdivision shall be installed by the subdivider. A formula may be developed by the city engineer to provide for a sharing of the costs of other sewer facilities needed to serve the subdivision or land development when certain of the required sewer facilities are necessary to serve other subdivisions or land developments in the same drainage basin. 
(b)  When, in the written opinion of the city engineer, a public sanitary sewer is not accessible, an alternate method of sewage disposal for each lot or the land development may be used when in compliance with the standards of the county health department, if accepted by the city council. 
(c)  If public sewerage is not available but is expected to be available within a six-month time period after completion of the subdivision or land development, an alternate method for sewage disposal for individual lots or the land development will be required on an interim basis. In this instance, unless otherwise determined by the city council, the developer will be required to construct a complete sanitary sewer system for the subdivision or land development, including outfall lines, street sewers, and service stubs to individual lots. All sewers will be plugged and otherwise protected to ensure serviceability at the time of connection to the public system, and will conform to the specifications of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 905) 
Sec. 40-74. - Utilities. 
The gas and electric systems and any other underground utility system, when it is provided in a subdivision or land development, shall be installed along with service connections before any paving of streets. All utility facilities, including, but not limited to, gas, electric power, telephone, and cable television, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision or land development. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 906) 
Secs. 40-75—40-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CORRIDOR MAP 

Sec. 40-92. - Purpose and intent. 
The purposes of a corridor map are to implement local comprehensive plans, especially transportation and thoroughfare plans, by reserving land needed for future transportation facilities designated by a plan. The corridor map is intended to provide a basis for coordinating the provision of transportation facilities with new development by designating corridors where the construction and improvement of transportation facilities is expected, to restrict the construction or expansion of permanent structures in the intended right-of-way of planned transportation facilities as indicated on a corridor map, and to protect the rights of landowners whose land is reserved on a corridor map. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1001) 
Sec. 40-93. - Findings and corridor map adoption. 
The city council reserves the right individually or collectively to adopt a corridor map that is consistent in all respects with the comprehensive plan or plans of participating municipalities. Prior to adoption of a corridor map, the following actions shall be taken to ensure procedural due process: 
(1)  Prior to public hearing, if the proposed corridor map includes land intended for transportation facilities to be constructed or improved by governmental units other than the participating municipalities, a copy of the proposed corridor map shall be submitted to the chief executive officer of each such governmental unit who shall be allowed 30 days to indicate in writing any reserved land for transportation facilities for which they are responsible that they want removed from the corridor map, in which case such reserved land shall be removed from the corridor map. 
(2)  At least 15 days before the public hearing, the administrative officer shall notify the public of the date, time, place, and nature of the public hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the territory of the local government or governments with jurisdiction. 
(3)  The administrative officer shall notify all owners of parcels of land that include proposed reserved land of the date, time, place, and nature of the public hearing by mail at least 15 days before the public hearing. 
(4)  The city council shall hold a public hearing at the date, time, and place advertised, and afford all interested individuals the opportunity to be heard concerning the proposed corridor map. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1003) 
Sec. 40-94. - General provisions. 
The administrative officer shall not issue any permit pertaining to zoning or development on land regulated by this article except pursuant to the procedures and in compliance with this article. This article does not forbid or restrict the use of any reserved land that does not constitute the development of that land, nor does this article forbid or restrict development on the unreserved portion of any reserved land. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1004) 
Sec. 40-95. - Development permit required to develop reserved land. 
An owner of reserved land who proposes to develop reserved land shall apply to the administrative officer for a development permit. It is unlawful to carry out development upon land shown as reserved on the corridor map without securing a development permit as required by chapter 46. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1005) 
Sec. 40-96. - Public hearing and notice on development permit. 
Upon receiving an application for a development permit involving reserved land as shown on an adopted corridor map, the administrative officer shall arrange for the application to be scheduled for public hearing before the city council. The applicant (and the governmental unit, if land is reserved for a public use by a governmental unit other than the local government) shall be notified in writing of the date, time, and place of the hearing, by written mail, personal service, or facsimile, at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. The public shall be given notice of the date, time, place, and nature of the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. The applicant shall, at the hearing, have an opportunity, personally or through counsel, to present evidence and argument in support of his application, as shall any governmental unit or interested individual that has an interest in the application. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1006) 
Sec. 40-97. - Action. 
Following the public hearing, the city council may take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Approve the development permit as proposed, with or without conditions, modify the mapped corridor to remove all or part of the reserved land from the mapped corridor, and issue with or without conditions the development permit authorizing development on the land removed from the mapped corridor. 
(2)  Modify the proposed development permit application and issue it for development as modified, with or without conditions, if the development can reasonably be accomplished on the subject parcel without encroaching on the reserved land. 
(3)  Delay action on the development permit for a defined period of time not to exceed three months for the purpose of any of the following: negotiating with the property owner for the purchase of all or a part of the reserved land by the governmental agency responsible for the transportation facilities; acquiring the reserved land voluntarily; acquiring a negative easement over the reserved land that prevents the property owner from building on the reserved land; taking the reserved land through eminent domain and the payment of just compensation. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1007) 
Sec. 40-98. - Authority to acquire reserved land for public use. 
After consideration of the development permit by the city council, the city council or other governmental unit responsible for the transportation facilities may, but shall not be obligated to, negotiate for the voluntary dedication of the land, enter into option to purchase, or it may initiate condemnation proceedings subject to applicable state laws and use its powers of eminent domain. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1008) 
Sec. 40-99. - Final action on the development permit. 
If the city council delays action on the development permit as provided by this article and the governmental agency responsible for transportation facilities on the reserved land fails to arrange for the legal acquisition of all or a part of the reserved land within the specified time period which shall not exceed three months, then the city council shall approve the development permit, with or without conditions, or in the absence of such approval, the development permit shall be deemed approved as submitted. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1009) 
Secs. 40-100—40-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 40-127. - Purpose and intent. 
This article is intended to provide for residential subdivisions that are designed based first and foremost on the preservation of open space, but that accommodate the full extent of development that would otherwise be legally possible under conventional subdivision designs, and that: 
(1)  Minimize the environmental and visual impacts of new development on critical resources and historically and culturally significant sites and structures. 
(2)  Contribute to an interconnected network of permanent open space in the community and provide for undivided or relatively undivided open spaces within new developments. 
(3)  Create a greater diversity of living environments than is possible with conventional residential subdivision developments. 
(4)  Foster informal social interaction among neighborhood residents in common open spaces. 
(5)  Reduce the demand on public expenditures for open space, parkland, play fields, and other areas for active and passive recreation. 
(6)  Encourage compact patterns that reduce capital costs by requiring less linear footage distances of roads and utilities than conventional subdivision development. 
(7)  Offer greater opportunities to implement environmentally sensitive sewage treatment and disposal systems. 
(8)  Meet design requirements and guidelines established in this article for the protection of conservation areas, the subdivision of land, the location and orientation of homes and structures, and the installation of improvements. 
(9)  Permit open space conservation subdivisions by right so that they are no more difficult to gain approval from the city council than are conventional subdivisions. 

(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1101) 
Sec. 40-128. - Relationship to other regulations. 
(a)  Zoning districts and permitted uses. Conservation subdivisions as described and regulated in this article are permitted as a by-right permitted use in all residential zoning districts. They are considered appropriate in exurban, rural, suburban, and urban areas. Use restrictions of the zoning district shall continue to apply. 
(b)  Zoning district densities. Conservation subdivisions shall not exceed the residential density in units per acre as established for the residential zoning district in which it is located. 
(c)  Lot size and width. Minimum lot sizes, minimum lot widths, and building setbacks of the residential zoning district in which the conservation subdivision is located may be reduced to no less than 50 percent of the required lot size or lot width for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(d)  Building setbacks. Building setbacks shall be proposed on the preliminary plat and shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(e)  Subdivision regulations. Conservation subdivisions shall be considered and processed in accordance with preliminary and final plats requirements as specified in this article, except that in addition, the criteria for approval and grounds for disapproval as provided in this article shall also apply to decisions on preliminary plats. 
(f)  Improvement requirements. Open space conservation subdivisions shall meet the improvement requirements of this article. Where design considerations for lots and blocks as more specifically recommended in this article, they shall be considered applicable recommendations in lieu of those found in other articles of this article which would otherwise be applied. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1103) 
Sec. 40-129. - Primary conservation areas. 
Primary conservation areas on lands in conventional subdivisions are permitted to be platted and included in adjacent residential lots. In contrast, a conservation subdivision incorporates and shall include all primary conservation areas into undivided or relatively undivided, permanent, open space. Primary conservation areas, as defined by this article, include the following: habitats for endangered or threatened species, wetlands, aquifer recharge areas, floodplains, water bodies, shorelines, and adjacent riparian zones or upland buffers, historic, cultural, and archaeological sites, and steep slopes. 

Primary Conservation Areas 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1104) 
Sec. 40-130. - Secondary conservation areas. 
Secondary conservation areas on lands in conventional subdivisions are rarely identified and conserved. In contrast, a conservation subdivision identifies and shall identify secondary conservation areas and shall integrate all or a portion of them into undivided or relatively undivided, permanent, open spaces. 

Secondary Conservation Areas 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1105) 
Sec. 40-131. - Required open space specifications. 
(a)  Minimum percent of site area. Each open space conservation subdivision shall provide a minimum of 40 percent of its total land area as open space, as defined by this article. Areas of aboveground utility right-of-way and impervious surfaces must be excluded from the minimum 40 percent. 
(b)  Minimum size. The minimum amount of open space required to qualify for an open space conservation subdivision shall be 1½ contiguous acres. The purpose of this minimum open space acreage is to avoid development proposals where minor subdivisions are used simply to reduce lot sizes and development costs or that provide only small, scattered open spaces that would not functionally contribute to the overall open space network of the surrounding area. 
(c)  Permitted uses. In the case of farmland conversion, part of the open space within a conservation subdivision may be permitted to be retained in the hands of the original farmer/landowner or leased to a farmer for agricultural, pasture, or horticulture uses, so long as the activity is undertaken using best management practices to reduce environmental impacts to the extent possible. Open space may not be used for golf courses, roadways, or water impoundments. No more than 25 percent of the open space may by used for active recreation spaces. Uses not expressly authorized via the preliminary plat process are prohibited. 
(d)  Open spaces shall be named. Each open space shall be given a name appropriate to its purpose and design. Acceptable identifying types of names for open spaces include, but are not limited to, "Common," "Park," "Green," "Meadow," "Woods," "Farm," and "Historic Site." 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1106) 
Sec. 40-132. - Conservation easement required. 
All primary conservation areas, and all secondary conservation areas shown on the preliminary plat and required to be retained as open space, shall be permanently protected from further subdivision, development, and unauthorized use by a conservation easement. A conservation easement, as defined, shall be approved by the city and co-signed by the city and donated to a conservation organization or land trust; or co-signed by the city, donated to a homeowners' association and co-signed by a conservation organization or land trust; or donated to the city if accepted by the city and co-signed by a conservation organization or land trust. In the case of farmland conversion, part of the open space within a conservation subdivision may be permitted to be retained in the hands of the original farmer/landowner if subject to a conservation easement meeting the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1107) 
Sec. 40-133. - Guidelines for drafting conservation easements. 
The following guidelines are offered for drafting conservation easements and may be required by the city council: 
(1)  The easement recognizes and describes in a statement of purpose the special qualities of the property subject to the easement. The easement must include a map of the tract noting all significant features within the area. The easement clearly identifies the owner of the property subject to the easement, the holder of the easement, and co-signer, and the responsibilities of the property owner, easement holder, and co-signer. 
(2)  The easement specifically and clearly identifies the boundaries of the property subject to the easement, preferably by metes and bounds legal description and survey plat. 
(3)  The easement contains restrictions as to what the owner may do with the property and specifically delineates what may not be done with the property. Limitations may include, but may not be confined to, prohibitions against subdivision, earthmoving, dumping, signs, utility lines, construction, changes to existing structures, and uses made of the property. 
(4)  The easement provides for the right of the easement holder and co-signer to inspect the property to ensure observance of restrictions. It also provides for enforcement procedures. 
(5)  The easement provides for the maintenance of property. 
(6)  The easement contains provisions governing its amendment, including provisions that the easement shall not be altered except with the express written permission of the easement holder, property owner, and any co-signers. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1108) 
Sec. 40-134. - Homeowners' association. 
Open spaces may be owned and managed in common by a homeowners' association, subject to compliance with the provisions of this article and the following requirements: 
(1)  The developer of the conservation subdivision shall provide to the administrative official for approval, prior to the approval of a preliminary plat, a description of the homeowners' association, including bylaws and methods for maintaining open space. The developer of the open space conservation subdivision shall provide a property management plan or an estimate of the costs and staff requirements for the maintenance, operation, and insurance of the open space and any facilities it includes in the description of methods for maintaining the subdivision's open space. 
(2)  The homeowners' association shall be established by the conservation subdivision developer and endowed with a financial subsidy from the developer prior to the approval of a final plat on the property involving an open space conservation subdivision. 
(3)  Homeowners' association membership of each non-open space lot owner in the open space conservation subdivision shall be mandatory (required) and automatic. 
(4)  Unless maintenance is assigned to a conservation organization or land trust, the homeowners' association shall be responsible for maintenance, insurance, and taxes on the open space within the open space conservation subdivision. In such cases, the association shall be required to assess dues for the maintenance of open space, purchase of insurance, and payment of taxes, unless another income source is proven to be available. Members of the association shall share equitably the costs of open space maintenance as indicated in bylaws. The association shall be empowered with the legal ability to place liens on non-open space lot owners for failure to pay association dues. 
(5)  The homeowners' association shall not be dissolved without the consent of the city council. If common ownership of open spaces by a homeowners' association is proposed and approved, then open spaces shall be subject to permanent deed and final plat restrictions or covenants on the future use, development, and subdivision of open spaces, in addition to the requirement of a conservation easement. 
(6)  The city council may, upon recommendation of the administrative officer, require that the homeowners' association establish a minimum amount of funds to be initially deposited and maintained in a maintenance account. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1109) 
Sec. 40-135. - Fee simple dedication to the city. 
(a)  Dedication in fee-simple ownership to the public for recreational or open space use is a possible mechanism for the permanent retention and maintenance of open spaces within the conservation subdivision, at the sole discretion of the city council, and subject to the following in addition to other applicable provisions of this article: 
(1)  Dedication to the city shall only be approved if the city council finds that the size, shape, location, type of open space, or cost of development or maintenance of such open space or the availability of open space would make public ownership desirable or necessary. 
(2)  The decision to accept open spaces for fee-simple public ownership shall be at the sole discretion of the city council but guided by recommendations of the administrative officer, design review board, and the comprehensive plan as it pertains to open space acquisition. 
(3)  The city council generally will require dedication of all open space or park and recreation areas indicated for acquisition in the comprehensive plan or capital improvement program. 
(b)  The city council may require a maintenance bond or other financial security with duration of 12 months following public acceptance in an amount sufficient to ensure that such lands do not cause unwarranted public expenditures because of faulty conditions or construction. The city council shall have authority to cash the bond in the event substandard conditions are evident. Otherwise, following the one-year period following public dedication, with satisfactory performance, the city council shall return the performance bond to the subdivider. 
(c)  In addition to the required conservation easement, a deed for open space lands in a form acceptable to the city attorney in favor of the city shall be signed and recorded prior to the approval of any final plat pertaining to land within the conservation subdivision. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1110) 
Sec. 40-136. - Application. 
As a part of the preliminary plat application, the applicant for a conservation subdivision shall, in addition to the requirements for preliminary plats specified in this article, submit an analysis of existing features on the site, which shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
(1)  Significant wildlife habitats, if any. If information on habitats is not available, the wildlife potential of various soil types on the site shall be identified and examined. 
(2)  Soils, including analysis of suitability for septic tanks, erosion potential, prime farmland, and identification of hydric soils. 
(3)  Wetlands. 
(4)  Floodplains. Areas of 100-year floodplains as identified on flood hazard boundary maps or flood insurance rate maps developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(5)  Steep slopes. 
(6)  Historic, archaeological, and cultural features. 
(7)  Tree cover/woodlands. 
(8)  Views into and out from the site, and any scenic qualities. 
(9)  Groundwater recharge areas. 
(10)  Property boundaries. 
(11)  Existing roads and structures. 
(12)  Greenspaces and trails traversing or adjacent to the site. 
(13)  Planned boundaries of open space. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1111) 
Sec. 40-137. - Consideration. 
Approval or denial of a preliminary plat for a conservation subdivision shall, in addition to criteria specified elsewhere in this article for consideration of preliminary plats, be based on the extent to which the plat meets the following criteria: 
(1)  All primary conservation areas are protected as permanent open space. 
(2)  A sufficient amount of secondary conservation areas are protected as permanent open space, as opposed to being devoted to lots and other uses. 
(3)  The configuration of the open space tract is contiguous and undivided, or open space is provided in relatively undivided tracts that cannot reasonably be reconfigured into one contiguous, undivided tract. 
(4)  The open space conservation subdivision meets the regulations specified in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1112) 
Sec. 40-138. - Justifiable grounds for denial. 
Reasons for the denial of a preliminary plat of a conservation subdivision include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  The application fails to fully identify primary and secondary conservation areas. 
(2)  The proposed method of sewage treatment is inappropriate for the site or found to be potentially dangerous to public health. 
(3)  One or more of the lots within the open space conservation subdivision are too small to meet the minimum lot size established by this article or even if compliant are out of character with residences on adjoining or nearby properties. 
(4)  One or more of the lots are significantly large or wide, such that their design contributes to an unnecessary decrease in the amount of open space retained on site. 
(5)  The street configuration does not provide for connectivity, or preserve natural features, or it is found to be inconsistent with the open space character of the subject property and its surroundings. 
(6)  The proposed open space network is divided, not functional, inconsistent with open space plans of the city with jurisdiction, or does not provide for the protection of the most valuable secondary conservation areas on the site given the natural and scenic properties inherent on the site. 
(7)  The proposed open space network fails to maximize the length of the common boundary between conservation areas on site and conservation areas or parkland abutting the open space conservation subdivision site. 
(8)  The preliminary plat appears to be submitted for the major purpose of circumventing minimum lot size or minimum lot width requirements or improvement requirements that would otherwise be required for conventional subdivisions pursuant to the city zoning regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1113) 
Secs. 40-139—40-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 40-160. - Administration and interpretation. 
The administrative officer shall administer and interpret the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1201) 
Sec. 40-161. - Additional specifications. 
The city engineer is hereby authorized to prepare and adopt standard drawings and constructions specifications for private and public improvements not specified in this article. Upon their adoption by the city council, they shall become mandatory. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1202) 
Sec. 40-162. - Variances. 
The city council shall be authorized to, upon application by the subdivider or land developer, grant a variance or variances upon a showing that each of the following criteria have been met which support the granting of a variance to the requirements of this article. The process of varying this article is distinguished from variances to zoning provisions as authorized by the city zoning regulations. 
(1)  There are unusual, exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property that do not apply generally to other property in the same vicinity or use district, and such conditions are not the result of the owner's or occupant's own actions. Such conditions may include topography, unique natural conditions, surroundings of the subject property, or the size or peculiar shape of the lot. 
(2)  As a result of such unusual circumstance or conditions, there is an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulties that render it difficult to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The authorization of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity or district in which the property is located, and the variance will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the provisions of this article. 
(4)  The variance approved is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the lots, land, building or structure. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1203) 
Sec. 40-163. - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by an interpretation or decision of the administrative official or city engineer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter may file an appeal to the city council. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1204) 
Sec. 40-164. - Enforcement; violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the administrative officer to enforce this article and to bring to the attention of the city attorney any violations or lack of compliance therewith. The administrative officer may delegate enforcement functions, powers and duties assigned by this article to other staff as may be appropriate, without the need to reflect such delegation by formal action. 
(b)  The administrative officer is hereby authorized and directed to deny and withhold permits or permissions on any new project or application pursuant to this article or other ordinances of the city where the applicant, applicant's business or agent has failed or refused to comply with this article. 
(c)  The administrative officer is hereby authorized to issue written stop work and cease and desist orders for any activity that fails to comply with the provisions of this article. Such stop work or cease and desist orders may be lifted at such time as the administrative officer is satisfied that a good faith effort is being made to comply with applicable provisions of this article. Nothing shall prevent the administrative officer from reissuing stop work and cease and desist orders where warranted. 
(d)  In any case where any land is, or is proposed to be, used in violation of this article, the administrative officer, with the assistance of the city attorney as may be required, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement, or any appropriate action of actions, or proceeding to prevent, enjoin or abate such unlawful use. 
(e)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by fine not to exceed $2,000.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both, as determined by the court of proper jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1205) 
Sec. 40-165. - Fees. 
The following fees are hereby established, the intention being to recover the costs of professional review, including engineering, planning, and zoning compliance. 

 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1209) 
Chapter 42 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; off-road vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq.; equipment and inspection of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; use of speed detection devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2 et seq.; cities and counties authorized to enact ordinances for removal of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Authority of police and fire department officials to enforce chapter. 
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to such duty to enforce all traffic laws of this city. In addition, officers of the fire department when at the scene of a fire may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers preserved, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); obedience to persons directing traffic required, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-2. 
Sec. 42-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the roads of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the chief of police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them, shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 66-3) 
Sec. 42-3. - Parental responsibility. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years to permit, whether knowingly or through ineffective control or supervision, such minor to violate any provision of this Code or state law regarding the operation of vehicles. 
(Code 1999, § 66-2) 
Sec. 42-4. - Traffic, speed and other zones; signs and traffic control devices. 
(a)  Upon approval of the mayor and council, the chief of police is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)  Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians. 
(3)  Traffic lanes. 
(4)  Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones. 
(5)  Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices. 
(6)  Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the city. 
(b)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the manual on uniform traffic control devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(c)  The city clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate official map setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs and other traffic control devices. The map and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by the mayor and council and the map shall be known as the official traffic control map of the city. An official copy thereof shall be kept in the office of the city clerk; shall be available to the public; and copies certified by the city clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device. 
(d)  No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this article shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1999, § 66-38) 
Secs. 42-5—42-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 42-27. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq., known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(Code 1999, § 66-1; Ord. of 7-14-1979, § 1) 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 42-28. - Free flow of traffic; obstruction prohibited. 
(a)  All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the streets, alleyways and other public ways of the city. 
(b)  Any person is prohibited from stopping his vehicle (except at a stop signal or stop sign, or to honor another driver's right-of-way, or in an emergency situation) in a manner as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver, or to engage in unduly slow driving procedures so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic or to needlessly "circle the block" or dawdle or make unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations or to in any other manner constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. 
Sec. 42-29. - Covering of loads. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 66-40) 
Sec. 42-30. - Use of bicycle helmets. 
(a)  No person under the age of 16 years shall operate or be a passenger on a bicycle on a highway or bicycle path under the jurisdiction of the city without wearing a bicycle helmet. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "bicycle helmet" means a piece of protective headgear which meets or exceeds the impact standards for bicycle helmets set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the Snell Memorial Foundation or the federal government. For the purposes of this article, a person shall be deemed to be wearing a bicycle helmet only if a bicycle helmet of good fit is fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet. 
(c)  A person under the age of 16 years failing to comply with this article shall have his bicycle impounded by the police. The parent or caregiver of the child may then retrieve the bicycle by going to the police department and showing proof that the child now has a bicycle helmet or by indicating that the person will not ride the bicycle in the future without a bicycle helmet. Proof of ownership of a bicycle helmet may be the helmet itself or a receipt documenting the purchase of a bicycle helmet. 
(Code 1999, § 58-4; Ord. of 4-14-1998) 
Secs. 42-31—42-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED REGULATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Maximum speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-181; power of local authorities to alter speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 42-49. - General speed limit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or portion of a street in the city at a rate of speed greater than 30 miles per hour unless another speed limit is posted or otherwise designated for such street or portion of a street. 
(Code 1999, § 66-36) 
Sec. 42-50. - Maximum speed limits on specific streets. 
(a)  The mayor and council may alter the maximum speed limits on any street or portion thereof within the city in accord with the provisions of state law. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit. 
(b)  In addition to any alteration of the state speed limits as provided by statute, and pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183, the following on-system and off-system speed restrictions for arterial streets and roads are applicable within the geographical limits of the city: 
ON-SYSTEM 

 
OFF-SYSTEM 

 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009) 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 42-51. - Speed detection devices authorized. 
The city is hereby authorized to use speed detection devices for the purpose of traffic control on the roads and streets in the city. Such speed detection devices shall be used only for the purpose of public safety and traffic control and shall not be used for the purpose of raising revenue. 
(Code 1999, § 66-39) 
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; authority for use or speed detection devices by local law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2; requirements that local government obtain state permit, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
Secs. 42-52—42-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STANDING, STOPPING AND PARKING 

Sec. 42-76. - Parking in deceleration or acceleration lanes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any automobile, truck, bus, truck tractor, trailer, tractor, trailer combination, motorcycle, moped or other motor vehicle within or upon the deceleration or acceleration lanes lying in the unincorporated areas of the city. 
(b)  Deceleration and acceleration lanes shall be defined for the purpose of this section as those strips of pavement lying adjacent to and to the east of the northbound lanes of traffic and adjacent to and to the west of the southbound lanes of traffic which are not part of the regular roadway but afford access into and out of the driveways and side roads along the highway. 
(Code 1999, § 66-41) 
Sec. 42-77. - Three-hour parking in the city. 
(a)  From and after the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived, it shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle more than three hours on the public streets in the city on Main Street between its intersection of Mill Street on the south and its intersection of Hamby Street on the north and on Savannah Street from its intersection of Old Warwoman Road and Old Chechero Road on the east and Church Street on the west. 
(b)  Penalties for violation of this section shall be a warning for the first violation, a fine of $20.00 for the second violation, and a fine of $75.00 for the third and each subsequent conviction. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2010; Ord. of 6-14-2011) 
Chapter 44 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public utilities generally, O.C.G.A. § 46-1-1 et seq.; municipal home rule, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; municipal utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; state Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; public water systems, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-170 et seq.; water supply, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-470; sewage and waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-29 et seq.; refusal by city or county to supply water because of indebtedness of prior owner, occupant, or lessee prohibited and limited liens for unpaid utility charges, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-17; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consumer means any person, establishment, unit or space served on or through any water meter other than the customer in whose name the meter is listed or from whom payment may be required. 
Customer means the owner of the property served by a utility service connection, or the tenant, lessee, renter, establishment or occupant of such property, or the person in or against whose name such connection for such property is listed on the books and records of the city, and who is responsible to the city for payment of bills incurred for such utility service furnished to such property and for use by such property of the public sewer system of the city, either or both. 
Minimum monthly bill means the fixed minimum monthly payment required for a utility meter or connection calculated under the provisions of this chapter. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent or semi-permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground, not including utility poles, but specifically including tents, bleachers, gasoline pumps, recreational vehicles, travel trailers signs, and structures from which products are vended and similar objects. 
Supply utility service means to supply any form of utility service, including water, in any manner to any structure within the city. 
Temporary basis , when used with regard to providing water service, means the supplying of water or any other utility service to any structure prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
User means a customer of any utility service furnished by the city whose property also discharges sewage, wastes or water into the public sanitary sewer system of the city in any quantity. 
Utility means water, sewer, solid waste collection and disposal or any other utility service furnished by the city to consumers thereof. 
(Code 1999, § 70-1) 
Sec. 44-2. - Scope of chapter. 
All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city shall furnish any utility service to any person, or whereby the city shall make any utility connections or perform any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of any utility service pursuant to the rules and regulations of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1999, § 70-2) 
Sec. 44-3. - Service to comply with technical provisions. 
Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with and in compliance with all applicable technical provisions of this Code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Code 1999, § 70-3) 
Sec. 44-4. - Rules and regulations. 
The mayor and council shall have the authority to establish by rule or regulation such standards and specifications as may be deemed necessary for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility service system owned and operated by the city within or without the city and under the management of the city. Such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Violation of such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1999, § 70-4) 
Sec. 44-5. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water or sewer lines. 
(Code 1999, § 70-5; Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 8) 
Sec. 44-6. - Termination or refusal of service. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any utility service for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law; 
(2)  Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service; 
(3)  Nonpayment of bills; 
(4)  Willful or negligent waste of any utility service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise; 
(5)  Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility service; 
(6)  Vacancy of premises. 
(7)  Theft or diversion or use of any utility service without payment therefor and: 
a.  Any person in violation of O.C.G.A. § 70-6-6 shall be allowed to report the hookup which is in violation of this Code and by paying the current tap-on fee and a fine of $500.00 for a residential user and $5,000.00 for a commercial user shall be relieved of any further penalties provided that thereafter they remain in compliance with this Code; 
b.  The city shall make a reward available for the identification of any verifiable illegal user of water from the city. The reward shall be equal to ten percent of all monies collected for the tap on and ten percent of all monies collected as civil fines from such illegal users. Notwithstanding the foregoing a minimum reward of $500.00 shall be paid in each case up to $1,000.00 based on the above formula; 
c.  Any hookup that is discovered in violation of this Code shall be disconnected at that location and may not be reinstated directly or indirectly or without first paying a civil penalty of $2,500.00 for any illegal connection of one inch diameter or less and $2,500.00 per additional one inch of diameter of pipe for illegal connection up to a maximum of $15,000.00 for a six-inch connection. The city manager may formulate a payment schedule of the penalty up to 24 months to be paid with regular water bills, at 12 percent annual interest on the unpaid balance. 
(b)  In addition, and without limitation, the city reserves a right to discontinue its service without notice to prevent fraud or abuse including unauthorized access to the water or sewer system in response to the consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules, for emergency repairs, in the event of insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control, in response to legal processes, at the direction of public authorities, and in the event of emergencies such as strike, riot, fire, flood, or unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1999, § 70-6; Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 11(c); Ord. of 11-12-2008) 
Sec. 44-7. - Liability of city for damage. 
The city shall not be liable for any damage to any customer of any utility service furnished by the city due to backflow of the sewerage system, failure of supply, interruption of service or any other cause outside the direct control of the city. 
(Code 1999, § 70-7) 
Sec. 44-8. - Application for service. 
Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city shall make application for such service to the mayor and council. Such application shall contain the applicant's name, address and the uses for which such utility service is desired. 
(Code 1999, § 70-8) 
Sec. 44-9. - Service not available to debtors. 
The city may decline or fail or cease to furnish utility service to any person who may be in debt to the city for any reason, except ad valorem taxes and special assessments. 
(Code 1999, § 70-9) 
Sec. 44-10. - Permit. 
Approval of the application for any utility service by the mayor and council shall be deemed permission for such service. 
(Code 1999, § 70-10) 
Sec. 44-11. - Use assumed. 
All premises connected to any utility service of the city shall be assumed to be using such utility service and the owner or occupant shall be charged therefor so long as such premises remain connected with the utility service. 
(Code 1999, § 70-11) 
Sec. 44-12. - Use contrary to permit. 
Any person having a permit from the city for the use of any utility service offered by the city who shall use such utility service for any purpose other than as mentioned in such permit or who shall make any unauthorized changes in such service shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1999, § 70-12) 
Sec. 44-13. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make them liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 9) 
Sec. 44-14. - Damage of equipment; trespass. 
It is unlawful for any person not having authority to do so to open any hydrant or tamper with any utility service furnished by the city to consumers, or to in any other way molest, damage or trespass upon any equipment or premises belonging to the city connected with any utility service. 
(Code 1999, § 70-13) 
Sec. 44-15. - Unlawful supplying of service. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to supply any utility service, including electricity, to any structure on a temporary basis without proof being shown that a building permit has been issued by the city to the owner, builder or other person in control of such structure for such structure. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to supply any utility service, including electricity, to any structure on a permanent basis without proof being shown that a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city to the owner, builder or other person in control of such structure for such structure. 
(Code 1999, § 70-14) 
Sec. 44-16. - Interruption of service; notice. 
The city reserves the right to cut off any utility service without notice in case of emergencies. When an interruption in service is necessary for the maintenance and improvement of the utility system, affected customers will be notified as circumstances permit. 
(Code 1999, § 70-15) 
Sec. 44-17. - Restricting use. 
The city hereby reserves the right to at any time restrict or prevent the use of any utility service furnished by the city during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restriction or prevention of use. 
(Code 1999, § 70-16) 
Sec. 44-18. - Sale of service by customer. 
It is unlawful for any person to resell any utility service obtained from the city to others except by special arrangement with the mayor and council. 
(Code 1999, § 70-17) 
Sec. 44-19. - Service connections. 
(a)  Supervision. Connections for any utility service furnished by the city shall be made under the supervision of the mayor and council. 
(b)  Separate connections. Every building, structure or consumer in the city shall have a separate utility service connection. 
(c)  Owner's consent. Any person who shall make any connection in any manner to any utility system, whether owned by the city or not, without the prior knowledge and consent of the owner of such utility system shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1999, § 70-18) 
Sec. 44-20. - Unlawful use. 
No person, other than employees of the city, shall be authorized to connect, turn on, turn off or disconnect any utility service offered by the city, or remove, replace or repair any equipment connected to any such utility service. 
(Code 1999, § 70-19) 
Sec. 44-21. - Maintenance of equipment by consumer. 
The consumer of any utility service furnished by the city shall maintain and keep in good repair all connections, appliances and other apparatus installed and used in connection with such utility service. 
(Code 1999, § 70-20) 
Sec. 44-22. - Security deposits, fees, meter reading, billing and collections. 
(a)  Security deposits and fees for city water and sewer applications, connections, disconnections and use are established from time to time by the city council and included in the city fee schedule. The fee schedule contemplates a single user, such as a one-family dwelling, a one-farm dwelling with appurtenances, or a one-commercial operation, with domestic sewage located within the city limits. Any extraordinary circumstances, such as multiple dwelling units, multiple office units, or with sewage other than domestic or located outside the city limits, shall be governed by special written agreements as approved by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The minimum connection charge provided in the fee schedule shall be made for such connection subscribed for water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection; the city shall not under any circumstances furnish water free of charge to any person, firm or corporation. 
(c)  Nonpayment within 30 days from the date due will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. Water and sewer service shall not be reconnected until the customer's delinquent bill, including penalties, late fees, reconnection fees, and any additional security deposit as may be required by the mayor and council is paid. 
(d)  When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward the settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(e)  If the consumer believes the bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and the payment shall not prejudice his claim. The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer upon payment of the fee provided in the city fee schedule; provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made. If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills or from other proper data. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, §§ 2, 5, 10, 11(a), 11(b), 12; Ord. of 4-11-2006; Ord. of 8-11-2009, §§ 3, 4) 
Sec. 44-23. - City's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The city shall run a service line from its distribution or collection line to the property line where the line exists and is of sufficient capacity or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. 
(b)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extension or upgrading of its water or sewer lines as may be required to render such services. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse services unless the consumer's lines or piping are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or back-flow. 
(e)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 6) 
Sec. 44-24. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any person or permit any other person to use the water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, or other purposes, except when water is available in quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of the consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(e)  Any water customer requiring a fire line shall install at their expense a double check detector check on the fire line in accordance with city standards. 
(f)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city's covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. The consumer shall additionally not discharge any wastewater to the sewer system not generated by potable water furnished by the city's water system, unless approved in writing by the city. 
(g)  The consumer agrees to limit its discharge into the sewerage system to that strength of sewage defined by trade usage as "domestic sewage." Discharges are restricted as follows: 
(1)  The discharge of wastes that create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewage or sewerage plant, waste products which will impair the hydraulic capacity of the sewer system, and wastes that regardless of quantity create a hazard to people, to the sewer system, to the treatment process or to the receiving waters are strictly prohibited. Examples of such wastes are gasoline, fuel, cleaning solvents, paint vehicles, ashes, sand, cinders, metal, broken glass, wood metal shavings, unshredded garbage, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, cyanides, and other acids and caustics. 
(2)  The maximum permissible temperature of any discharge shall be 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Volatile oils shall not be allowed in any amount. Mineral oil shall be removed to the maximum degree practical before discharge. Vegetable oils, fats, and grease shall be limited to no more than 100 milligrams per liter (mg/l). The pH of influent waste shall be between 5.5 and 9.5. 
(4)  Discharge of substances toxic to biological wastewater treatment processes such as copper, chromium, lead, zinc, arsenic, and nickel may also be limited if the substances are present in sufficient quantity adversely to affect treatment. 
(5)  The maximum allowable five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) that will be accepted shall be 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(6)  The maximum allowable amount of suspended solids that will be accepted shall be 250 mg/l. 
(7)  All commercial and industrial users shall provide specific data to the city 60 days prior to applying for a sewer connection including wastewater flow and strength characteristics. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 7) 
Secs. 44-25—44-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 

Sec. 44-52. - Permit to withdraw water from fire hydrant. 
No person shall withdraw water from a fire hydrant without obtaining a permit from the city public works department. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2009, app.) 
Secs. 44-53—44-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-78. - Mandatory sewer connections. 
All residences, business establishments and other structures having a wastewater discharge within the city limits are required to connect onto the city's central sewer system where the structure is within 200 feet of the sewer line. The connection shall be made within 60 days of availability of sewer service. All new construction within the city limits are required within 200 feet of the city's sewer line shall also be required to connect onto the system. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 13) 
Sec. 44-79. - Definitions. 
Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq. 
BOD means the value of the five-day test for biochemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water & Wastewater. 
COD means the value of the test for chemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water & Wastewater. 
CZA means the City of Clayton zoning administrator/personnel/designee. 
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Fats, oil, and greases (FOG) means the organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases." 
Food service establishments or business means any location that is involved in the preparation of food items either for commercial, humanitarian, or hospitality reasons, this would involve food preparation on a scale larger than the average household. This includes restaurants, coffee houses, deli's, sandwich shops, cafeterias, bars, grocery stores, motels, hotels, schools, hospitals, churches, nursing or care facilities, also non-cooking establishments that process dairy or frozen foodstuff that will handle liquid wastes containing grease, food processors, or any other facility which in the opinion of the CZA, would require a grease interceptor installation by virtue of its operation. 
Generator means any person who owns or operates a grease interceptor, or whose act or process produces a grease trap/interceptor waste. 
Grease interceptor means an appurtenance, appliance, or device that is installed in the sanitary sewage drainage system to intercept non-petroleum fats, oils, and grease (FOG) from wastewater. There are two types of grease interceptors, gravity grease interceptor and hydromechanical grease interceptors. 
Grease interceptor, gravity means an appurtenance/appliance/ or device that is a large tank or vault typically installed outside of the building that provides the most efficient way to remove grease and oils. Such interceptors are often referred to as "outdoor" units and is identified by volume, 30-minute retention time, baffle(s), a minimum of two compartments, a minimum total volume of 300 gallons and gravity separation. The outdoor units shall be designed in accordance with section 44-83 and Table 1 in section 44-87. 
Grease interceptor, hydromechanical means a plumbing appurtenance/appliance/or device that is typically installed inside the building near the sink and acts as a holding container for kitchen water before it is discharged into the sanitary drainage system. Such interceptors are often referred to as the "under the counter" or "in-floor" package units. The "under the counter" or "in-floor" units shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance to the Plumbing and Drainage Institute Standard PDI G101. 
Grease waste means material collected in and from a grease interceptor in the sanitary sewer service line of a commercial, institutional, or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the solids resulting from de-watering process. 
FOG disposal system means a grease interceptor that reduces non-petroleum fats, oils, and grease (FOG) in effluent by separation, and mass and volume reduction. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the City of Clayton Sanitary Sewerage System from any non-domestic source. 
Interference means a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the City of Clayton Sanitary Sewerage System, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or is a cause of a violation of the city's discharge permit. 
pH means the measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water and is defined as the negative logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
City of Clayton Sanitary Sewerage Treatment Works (CCTW) means a treatment works which is owned by the City of Clayton as defined by section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of the municipal sewage of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes, and other conveyances that convoy wastewater to the City of Clayton Sanitary Sewer Treatment Works. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such treatment works. For the purposes of this ordinance, the terms "sanitary sewer system" and "CCTW" may be used interchangeably. 
City of Clayton Public Works Director (PWD) means means the individual who supervises and approves all operations, maintenance, and installation to the City of Clayton Sanitary Sewer System and water system. This term shall also apply to his designee or department employee. 
Transporter means means a person who is registered with and authorized to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit or sand trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with current regulations. 
Sand trap means a plumbing appurtenance, appliance, or device that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept sand, grit, dirt, sweepings, gravel or minor petroleum spills. 
TSS means the value of the test for total suspended solids as described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. 
User means any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the City of Clayton, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the CCTW, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources. 
(Ord. of. 7-25-2018(2) ) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of 7-25-2018(2) repealed former § 44-79 and enacted a new § 44-79 as set out herein. The former § 44-79 pertained to sand and oil and grease traps, and derived from the 1999 Code, an ordinance of 7-10-1984, and an ordinance of 3-6-2003. 
Sec. 44-80. - Sand and oil traps. 
All users whose wastewater stream is associated with unusually large quantities of dirt, grit, sand, sweepings, gravel or minor petroleum spills shall be required to install a sand/oil trap. All car and truck wash systems shall be required to install a sand trap; design specifications and calculations must be submitted and approved by the CZA and the PWD before installation. 
(1)  Sand/oil interceptors shall be sized for a minimum of a 30-minute detention time at peak flow. 
(2)  Sizing requirements, maintenance, monitoring and entrance, acceptable levels of discharge, construction, penalties and general requirements shall be the same as contained herein as those for grease interceptors. 
(Ord. of. 7-25-2018(2) ) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of 7-25-2018(2) repealed former § 44-80 and enacted a new § 44-80 as set out herein. The former § 44-80 pertained to surcharges and procedures for inspecting and assessing surcharges, and derived from the 1999 Code, and an ordinance of 10-10-2000. 
Sec. 44-81. - Grease traps/interceptors—general requirements. 
The following requirements are applicable to all food service establishments, new or existing. No food service establishment shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city sanitary sewerage system FOG or heavy solids that exceed the adopted level, as set forth in section 44-86 or that may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages in the sanitary sewerage system. All food service establishments shall have grease-handling facilities or devices approved by the CZA and PWD of the city. Establishments whose grease handling facilities/devices are not in accordance with this standard shall be given a compliance schedule with a deadline not to exceed three months from initial notification date. 
(User's responsibility shall still exist for any and all damages and costs associated with those damages to the sanitary sewerage system regardless of the three-month improvement schedule). 
(1)  All food service establishment grease-handling facilities/operations shall be subject to periodic review, evaluations, and inspection by the city representatives at any time. Results of the inspections will be made available to facility owners with overall ratings assigned and recommendations for correction/improvement (if necessary) delineated. 
(2)  Any food service establishment whose effluent is suspected or perceived to contain a concentration of greater than 100 mg/l of oil and grease may be required to routinely sample their grease interceptor effluent, and have it analyzed by certified laboratory for oil and grease at the expense of the owner and furnish a copy of the analysis to the CZA. 
(3)  All grease interceptors shall be designed and installed to allow for complete access for inspection, maintenance, etc. 
(4)  The plumbing fixtures required to discharge through the grease interceptor are all floor drains, floor sinks, mop sinks, pot sinks, food prep sinks, dishwashers without a pre-rinse sink, and hub drains located in the kitchen and flush with the floor, and/or any fixture or equipment that may allow grease or fats to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. 
(5)  No food service establishment or facility will be allowed to initiate operations until grease handling facilities are installed and approved by both the CZA and PWD. 
(6)  Disposal of waste cooking oil into the sanitary sewerage system is prohibited. All waste oils shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles and collected by a permitted waste disposal company. 
(7)  Discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of 140° F to any grease or FOG control device is prohibited. 
(8)  Discharge of any waste including FOG and solid materials removed from the grease control device into the sanitary sewerage system is prohibited. Grease and FOG removed from grease interceptors shall be waste that will be placed in the proper receptacle and collected by a permitted waste disposal company. 
(9)  All food service establishments shall implement kitchen best management practices as set forth in section 44-89. 
(Ord. of. 7-25-2018(2) ) 
Sec. 44-82. - Structures (new). 
(a)  All newly constructed food service establishments shall be required to install a gravity grease interceptor approved by CZA and PWD. 
(b)  The construction and location criteria for grease interceptors shall be in accordance with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Guidance Document, On-Site Wastewater Treatment and Disposal Systems. 
(c)  All grease interceptors shall be accessible from the surface and must be fitted with an extended outlet sanitary tee that terminates six to 12 inches above the tank floor. The minimum access opening dimensions shall be 18 inches × 18 inches. 
(d)  Above criteria, subsections (a) through (d), apply primarily to outdoor type grease interceptor units. 
(Ord. of. 7-25-2018(2) ) 
Sec. 44-83. - Structures (existing). 
(a)  Where practical, new food service establishments located in existing buildings will be required to comply with the grease interceptor standards applicable to new facilities, i.e., outdoor-type gravity grease interceptor shall be installed. 
(b)  Where there is no adequate space for installation/maintenance of a grease interceptor or there is no adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and the interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and the public sewerage collection lines to install a proper "outdoor" unit(s), an "under the counter" or "in the floor" unit(s) may be allowed provided prior approval of unit type, size, location, etc. is given by the CZA and PWD. Flow control fittings and automatically cleaned units will be required in all cases. Maintenance contracts and/or cleanout records will also be required to be submitted to the CZA on a quarterly basis. 
(c)  The properly sized grease interceptor will be connected to individual fixtures such as dishwashers, sinks and any other potential grease-containing drain or discharge. In such cases, units will be considered acceptable only if approved flow control fittings are provided to the grease interceptor inlet to prevent overloading of the grease interceptor and to allow for proper interceptor operation. 
(d)  Sizing of the "under the counter" or "in the floor" grease elimination units will be in accordance with (Standard PDI-G101) recommended ratings for commercial grease traps. The grease retention capacity rating in pounds shall be at least two times the GPM flow rate of the type fixture which it serves. Approved flow control fittings must be provided to the inlet side of all "under the sink" or "in the floor" units. 
(e)  Location of "under the sink" or "in the floor" units must be as close to the sources of the wastewater as physically possible. 
(f)  Wastewater from garbage grinders should not discharge to grease trap/interceptors. 
(g)  In maintaining grease interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper maintenance and pumping of the unit. 
(Ord. of. 7-25-2018(2) ) 
Sec. 44-84. - Construction/installation of interceptor. 
(a)  Food service establishments will be required to submit a minimum of three copies of facility site plans, mechanical, and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewer locations and connections. The submittal shall be in a form and content acceptable to the CZA and PWD for reviewing of existing or proposed grease control devices, grease interceptor, monitoring facilities, metering facilities, and operating procedures. The review of the plans and procedures shall in no way relieve the food service establishment of the responsibility of modifying the facilities or procedures in the future as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge and to meet the requirements of this ordinance or other regulatory agencies. 
(b)  Site plans and drawings shall show grease interceptor, appurtenances, and plumbing by size, location, and elevation for evaluation. 
(c)  It is required that the drawings or site plans be prepared by a state registered civil, chemical, mechanical or electrical engineer. 
(d)  All grease waste interceptors for FOG and heavy solids shall so be designed and located as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease interceptors shall be constructed and designed in accordance with the design specifications contained herein and shall be approved by the CZA and PWD. 
(e)  Each interceptor shall be prefabricated or field fabricated and have at a minimum one baffle that shall extend the full width of the interceptor, extending from the bottom to within six inches of the top. The baffle shall have an inverted long radius elbow fitting or other approved means equivalent in size to the inlet piping but in no case less than four inches in size installed in the inlet compartment side of the baffle with the fitting placed 12 inches above the bottom of the interceptor. Minimum depth of the liquid shall be 42 inches. There shall be a minimum of two manholes with covers that are gas-tight in construction having a minimum opening of 18 inches in diameter (one over the inlet and one over the outlet) to provide access for cleaning and inspection of all fixtures and compartments of the grease interceptor. The grease interceptor shall be located at least 25 feet from the last appliance connected to the grease line within the building. In parking areas, the grease interceptor shall be designed to have adequate reinforcement and cover (including piping) meeting HS-20 traffic loading specifications. Grease interceptors in parking areas require concrete driving surface over piping with structural backfill around piping. 
(f)  The inlet and outlet piping shall have a two-way cleanout tee installed and leveled. The tee and pipe shall be no less than four inches in diameter. The tee shall be installed with the run in the vertical orientation. Inlet piping shall enter at two-and-one-half inches above the invert of the outlet piping. Inlet piping shall extend to 24 inches below the water level of the interceptor. The outlet pipe shall extend to 36 inches below the water level of the interceptor. 
(g)  Each grease interceptor shall be vented where subject to a loss of trap seal. The grease interceptor shall be designed so that it will not become air bound if a closed cover is used. The grease interceptor and discharge line shall each be vented, and the vents shall not be tied together less than 42 inches above the tank lid elevation. 
(Ord. of. 7-25-2018(2) ) 
Sec. 44-85. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  In the maintaining of grease interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material. Any removal and hauling of the collected material must be performed by a currently licensed waste disposal firm. 
(b)  Maintenance contracts and or grease removal records and manifests will be required to be submitted quarterly to the CZA to ensure routine and adequate system maintenance. 
(c)  Grease interceptor cleaning and maintenance shall include pumping the grease interceptor until empty, and cleaning the side walls, baffle walls, cross-pipes and inlet and outlet pipes. If multiple grease interceptors are installed, all traps in the series must be pumped. The pumping of grease interceptors shall occur with a minimum frequency of every 90 days or more frequently when; 
(1)  Twenty-five percent or more of the wetted height of the grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe contains floating materials, sediment, food particles, or FOG; 
(2)  The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH or other pollutant levels established by the city; 
(3)  If there is a history of non-compliance. 
(Ord. of. 7-25-2018(2) ) 
Sec. 44-86. - Acceptable levels. 
The following are acceptable levels within wastewater discharge into the City of Clayton Sanitary Sewage System: 
(1)  BOD or COD: 13.0 mg/L. 
(2)  TSS:20 mg/L. 
(3)  FOG: 100mg/L. 
(4)  pH: No less than 6.0, nor greater than 9.0. 
(Ord. of. 7-25-2018(2) ) 
Sec. 44-87. - Formula to size interceptors. 
Table 1 

 
* Flow calculations based on a PVC drain pipe with Manning Coefficient of 0.009 and a full-flow depth of ⅞ × pipe flow diameter. A ¼ inch per foot slope is used for drain pipes with diameters of 2.5 inches and smaller; a slope of ⅛ inch per foot is used for 3-inch drain pipes. 
† Include the number of kitchen and serving areas with floor drains (not the number of drains). Do not include the area if the sole discharge to the floor drain is from a fixture accounted for above. 
If approved by the CZA and PWD for the installation of a hydro-mechanical grease interceptor, Table 2 shall be used to size the unit. This table shows the standard formulas for sizing grease interceptors to meet requirements of specific fixtures in an ordered fashion, an includes an example of their use. Table 3 provides the standard sizes for hydro-mechanical grease interceptors. 
Table 2 

 
  
Table 3 

 
(Ord. of. 7-25-2018(2) ) 
Sec. 44-88. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any facility/business receiving three unsatisfactory evaluations within a 24-month period shall be subject to penalties/restrictions/termination of service as provided in this ordinance. 
(b)  Failure to submit quarterly pumping reports to the city shall constitute an occurrence of an unsatisfactory evaluation. 
(c)  Violation of the City of Clayton Sewer Ordinance will be considered grounds for discontinuance of water and sewer service. 
(d)  Food service establishments whose operations cause or allow excessive FOG to discharge or accumulate in the sanitary sewer system are liable to the city for all costs related to service calls for line blockages, line cleaning, line and pump repairs, etc. including all labor, materials, equipment(s), and related costs. Failure to pay all service related charges within 30 days may be grounds for water/sewer service discontinuance. 
(e)  Fines for violations to this ordinance shall be as follows: $250.00 for the first violation, $500.00 for a second violation, and $750.00 for the third violation within a two-year period. Continuous violations will result in an increase of fine by $250.00 and may also result in termination of water and sewerage service. Fines do not include costs for damages, equipment and labor to repair the sanitary sewerage system. 
(f)  Any termination of water and/or sewerage service will be upon recommendation of CZA, notice to business license holder and property owner, and hearing before the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of. 7-25-2018(2) ) 
Sec. 44-89. - Kitchen best management practices. 
Best management practices for commercial food establishments are: 
(1)  Clean your FOG interceptor regularly; 
(2)  Post "no grease" signs above sinks and in front of dishwashers; 
(3)  Recycle waste cooking oil; 
(4)  Dry wipe pots, pans, dishware, and cooking utensils before washing; 
(5)  Use strainers to catch food scrapes and other solids; 
(6)  Dispose of food waste by discarding into solid waste receptacles, 
(7)  Do not pour grease down sinks or toilets; 
(8)  Regularly clean kitchen exhaust filters; 
(9)  Cover outdoor oil and grease receptacles; 
(10)  Locate outdoor grease and FOG receptacles away from direct contact with storm drainage areas; 
(11)  Train your staff on FOG best management practices. 
(Ord. of. 7-25-2018(2) ) 
Sec. 44-90. - Compliance monitoring and entrance. 
(a)  The grease interceptor area and monitoring facilities shall be maintained safe, clear of debris, and accessible at all times for observation, inspection, sample collection and flow measurement of the food service facility's discharge to the sanitary sewerage system. Authorized employees of the city shall be allowed entry upon all properties that utilize city water and sewerage services to perform required tasks and inspections. 
(b)  Each facility/business with a grease interceptor shall conduct quarterly pumping and maintenance of the unit and provide manifests and pumping reports to the CZA. 
(Ord. of. 7-25-2018(2) ) 
Secs. 44-91—44-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DUMPING OF SEPTIC SEWAGE 

Sec. 44-104. - Dumping permit. 
Any person desiring to dump or empty the contents of septic sewage into the city's sewage system must first obtain a dumping permit from city hall. The dumping permit shall specify the amount of sewage to be dumped, the location where the sewage originated and date and time sewage was obtained by hauler. 
(Code 1999, § 70-126; Ord. of 3-10-1998, § 1) 
Sec. 44-105. - Location of disposal. 
Location of disposing the septic sewage will be at the city's water reclamation facility. Any person dumping sewage must present a dumping permit to an operator at the water reclamation facility prior to disposing of sewage. Hours of dumping septic waste are Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 pm. 
(Code 1999, § 70-127; Ord. of 3-10-1998, § 2) 
Sec. 44-106. - Inspection. 
City water reclamation operators have the right to inspect any load of sewage prior to dumping into the city sewer system. 
(Code 1999, § 70-128; Ord. of 3-10-1998, § 3) 
Sec. 44-107. - Restricted substances. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such waters can damage either the sewage treatment process or equipment. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any waste obtained from grease traps. Any waste obtained from residential septic tanks which contain fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, other petroleum products or any other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any waste containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity as to constitute a hazard. 
(5)  Any waste containing in excess a solid or viscous substance capable of interfering with the sewage treatment process. 
(6)  Any or all of the toxic substances listed in this article. 
(7)  Waste containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process or in such a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Code 1999, § 70-129; Ord. of 3-10-1998, § 4) 
Sec. 44-108. - Right of city to reject waste. 
If any waste which violates the outline of this article or in the judgment of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage treatment process, equipment or receiving waters, the superintendent may reject the waste. 
(Code 1999, § 70-130; Ord. of 3-10-1998, § 5) 
Sec. 44-109. - Waste origination. 
Only septic waste that is originated in the county will be accepted by the city. 
(Code 1999, § 70-131; Ord. of 3-10-1998, § 6) 
Sec. 44-110. - Load limits; dumping fees. 
Fees per load for dumping septic waste are as set forth in the city fee schedule. Each load is not to exceed 2,000 gallons. 
(Code 1999, § 70-132; Ord. of 3-10-1998, § 7) 
Chapter 46 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.; municipal business improvement districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.; redevelopment authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1; city and county development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; county and municipal urban development, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; city and county zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local zoning proposal review procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning and service delivery by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abutting means having property or district lines in common, or having property separated by only an alley. Separation by a street right-of-way is not considered abutting. 
Accessory apartment means a second dwelling unit either in or added to an existing single-family detached dwelling, or in a separate accessory structure on the same lot as the main dwelling, for use as a complete, independent living facility for a single housekeeping unit (family), with provision within the accessory apartment for cooking, eating, sanitation, and sleeping. Such a dwelling is considered an accessory use or structure to the main dwelling. 
Accessory building or use means a building or use that is not more than two stories in height; is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use; is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or use served; contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use; and is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use. 

Agriculture means the cultivation or growth of a field or horticultural crop, including dairying, livestock and poultry raising, farm forestry, and other similar enterprises or uses. 
Airport means any area of land, water or mechanical structure which is used for the landing and take-off of aircraft, including any appurtenance structures and areas which are used or intended to be used for airport buildings, other airport facilities, rights-of-way or easements. 
Alley means a private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to a building or abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, any modification or change in construction, any addition which increases the area or height, any change in use from that of one district classification to another. 
Amusement arcade means a building or part of a building in which three or more pinball machines, coin-operated billiard tables, videogames, or other similar player operated amusement devices are maintained. 
Animal hospital means a facility operated by a licensed veterinarian specifically for the practice of veterinary medicine. 
Antique shop means a store or shop for the sale of relics, objects of ancient times or of an earlier period, works of art, pieces of furniture or decorative objects made at a much earlier period than present. 
Apartment house means a multifamily dwelling located on a parcel of land under a single ownership, designed for use by three or more housekeeping units, living independently of each other, and doing their own cooking on the premises. 
Automated teller means an accessory facility through which certain banking functions such as deposits and withdrawals can be completed without the personal assistance of a bank employee. 
Automotive repair garage means a use of land or structures involving maintenance, repair, conversion and other such services on cars, trucks, boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and mobile/manufactured homes, typically including vehicle storage and incidental sales of parts. 
Basement means that portion of a building located wholly or partly underground but having less than one-half of its height above the grade. A basement shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of determining maximum permitted height. 
Bed and breakfast inn means a dwelling unit, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging rooms, with or without meals, are provided for compensation, and where the operator of the inn resides on the premises. 
Boardinghouse means a building where, for compensation, both lodging and meals are provided for persons, provided that a single-family dwelling shall not be deemed to be a boardinghouse by reason of a contribution to or expense sharing arrangement with the owner or tenant occupying the dwelling by a person related by blood or marriage. 

Buffer means a landscaped open space or screen located between incompatible land uses for the purpose of visibly separating uses through distance and to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances; that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established for the purpose of screening and separating properties with incompatible land uses, the width of which is measured from the common property line and extending the developed portion of the common property line. A buffer consists of trees, shrubs and other natural vegetation undisturbed by grading or site development and replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access and utility crossings. 

Buildable area means the portion of a lot remaining after required yards, buffers and building setbacks have been provided, where construction of principal buildings is permitted. 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building inspector means the building inspector of the city or his authorized representative. 
Building, principal, means a building or structure in which is conducted the main use of the property on which the building or structure is located. In any residential district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building on the lot on which the structure is located. 
Building setback line means a line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the main or front wall of a building, including any covered porches, and the street right-of-way or property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. In the case of corner lots or double frontage lots, front yard requirements shall be observed for those areas adjacent to street rights-of-way. 
Car wash means an establishment engaged in the business of washing vehicles with self-serve, automated or staffed facilities. 
Carport means an accessory structure or portion of a principal structure, consisting of a roof and supporting members such as columns or beams, unenclosed from the ground to the roof on at least two sides, and designed or used for the storage of motor vehicles or boats. 
Cemetery means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, but not including crematories and mortuaries. 
Certificate of occupancy means a legal statement or document issued by the building inspector indicating that the building and use or reuse of a particular building or land is in conformity with all applicable codes and regulations, and that such building or land may be occupied for the purpose stated therein. 
Church means an institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meeting and other purposes, including education, day care and recreation facilities when owned and operated by such church. 
Circus means the temporary use of land offering entertainment and instruction in the form of such things as thrill rides, games of chance and skill, educational exhibits, display of oddities and the like. The term also includes carnivals and fairs. 
City council means the mayor and city council, duly elected by the citizens within the jurisdiction. 
City engineer means the engineer or engineering firm in the employ of the city, or his authorized representative. 
Clinic means a building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of patients that does not include overnight care facilities. 
Club, nonprofit, means a building or facilities owned or operated by a group for social, educational or recreational purposes, but not customarily for profit or to render a service that is customarily carried on for gain. 
Commercial recreation facility means any use of a building or land that involves the provision of sports and leisure activities to the general public for a fee, including, but not limited to, the following: amphitheaters and stadiums; assembly halls, auditoriums and meeting halls; billiard halls, pool rooms and amusement/video arcades; bowling alleys; firearms shooting ranges and turkey shoots; golf driving ranges, public golf courses, miniature golf courses and baseball batting cages; private clubs operated for profit, race tracks for animals and motor-driven vehicles, ice and roller skating rinks; horse- and pony-riding rinks; circuses and carnivals; indoor and drive-in theaters; physical fitness facilities and health clubs; botanical gardens and zoological gardens; commercial museums and art galleries; racquetball courts; bungee jumping. 
Compatibility means the characteristics of different uses or activities that permit such uses or activities to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict. Some elements affecting compatibility include: intensity of occupancy as measured by dwelling units per acre or gross square footage per acre; pedestrian or vehicular traffic generated; volume of goods handled, and such environmental effects as noise, vibration, odor, glare, air pollution or radiation. 
Comprehensive plan means those coordinated plans or portions thereof which have been prepared by or for the city council for the physical development of the jurisdiction; or any plans that designate plans or programs to encourage the most appropriate use of the land in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
Conditional use means a use which would not be appropriate without restriction throughout a zoning district and is not automatically permitted by right within a zoning district, but which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions (such as controls on number, size, area, location and activities) contained in these regulations or required by the city council. Such uses may be permitted only if approved by the city council in accordance with the regulations established herein. 
Conditional zoning means the granting or adoption of zoning for property subject to compliance with restrictions as to use, size, density or actions stipulated by the city council to mitigate adverse impacts that are anticipated without imposition of such conditions. 
Condominium (residential building) means a building or complex of multiple-unit dwellings in which a tenant holds full title to his unit and joint ownership in the common grounds. 
Contractor's establishment means an establishment engaged in the provision of construction activities including, but not limited to, plumbing, electrical work, building, paving, carpentry and other such contracting activities, including the storage of materials and the overnight parking of commercial vehicles. 
Convalescent home means a home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, wherein two or more persons are professionally cared for. 
Convenience store means a small retail store which sells convenience items and may include the sale of gasoline and diesel fuel. 
Conversion means any change in the original use or purpose of a building or lot to a different use. 
Curb cut means a provision for vehicular ingress or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
Day care center means any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group wherein are received for pay for group care, for fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody, seven or more children under 18 years of age. A day care center of six children or less may be considered to be a home occupation. 
Density means the number of dwelling units developed, or to be developed, per gross acre of land, or the gross square footage of a building per acre of land. 
Development means any manmade change on improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Developmentally disabled person means a person with a disability resulting in substantial functional limitations in such person's major life activities which disability is attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, or autism or is attributable to any other condition related to mental retardation because such condition results in impairment of general intellectual functioning or adaptive behavior similar to that of mentally retarded persons. 
District, zoning, means a geographical area or areas, designated with the use of symbols on the official zoning map, wherein uses of land are restricted in type, size, height and other limitations as established in these regulations. 
Drive-in means a retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the customer within a motor vehicle on the outside of the principal building. 
Drive-in theater means a facility designed for the outdoor projection of motion pictures onto a permanent screen to be viewed from the patron's automobile. 
Dry cleaners means an establishment engaged in providing laundry, dyeing and dry cleaning services to individual customers. 
Dry cleaning plant means an establishment engaged in providing laundry, dyeing and dry cleaning services on a large scale for institutions, businesses or other such establishments. 
Dwelling means a building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used for permanent living, or sleeping quarters. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more single housekeeping units with separate kitchen and bath facilities for each family or housekeeping unit, including apartment houses, row houses, townhouses, and similar housing types, but not including motels, hotels, lodginghouses, hospitals, nursing homes, or public institutions such as prisons and mental institutions. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed or arranged to be occupied by one single housekeeping unit only. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex), means a building designed or arranged to be occupied by two single housekeeping units living independently of each other. 
Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels or other structures designed for transient residence. 
Easement means a non-possessory interest in land; a grant by a property owner for the use by the public, a corporation or persons, of a portion of land for a specified purpose or purposes. 
Exterminator means an establishment or person engaged in the service of killing insects, mice, rats or other pests. 
Family means an individual; two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship; or a group of not more than five unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit and using the same cooking facilities; provided, however, that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or families. Any group which is licensed by the state, or any political subdivision thereof, which contains up to six developmentally disabled persons and up to two supervisors or surrogate parents residing on the premises at one time shall constitute a family. 
Farm means an area of land principally devoted to agriculture. 
Fence means a structural barrier for enclosure, screening or demarcation, presenting a solid face or having openings amongst or between its constituents' members; also, a wall separate from or extending from a building. 
Finance, insurance and real estate establishments include, but are not limited to, banks, savings and loan institutions and credit unions; security and commodity exchanges; insurance agents, brokers and service; real estate brokers, agents and managers; trusts; holding and investment companies. 
Flea market means the use of land, structures or buildings for the sale of produce or new or used goods, usually of second quality or at cut-rate prices, in which more than two vendors are accommodated in spaces on the same lot or within the same building. 
Floor area means the gross heated, finished horizontal area of the floor or floors of a dwelling unit, exclusive of basement, attic, carport or garage. 
Funeral home means a building or part thereof used for human funeral services, that may contain space and facilities for: embalming and the performance of other services used in preparation of the dead for burial; performance of autopsies; storage of caskets; and chapel services. 
Garage means an accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for the private storage of motor vehicles and other personal property as an accessory use. 
Glare means a sensation of brightness within the visual field that causes annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
Grade means the average of the finished ground levels at the center of all walls of a building. 
Greenhouse means a building designed or used for growing or propagating plants, with walls or roof usually designed to transmit light. The term "greenhouse" shall not be construed to include commercial horticultural activities. 
Guest house means a lodging unit for temporary guests in an accessory building. No such lodging unit shall contain independent cooking or kitchen facilities and shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Height, building, means the vertical distance measured from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof; to the declines of a mansard roof; or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 

Home occupation means any occupation or profession engaged in by any occupant of a dwelling, not including the conduct of a retail business, manufacturing business or repair business of any kind on the premises. Home occupation shall not include any occupation conducted in any building on the premises other than the building which is used by the occupant as his private dwelling and shall not include the employment of any additional person in the performance of such services. Such home occupations shall not include clairvoyance, fortunetelling, experimentation that involves the use of chemicals or matter or energy that may create or cause to be created noises, noxious odors, or hazards that will endanger the health, safety, or welfare of the community. 
Hospital means an institution providing health services, for in-patients and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient department, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. 
Hotel means a public commercial lodging facility intended for use as temporary residence which may make provisions for meals, entertainment and various personal services provided for compensation to persons traveling for business, tourism or other visitation purposes in which ingress and egress from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. 
Household pet means an animal which is customarily kept for company or pleasure within a home or yard which is not exhibited to the public, and raised for commercial purposes, (e.g., show dogs). Household pets include domestic canines, felines, tropical birds, fish, rabbits, rodents and other animals customarily sold in pet stores. 
Impervious surface means any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land, including, but not limited to, buildings, paved roads, parking lots and driveways, decks, swimming pools and patios, but not including graveled driveways and parking areas. 

Inoperable vehicle means any motorized vehicle, other than those vehicles temporarily disabled incapable of immediately being driven. Any motorized vehicle without a current vehicle registration tag shall be considered an inoperable vehicle. 
Junkyard/salvage yard means any property involving the abandonment, parking, storage or disassembly of junked or inoperable vehicles or junked machinery, the abandonment, storage, sale, or resale of used auto parts, tires, scrap iron, metal, used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, refrigerators or other old household appliances, used brick, wood, or other building/structural materials, used paper, rags or other scrap materials. 
Kennel means the housing, breeding, boarding or training of four or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals, operated for the purpose of providing income or revenue. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands of the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, scraping, excavating, transporting, or filling of land; and any construction, rebuilding or alteration of a structure, but specifically excluding agricultural and gardening practices. 
Landfill means an area wherein solid wastes are placed, under license, compacted and covered but specifically excluding hazardous or radioactive wastes. 
Landscape strip means that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established as landscaped open space, the width of which is measured from a given property line and extending the developed portion of the property line. A landscape strip, as distinguished from a buffer, may be disturbed by grading or side development but is maintained as landscaped open space. A landscape strip may consist of grass lawns, decorative planting, berms, walls, fences or other features designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect within and outside of the development. 

Landscaping means changing, rearranging or adding to the original vegetation or scenery of a piece of land to produce an aesthetic effect appropriate for the use to which the land is put. It may include reshaping the land by moving the earth, as well as preserving the original vegetation. 
Landscaping service means an establishment engaged in performing a variety of lawn and landscaping services such as lawn fertilizing, mowing, spraying and planting, and the planting and maintenance of landscaping. 
Laundromat means a business that provides home-type washing and drying machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises. 
Library means a building in which literary, musical, artistic or reference materials are kept for use but not generally for sale. 
Loading and unloading space means a space, typically with dimensions of 12 feet by 60 feet, logically and conveniently located for pickups or deliveries or for loading or unloading, scaled to delivery vehicles to be used, and accessible to such vehicles. 
Lodginghouse means a fraternity house, sorority house, dormitory, or other such building designed and occupied, with or without separate kitchen or housekeeping facilities for each unit. 
Lot means a parcel of land having principal frontage on a public street; a developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership legally transferable as a single unit of land. 
Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of public street rights-of-way but inclusive of easements. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot coverage means the part or percent of a lot occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings and structures, but not including unenclosed parking areas. 
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
Lot, double frontage, means any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 

Lot, flag, means a tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a public street is less than the required minimum width for construction of a building or structure on that lot. 
Lot frontage means the width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the records of the county superior court clerk; or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the same office as of the date of adoption of these regulations. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum required front yard (regulatory front building setback) line. 

Manufactured home means a structure built to conform to national standards embodied in the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq. Administered by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes mandatory plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. A manufactured home displays a certificate from the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Manufactured home park means a parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned or improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for residential use, including land, buildings and facilities used by the occupants of manufactured homes on such property. 
Manufactured home space means a parcel of land within a manufactured home park which is reserved or leased for the placement of an individual mobile home and accessory structures for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Manufactured home subdivision means parcels of land planned or improved for the placement of manufactured homes on individual lots for residential use. 
Manufacturing, processing and assembling means the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. The land uses engaged in these activities are usually described as plants, factories or mills and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Establishments engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products are also considered under this definition if the new product is neither a fixed structure nor other fixed improvement. Also included is the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastic resins or liquors. 
Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure made of metal or other durable material affixed to the wall of a building. 
Metes and bounds means a system of describing and identifying land by distances or measures (metes) and bearings or direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference, such as a monument or other marker or the corner of intersecting streets. 

Mini-warehouse means a building or group of buildings that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers used for storage, which may include accessory office or night watchman's residence, but not including retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any other commercial use. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land or any portion thereof under single ownership which has been designed, planned, or improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes for residential use, including land, buildings, and facilities used by the occupants of mobile homes on such property. 
Modular structure means a factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential or commercial purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of either the Southern Building Code Congress International or the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
Motel means a public commercial lodging facility intended for use as temporary residence, which may also include provision of meals, entertainment and various personal services, provided for compensation to persons traveling for business, tourism or other visitation purposes, distinguished from a hotel in that ingress or egress to and from all rooms is made primarily from an exterior walkway rather than from an interior lobby. 
Museum means an establishment engaged in the procurement, care, study, and display of objects of historical, educational and cultural value and interest. 
Nonconforming lot means a lot, the area, width, or other characteristic of which fails to meet requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and which was of record as of the date of adoption of these regulations. Any lot which was subsequently annexed into the city limits which does not meet the requirements of the particular zoning district shall also be considered a nonconforming lot. 
Nonconforming structure means any building or structure which does not conform to the regulations governing the bulk, location, height or size of buildings or structures permitted in the district. 
Nonconforming use means any building or use of land or building lawfully existing at the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived tor as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter, which does not conform to the permitted use provisions established herein for the district in which it is located. 
Nuisance means anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of property, endangers public health or safety, or is offensive to the senses; anything that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another, even though it may otherwise be lawful. 
Nuisance, public, means a nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation. 
Nursing home means a facility which admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision; it maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care, rehabilitative nursing care, and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will be available for any medical or dental emergency and who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the home. 
Off-street means not located on a street as defined by this article. 
Office means a building or portion thereof wherein predominantly administrative, professional or clerical operations are performed, and not involving retail sales or other sales of any kind on the premises. 
Official zoning map means the map, which accompanies this chapter text, that delineates the geographic location of the boundaries of zoning districts established in this chapter in relation to natural features, manmade features or property uses. 
Open air business means any commercial establishment that displays products in a non-enclosed area. 
Open space, landscaped, means that portion or portions of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, set aside and maintained as a buffer, landscape strip or other approved open area. 
Outdoor display means the keeping of any goods, junk, material or merchandise outside of a business, building or establishment or in an area visible from a public street, for display, advertisement or purposes of attracting rental or sales. The term "outdoor display" shall not be construed as to include the temporary loading or unloading of such goods, junk, material or merchandise to or from an enclosed area. 
Outdoor storage means the keeping of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or commercial vehicles in the same outdoor place for more than 24 hours. 
Parking lot means any public or private open area used for the express purpose of temporary parking of private motor vehicles. A parking lot may be the principal use on a given lot or an accessory use to the principal use on a given lot. 
Parking space means an area having an area of at least 160 square feet and 300 square feet, including maneuvering space within a parking lot, to be used exclusively as a temporary parking space for a motor vehicle. 
Permitted use means a use which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
Personal care home means a dwelling in which the aged or infirm persons are boarded and receive personal care on a 24-hour basis, but not including professional treatment. 
Photography studio means an establishment engaged in photography for hire for the general public, including, but not limited to, portrait, passport, wedding and other special occasion photographs. 
Planned unit development means a form of development usually characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units, clustered buildings, common open space, and a mix of building types and land uses in a more dense setting than allowable on separate zoned lots. 
Pool hall means an establishment containing one or more billiard tables, operated for profit, and open to the general public. 
Premises means a lot as otherwise used in this article. 
Public use means any building, structure or use owned or operated by the federal, state or a local government or any authority, agency, board or commission of the above governments, which is necessary to serve a public purpose, such as but not limited to the following: government administrative buildings, police and fire stations, public health facilities and hospitals, public works camps, parks and community centers, public roads and streets, airports, water and sanitary sewerage storage, intake, collection and treatment and pumping facilities, public housing facilities, jails and correctional centers. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicular type portable structure which can be towed, hauled or driven and is primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping and travel uses. 
Recreational vehicle (RV) park means any lot of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy on a temporary basis by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters by campers, vacationers or travelers. 
Recycling collection center means a principal or accessory use that serves as a neighborhood or regional drop-off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources such as cans, bottles and newspapers, but specifically excluding processing of such resources. 
Recycling plant means a facility in which recoverable resources such as cans, bottles and newspapers are recycled, reprocessed and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used in packaging or for production. 
Rehabilitation means the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values. 
Rehabilitation center means facilities authorized or licensed by appropriate agencies for the primary purpose of rehabilitation of: offenders against the law; persons with drug or alcohol abuse problems; mentally handicapped; and physically handicapped. 
Residence for caretaker or night watchman means an accessory residence, located inside or in addition to the principal structure or use of a parcel of land, designed or occupied by security personnel for security reasons only. 
Residential district means any R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning district as indicated on the official zoning map. 
Restaurant means any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment or beverages. 
Restaurant, drive-in, means any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment or beverage to persons in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may eat or drink on the premises. 
Retail trade establishment, enclosed, means any business offering goods and products for sale to the public, which operates entirely within a structure containing a roof and walls on all sides, except for outdoor display or other use during business hours and accessory storage in enclosed, subordinate buildings. Incidental repair is also included. The following are considered enclosed retail trade establishments (list is not all-inclusive): paint, glass and wallpaper stores; grocery and miscellaneous food stores including retail bakeries; apparel, shoe and accessory clothing stores; furniture, floor covering and home furnishing stores; household appliance stores; radio, television and computer stores; musical instrument stores; record, tape and compact disc stores; eating and drinking places not involving drive-in or drive-through facilities; drug stores and proprietary stores; liquor stores; used merchandise stores; sporting goods and bicycle shops; book, art and stationery stores; hobby, toy and game shops; jewelry, gift, novelty, souvenir and antique shops; camera and photographic supply stores, luggage and leather goods stores; sewing, needlework and piece goods stores; catalog and mail order stores; florists; tobacco stores; optical goods stores; news stands; automotive parts stores; video rental and sales stores; watches and clocks; pawnshops; convenience stores with or without retail gasoline sales. 
Retail trade establishment, unenclosed, means any business offering goods and products for sale to the public, which does not operate entirely within a structure containing a roof and walls on all sides, and which all or a portion of the goods and products are displayed or stored, or business transacted, in the open air or other shelter not completely enclosed. The following are considered unenclosed retail trade establishments (list is not all-inclusive): lumber and building materials; retail nurseries and garden supply stores; mobile and manufactured home/modular building dealers; new and used car, truck, boat, recreational vehicle, camper, motorcycle, and other motorized vehicle sales and leasing; eating and drinking places including drive-in and drive-through facilities; fuel oil and liquefied petroleum dealers; agricultural implement and equipment sales and rental; Christmas tree sales; flea markets; monument sales establishments; automatic teller facilities; gas stations; produce stands; firewood sales. 
Rezoning means an amendment to or a change in the official zoning map. 
Right-of-way means that area, distinguished from an easement, which is owned in fee-simple title by the governing body or other government, for the present or future use of roads, streets, and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
Roominghouse means a building where, for compensation, lodging only is provided. 
Sanitarium means a hospital used for treating chronic and usually long-term illness. 
School means a facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary academic instruction. A school is considered public if operated by a unit of government. 
School, trade, technical, business, means an establishment in which is offered, for compensation, instruction in a trade, craft, technical field, or business skills. 
Screening means a method of shielding, obscuring or buffering one use or building from another use or building by fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, natural vegetation or other means; a visual and acoustical barrier which is of such nature and density that provides yearround maximum opacity from the ground to a height of at least six feet or that screens structures and activities from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot. Screening methods include opaque fences, walls, hedges, berms and other features. 
Semi-public use means any building, structure or use owned or operated by private utilities or private companies for a public purpose, or which is reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities, such as but not limited to the following: underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water distribution or transmission lines or systems, electric power substations, wires, towers, cables, and poles, railroad facilities and bus and air terminals. 
Septic tank means an approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to effect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
Service, automotive, means an establishment providing services and repairs to motor-driven vehicles, including, but not limited to: rental car facilities; automobile parking lots; top and body, paint, automotive glass, transmission, and tire repair shops; car washes, including automated and full service facilities; oil change and lubrication. 
Service establishment, business, means a facility engaged in support functions to establishments operating for a profit, including, but not limited to: advertising agencies; photocopying, blueprinting and duplication services; commercial art and graphic design; disinfecting, exterminating and pest control; personnel supply services and employment agencies; computer and data processing services; detective and security system services; accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services; publications and business consulting firms. 
Service establishment, personal, means a facility engaged in the provision of services to persons and their apparel, including, but not limited to: barbershops and beauty shops; coin-operated and full service laundries; photographic studios; shoe repair and shoeshine parlors; dance studios, schools and halls; specialized instructional studios and schools; day care centers; and massage parlors. 
Service, lodging, means a facility that offers temporary shelter accommodations, or place for such shelter, open to the public for a fee, including, but not limited to: hotels, motels and motor hotels; roominghouses and boardinghouses; bed and breakfast inns; recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds. 
Service, miscellaneous, means those service establishments not otherwise specifically classified, including, but not limited to: food catering; interior decorating; locksmiths; travel agencies; animal hospitals and veterinary clinics; funeral homes, mortuaries and mausoleums; construction contractors establishments not involving outside storage of vehicles or materials; hospitals and clinics; palmreading and fortunetelling; pet grooming, pet psychologists, dog obedience schools and kennels; taxidermists. 
Service station means any building, structure or land used for the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel, oil, accessories, and motor vehicle servicing, except that major repairs, body repairs, and painting of motor vehicles shall not be considered motor vehicle servicing. 
Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a street, alley, or the property boundary lines of a lot and the front, rear, or side lines of a building located on that lot. 
Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit, with off-street parking on the property. 
Sign means any writing, pictorial presentation, illustration, or decoration, flag, banner or pennant or other device which is used to announce, direct attention to, identify, advertise or otherwise make anything known, and which is designed to be visible from any street or adjoining property, except for house numbers and address numbers and non-business letters on mailboxes. For the purposes of these regulations, any sign not visible from a street or adjoining property or any sign within a business, office, mall or totally enclosed area is exempted from these regulations, as are all approved traffic control signs and devices. 
Sign, animated, means any sign of which all or any part thereof visibly moves in any fashion whatsoever; and any sign which contains or uses for illumination any light, lights or lighting device or devices which change color, flash or alternate, show movement or motion, or automatically change the appearance of the sign or any part thereof. 
Sign area means the entire area within a circle, triangle, or parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign consists solely of lettering or other sign elements printed or mounted on a wall of a building without any distinguishing border, panel, or background; any blank rectangular area which consists of ten percent or more of the area of the sign as otherwise computed shall be disregarded. All of the lettering and other sign elements printed or mounted upon a wall of a building without any distinguishing border, panel, or background and pertaining to the same enterprise shall be treated as a single sign for purposes of area computation. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be counted as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. 
Sign, bench, means a sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
Sign, construction, means any sign giving the name and location of principal contractors, architects, and lending institutions responsible for construction on the site where the sign is placed. 
Sign, directional, means a sign temporarily or permanently erected on a site other than that to which persons are directed (off-site) which denotes the route to a particular business or other destination. 
Sign, flashing, means a sign designed to attract attention through the use of a flashing, changing, revolving or flickering light source, or a change in light intensity. 
Sign, freestanding/ground, means a permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of any building for support. 
Sign height means the vertical distance from the finished grade at the base of the supporting structure to the top of the sign, or its frame or supporting structure, whichever is higher. 
Sign, identification, means a sign which depicts the name or address of a building, subdivision or establishment on the premises where the sign is located as a means of identifying the building, subdivision or establishment. 
Sign, internally illuminated, means a sign illuminated with a light source which is enclosed within the sign and viewed through a translucent panel. 

Sign, portable, moveable, means any sign that is, or is intended to be, affixed or mounted to a frame with or without wheels or other substantial base for the express purpose of easy mobility from one location to another. These signs include, but are not limited to, signs on wheels, trailers or other devices designed and used for relocation. 
Sign, temporary, means a sign with or without a structural frame, that is not permanently attached to a building, a structure, or the ground, and that is intended for a limited period of display. 
Sign, window, means any sign painted or placed inside or upon a door or window facing the outside and which is intended to be seen from the exterior, which is devoted exclusively to operational aspects of a business or other establishment (i.e., open, closed, out-to-lunch, no smoking, etc.) and which does not contain general advertising material. 

Site plan means a graphic illustration, two-dimensional, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a lot or tract and the location of all buildings, structures, uses and principal site development features proposed for a specific lot or tract of land. 
Story means that portion of a building comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next above. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare which is open to the general public and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, arterial, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, means streets and highway facilities, including full and partial access controlled highways and major urban area entrance highways, which are designed to carry the highest traffic volumes and the longest trips through and within an urban area. 
Street, collector, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, means those streets that collect traffic from minor streets or other collector streets and channel it to the arterial system. Collector streets provide land access and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas. 
Street, public, means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent or semi-permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground, not including utility poles, but specifically including tents, bleachers, gasoline pumps, recreational vehicles, travel trailers signs, and structures from which products are vended and similar objects. 
Subdivision means the division of a parcel or tract of land into three or more lots for the purposes of creation of lots for development, the rearrangement of existing lot lines, or for the purpose of transfer of ownership. 
Temporary use means a use intended for a specified limited duration. 
Townhouse means one of a group of three or more attached dwelling units under fee-simple ownership. 
Transitional use means a permitted use, building or structure that by nature or level and scale of activity acts as a transition or buffer between two or more incompatible uses. 
Transportation, communication and utility facilities includes, but is not limited to, the following: bus passenger stations and terminals; airports, heliports and helistops; taxicab and limousine services; radio and television studios and broadcasting towers; recycling collection centers; truckstops and truck terminals; trucking and courier services; marinas; railroad facilities; gas, electric, water supply services; emergency medical services; ultra-light flight parks. 
Travel trailer means a portable dwelling or lodging unit having no other foundation than wheels, distinguished from a mobile or manufactured home, designed for short-term travel, recreational or vacation use, including pickup campers and motor homes. 
Tree means any self-supporting, woody perennial plant having a single trunk diameter of two inches or more which normally grows at maturity to an overall height of a minimum of 15 feet. 
Truckstop means an area principally devoted to the service, re-fueling, temporary storage or parking of trucks, including accessory buildings, structures and uses such as restaurants. 
Truck terminal means an area where cargo is stored for routing or reshipment and where trucks load and unload cargo on a regular basis, or an area in which semi-trailers or trucks are parked and stored. 
Unenclosed area means any area of a given lot or structure which is not covered with a roof and protected by opaque walls on each of the sides of the area or structure. 
Use means any purpose for which a building or structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or structure or on a tract of land. 
Utility means public or private water and sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, cable television lines, roads, driveways, river/lake access facilities, stormwater facilities, railroads, airports and bus terminals. 
Variance means a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the height, area, placement, setback, yard, buffer, landscape strip, parking and loading regulations as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
Warehouse means a building or group of buildings for the storage of goods or wares, with controlled access to contents. 
Wholesale distribution means an establishment engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users or to other wholesalers. 
Wrecked motor vehicle compound means an area used to store disabled motor vehicles until such time as their disposition (either by junk, salvage or repair) has been determined by the insurance company, the owner of the vehicle, or his legal representative. 
Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building, which is open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. A yard may contain a parking or loading area unless otherwise specified by these regulations. 
Yard, front, means a space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. In the case of a corner lot, both spaces with street frontage shall be considered front yards. In the case of double frontage lots, the spaces as defined above shall both be considered front yards. 
Yard, rear, means the space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard sale means the temporary sale of home furniture, appliances, clothing or domestic items owned by an occupant of a residential dwelling and taking place on the premises on which such occupant resides, whether in the yard or in a carport or garage, usually as a result of the occupant moving/relocating to another place of residence. Yard sales which do not take place on the premises on which such occupant resides are considered open-air businesses. 
Yard, side, means a space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between the building and the side lot line and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 

Zero lot line means the location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more building sides have no side building setback and rest directly on a side lot line. 
Zoning means a legislative procedure in which the community is divided into districts or zones within which permitted uses, and in some cases conditional uses, are established as well as regulations governing lot size, bulk, height and other development requirements. 
Zoning administrator means the city manager or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 301; Ord. of 2-14-1995, § 14) 
Sec. 46-2. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The location and boundaries of the districts listed in section 46-25 are hereby established as shown on a map entitled Official Zoning Map of the City. The map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(b)  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bear the seal of the city or that of a notary public under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in city zoning regulations," together with the date of the adoption of the ordinance. The official zoning map may be reproduced so that additional copies of the map may be made available, upon proper certification as described above. 
(c)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the applicable state law, changes are made in boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council with appropriate entry or indication of such amendment on the official zoning map. The formal action by the city council to change the boundaries of the official zoning map shall be sufficient to make such zoning district change effective. Upon such changes, the zoning administrator is authorized to enter such changes on the official zoning map, and readoption of the map shall not be required. 
(d)  No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(e)  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map shall be located in the office of the zoning administrator and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the city. 
(f)  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bear the seal of the city or a notary public under the following words: "This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the city zoning regulations." 
(g)  Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map, or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. of 1993, §§ 402, 403) 
Sec. 46-3. - Chapter to be made available to public. 
The zoning administrator, city clerk or other official in the city shall ensure that copies of this chapter are printed and available for distribution to the general public. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1995, § 13) 
Secs. 46-4—46-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-25. - Use districts enumerated. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into use districts as set out below: 

 
(Ord. of 1993, § 401) 
Sec. 46-26. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
(a)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets or highways, street right-of-way lines or railroad right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such centerline, street right-of-way lines, or railroad right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(b)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the corporate limit line of the city, such corporate limit line shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(c)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines or such lines extended, such property lines or such lines extended, as indicated by boundary survey, deed or legal description maintained in the official file of the zoning adoption or amendment, if available, shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(d)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streambeds or river beds, such centerline shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(e)  In the case where the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the city council shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 404) 
Sec. 46-27. - District boundary line divides a lot of single ownership. 
Where a boundary line as appearing on the official zoning map divides a lot in single ownership at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the requirements for the district in which the greater portion of the lot lies may be extended to the balance of the lot without recourse or amendment procedure, provided that this provision shall not apply to a double frontage lot. In the case of a double frontage lot, the restrictions of the district applying to the adjoining lots which front on the same street as the lot frontage in question shall apply. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 405) 
Sec. 46-28. - Minimum requirements. 
Within each district, the regulations set forth in this chapter shall be minimum requirements and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of building, structure or land. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 702) 
Sec. 46-29. - Use prohibited when not specified. 
Unless otherwise stated, any use not specifically permitted in a use district as provided in these regulations shall be prohibited in that district. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 710) 
Sec. 46-30. - Minimum setback and buffer requirements by zoning district. 
Principal building setbacks (in feet) shall be as follows: 

 
Additional setbacks may be required for specific uses as provided in permitted uses sections of particular zoning districts. 
*See section 46-237. 
a When development in this district abuts an A-1, R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning district boundary, a buffer with a minimum width of 15 feet shall be provided along the entire property line abutting the zoning district. 
b When development in this district abuts an A-1, R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning district boundary, a buffer with a minimum width of 30 feet shall be provided along the entire property line abutting the district. 
c No new building shall be constructed with a setback greater than five feet from any front property line or public right-of-way, if adjacent lots are occupied with buildings erected within five feet of the front property line or public right-of-way. No new building shall be constructed with more than one side yard if adjacent lots are occupied with buildings erected within two feet of the side property line. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1801) 
Sec. 46-31. - Minimum lot width, lot size, floor area and density requirements. 
Minimum lot width, lot size, floor area and density shall be as follows: 

 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1802) 
Sec. 46-32. - Lot size on land containing slopes of ten percent or more. 
(a)  Lot size for lots positioned on land containing a slope of ten percent or more shall be as follows: 

 
(b)  Interpolation shall be permitted. See figures 1 and 2 for determination of slope and relationship between buildings and the natural resource base. 
Figure 1  RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BUILDING AND THE NATURAL RESOURCE BASE 

Typical site areas illustrating the varying degrees of slope and their relation to the actual building site. Floodplains, tree protection zones, zones of minor improvements and locations for scenic trails are also shown. 
Figure 2  DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE SLOPE FOR LOTS 


(Ord. of 1993, § 1803) 
Sec. 46-33. - Use, occupancy and erection. 
No building, structure, land, open space or water shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure, land, open space or water, unless in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 701) 
Sec. 46-34. - Height limitations. 
(a)  No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except as otherwise specifically exempted in this article, to exceed the maximum height for the district in which the building or structure is located; provided, however, that the city council may permit buildings and structures to exceed height limitations upon approval of a conditional use as specified in these regulations. 
(b)  The height limitations established herein shall not apply to chimneys, smokestacks, church spires and steeples, domes, flagpoles, public monuments, observation towers, water towers, non-commercial radio and television towers, electricity transmission towers, utility poles and similar structures. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 703) 
Sec. 46-35. - Every use must be upon a lot. 
No building or structure shall be erected or use established unless upon a lot of record as defined by these regulations except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 704) 
Sec. 46-36. - One principal building on a lot. 
Only one principal building and its accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any one lot intended for such use; provided, however, that more than one multiple dwelling, office, institutional, commercial or industrial building may be located upon a lot, subject to setbacks and separation as provided in these regulations. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 705) 
Sec. 46-37. - Separation between principal buildings. 
No principal building shall be located closer than 20 feet to another principal building. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 706) 
Sec. 46-38. - Reduction in lot size prohibited. 
No lot shall be reduced, divided or changed in size so that lot width, size of yards, lot area per dwelling unit or any other requirement of these regulations is not maintained, unless the reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is acquired for a public purpose. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 707) 
Sec. 46-39. - Annexation. 
Any land area subsequently added to the incorporated area of the city shall automatically be classified R-1 (single-family residential district) until or unless otherwise classified by amendment to the official zoning map. Within 60 days after the date of annexation approval, the planning commission shall, after public hearing, recommend to the city council a zoning classification for each newly annexed area which will carry out the objectives of the comprehensive plan. Upon such recommendation by the planning commission for an amendment to the official zoning map as related to the subject property the city council may act in accordance with normal procedures specified in these regulations to assign a different zoning district to the property. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 708) 
Sec. 46-40. - Street frontage requirement. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on a lot, and no lot shall be subdivided, that does not abut for at least 30 feet on a public street. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 709) 
Sec. 46-41. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
With the exception of water well houses and other utilities, accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only in side or rear yards, unless otherwise provided by these regulations. Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only if they meet the following: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and uses shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any lot line. 
(2)  Where a building housing an accessory use is structurally attached to the principal building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations applicable to the principal building and shall not be considered an accessory building. 
(3)  In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both streets. 
(4)  Detached accessory buildings shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the principal building on a lot. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 711) 
Sec. 46-42. - Regulations for specific accessory structures. 
The following specified structures shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  Fences and walls. Installation of fences and barrier walls shall require a permit issued by the zoning administrator. No fence or wall shall be erected closer than two feet from a public right-of-way or in such a manner as to obstruct vision on a public right-of-way. Barbed wire top strands six feet above the ground may be permitted in agricultural, commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(2)  Gasoline pumps. Gasoline pumps and pump islands shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(3)  Canopies and carports. Canopies and other attached or detached structures intended for cover shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(4)  Nonresidential occupancy of mobile homes. Mobile homes, manufactured homes or other temporary portable structures shall not be used as a permanent or temporary office, classroom, store, or for-hire work space in any district; provided, however, that such mobile homes or structures may be used for a temporary construction office for a licensed contractor in any district, upon issuance of a permit by the zoning administrator. The permit shall be temporary but renewable once after a period of six months. 
(5)  Swimming pools. Swimming pools accessory to residences shall be enclosed by a security fence a minimum of six feet in height. The fence shall provide security against unauthorized use of the swimming pool, and all pools shall meet any applicable code requirements on swimming pools. A permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator for the siting and construction of a swimming pool. Swimming pools which are operated as an accessory use to hotels, motels or other uses shall be restricted to use by the patrons or guests of the principal use on the subject property and shall not be opened to the general public for a fee. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 712) 
Sec. 46-43. - Home occupations. 
(a)  A home occupation shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation, with the exception that employment of one person not residing in the dwelling may be permitted. 
(2)  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the residential character of the building or lot. 
(3)  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of a home occupation. 
(4)  No internal or external alterations of the dwelling solely for the accommodation of a home occupation are permitted, with the exception of one additional outside entrance for business use. 
(5)  One non-illuminated, non-animated business identification sign or name plate not exceeding four square feet in area indicating the name or occupation of occupant shall be permitted. 
(6)  Use of a building for a home occupation shall not exceed 25 percent of one floor of the principal building. Home occupations are not permitted, in whole or part, within accessory buildings. 
(7)  A business license shall be obtained from the city prior to the operation of any home occupation. The business license shall require approval by the zoning administrator. 
(8)  The following uses are allowable as home occupations (not all inclusive): tutoring, consultation and instruction in music, dance, arts, crafts and similar subjects, limited to six students at one time; day care centers serving six or less persons; professional services (e.g., attorneys, architects, accountants, realtors, insurance and travel agents; secretarial services and answering services); mail order and general offices not involving the storage of equipment, materials or vehicles; phone solicitations; beauty salons and barbershops limited to two patrons at a time; food catering and home products sales agents. 
(9)  The following uses are specifically prohibited as home occupations (not all inclusive): cabinet shops and/or metal cutting; doctors, dentists or other medical professions; automobile repair or related work, small engine repair shops, and landscaping, nursery or greenhouse operations. 
(b)  The failure of a home occupation licensee to comply with any of the above conditions shall be reasonable grounds for revocation of a home occupation business license. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 713) 
Sec. 46-44. - Visibility at intersections. 
No fence, wall, sign, hedge or planting which obstructs the sight lines at elevations between 2.5 and 12 feet above any roadway shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines, or such lines extended, and a line connecting such right-of-way lines at points 25 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 

(Ord. of 1993, § 714) 
Sec. 46-45. - Abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles and materials. 
Except as otherwise expressly permitted, it shall be prohibited in all districts to park or continuously store abandoned, wrecked, junked or inoperable vehicles, and power-driven construction equipment. Used lumber or metal, or any other miscellaneous scrap material in quantity that is visible from a public street or adjacent or abutting property is prohibited. These prohibitions shall not be construed as to prohibit the temporary repair or maintenance of automobiles owned by the property owner or the storage of such vehicles, equipment or other materials within an enclosed building, provided that such vehicles, equipment or materials are not for commercial sale. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 715) 
Sec. 46-46. - Subdivision plats must meet zoning requirements. 
No proposed plat of a subdivision, nor any plat of re-subdivision, shall hereafter be approved by the city council or by the planning commission unless the lots within such plat equal or exceed the minimum size and width requirements set forth in the various zoning districts in these regulations and unless such plat fully conforms with the statutes of the state and regulations of the city council. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 716) 
Sec. 46-47. - Yard sales. 
Yard sales will be allowed in all residential zoning districts as frequently as once every six months. The duration of any yard sale shall not exceed 72 hours. Sales must be operated in such a manner so as not to be a nuisance to the neighbors or obstruct sidewalks, driveways or other public ways. A permit shall be required. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 717) 
Sec. 46-48. - Designation after street abandonment. 
Where a public street, alley or other right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned public street, alley, or right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 406) 
Secs. 46-49—46-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - R-1, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-70. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-1 single-family residential district is intended to establish and preserve quiet, stable single-family residential neighborhoods at low densities (up to approximately 2.9 units per acre) free from other uses except those which are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 901) 
Sec. 46-71. - Permitted uses. 
In R-1 single-family residential district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings not including mobile or manufactured homes. 
(2)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal residential use of the property, including guest houses (not accessory apartments) home gardens, non-commercial greenhouses, and shelters or enclosures for household pets. Livestock and poultry raising activities are specifically prohibited. 
(3)  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, and their solely owned and operated customary accessory facilities, including cemeteries, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum area of one acre, principal buildings are setback a minimum of 50 feet from any property line, and parking areas are located outside of the required front yard and separated from any side or rear property line by a minimum six-foot high, opaque fence or wall, or a densely planted landscape strip of at least ten feet in width. 
(4)  Home occupations as limited in section 46-43. 
(5)  Parks, playgrounds, community centers, tennis courts, swimming pools, golf courses and other recreational facilities, operated on a nonprofit basis. 
(6)  Public and semi-public buildings and uses. 
(7)  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary. 
(8)  Schools, parochial and private offering courses in general education substantially similar to that of a public school, not offered for profit. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 902) 
Sec. 46-72. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
Area, height, density and placement requirements shall be as specified in sections 46-30 and 46-31. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 903) 
Secs. 46-73—46-102. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-2, MODERATE DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-103. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-2 moderate density residential district is intended to establish and preserve quiet, stable residential neighborhoods with possible mixtures of single-family residences, duplexes and other dwelling types at medium densities (up to approximately 5.8 units per acre) free from other uses except those which are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1001) 
Sec. 46-104. - Permitted uses. 
In the R-2 moderate density residential districts, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings including mobile and manufactured homes, all dwellings being subject to the following design standards: 
a.  The structure shall meet all applicable codes; 
b.  The structure shall be placed on a permanent foundation; 
c.  Residences must be constructed with a minimum roof slope of two inches vertical rise for every 12 inches of horizontal run, commonly referred to as a 2:12 slope; 
d.  All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed; and 
e.  Each home shall be completely skirted with an appropriate barrier, properly ventilated, to enclose the area between the bottom of the structure and the ground. Such skirting shall not be required for those homes with a complete masonry or concrete perimeter foundation. 
(2)  Accessory apartments. 
(3)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal residential use of the property, including guest houses (not accessory apartments) home gardens, non-commercial greenhouses, land shelters or enclosures for household pets. Livestock and poultry raising activities are specifically prohibited. 
(4)  Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses), subject to the requirement of section 46-107. 
(5)  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, and their solely owned and operated customary accessory facilities, including cemeteries, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum area of one acre, principal buildings are set back a minimum of 50 feet from any property line, and parking areas are located outside of the required front yard and separated from any side or rear property line by a minimum six foot high, opaque fence or wall, or a densely planted landscape strip of at least ten feet in width. 
(6)  Two-family dwellings (duplexes), three-family dwellings (triplexes) and four-family dwelling (quadraplexes). 
(7)  Home occupations as limited in section 46-43. 
(8)  Parks, playgrounds, community centers, tennis courts, swimming pools, golf courses and other recreational facilities, operated on a nonprofit basis. 
(9)  Public and semi-public buildings and uses. 
(10)  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary. 
(11)  Schools, parochial and private offering courses in general education substantially similar to that of a public school, not offered for profit. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1002) 
Sec. 46-105. - Conditional uses. 
In the R-2 moderate density residential districts, professional offices, not to exceed a density of 5,000 square feet of area per acre nor a total of 10,000 square feet, are permitted as conditional uses. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1003) 
Sec. 46-106. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
Area, height, density and placement requirements for R-2 moderate density residential districts are as specified in sections 46-30 and 46-31. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1004) 
Sec. 46-107. - Townhouse developments. 
All developments in R-2 moderate density residential districts containing fee-simple townhouses shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Lots. Each townhouse shall be located on its own lot of record, and subdivision plat approval shall be required in accordance with the city subdivision regulations. 
(2)  Minimum lot size, frontage, width. Each townhouse lot shall contain a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet. The minimum lot width and frontage for each lot shall be 18 feet. The minimum lot area for a townhouse development shall be one acre. 
(3)  Setbacks. Townhouses shall conform to the setbacks established for the zoning district in which it is located; provided, however, that zero lot line (no side building setback) is permitted between individual townhouse units forming the same building. Between buildings, there shall be a side yard of not less than 25 feet. The rear setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet. Dwelling units which form a part of a single building shall have the front setbacks and rooflines varied/staggered by a minimum of two feet. 
(4)  Maximum unit per building. No more than six townhouses shall be permitted to form any building. 
(5)  Streets. All streets within a townhouse development shall be built to city specifications as provided in the city subdivision regulations and dedicated to the city. 
(6)  Maximum density. Townhouse developments shall not exceed the maximum density permitted within the particular zoning district. 
(7)  Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. No off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1005) 
Secs. 46-108—46-127. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-3, MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-128. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-3 multiple-family residential district is intended to provide suitable land for a variety of dwelling types at medium to high densities (up to 12 units per acre) in areas served by public water and sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1101) 
Sec. 46-129. - Permitted uses. 
In R-3 multiple-family residential districts, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-2 moderate-density residential district. 
(2)  Apartments subject to the requirements of section 46-132. 
(3)  Churches, synagogues, temples and places of worship. 
(4)  Condominiums, with a minimum lot size of two acres for any condominium development, and subject to the provisions of section 46-210. 
(5)  Institutional buildings for private clubs and social organizations, nonprofit. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1102) 
Sec. 46-130. - Conditional uses. 
In R-3 multiple-family residential district, the following conditional uses are permitted: 
(1)  Roominghouses or boardinghouses. 
(2)  Personal care homes, nursing homes and convalescent homes. 
(3)  Mobile home parks, subject to the requirements of section 46-165. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1103) 
Sec. 46-131. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
Area, height, density and placement requirements for R-3 multiple-family residential districts are as specified in sections 46-30 and 46-31. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1104) 
Sec. 46-132. - Apartment developments. 
The following additional requirements apply to apartment developments in R-3 multiple-family residential districts: 
(1)  Site plan approval by the planning commission shall be required. 
(2)  Apartment buildings shall be constructed with a separation of at least 20 feet if one or more buildings contain two stories, and a separation of at least 30 feet if one or more buildings contain three or more stories. 
(3)  No principal building shall be constructed less than 40 feet from any property line. 
(4)  Each apartment development shall have a minimum of 20 percent of the development's total land area as landscaped open space. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1105) 
Sec. 46-133. - Residential condominium developments. 
All developments in R-3 multiple-family residential districts containing residential condominiums shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Site plan approval. Site plan approval by the planning commission shall be required. 
(2)  Compliance with state law. Condominium developments shall meet all applicable state laws, including the state condominium act. 
(3)  Bylaws. Proposed condominium bylaws shall be submitted with the application for site plan approval. 
(4)  Setbacks. Residential condominiums shall conform to the setbacks established for the zoning district in which it is located; provided, however, that the rear setback for all residential condominium buildings shall be 25 feet. 
(5)  Maximum density. Residential condominium developments shall not exceed the maximum density permitted within the particular zoning district. 
(6)  Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. No off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1106) 
Secs. 46-134—46-164. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MHP, MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-165. - Applicability. 
Development of mobile home parks in the MHP district shall conform to the regulations of this division. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1107(intro.)) 
Sec. 46-166. - Site plan approval required. 
All mobile home park developments shall require site plan approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1107(1)) 
Sec. 46-167. - Location and frontage. 
A mobile home park district development shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a public street. 
SAMPLE MOBILE HOME PARK SITE PLANS 


(Ord. of 1993, § 1107(2)) 
Sec. 46-168. - Street requirements. 
Interior roads serving the development shall be constructed to city standards as specified in the city subdivision regulations, and in addition shall have a minimum pavement width of 20 feet. If dedicated to the public, the roads within the development shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 40 feet. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1107(3)) 
Sec. 46-169. - Lot area and width. 
A mobile park home district development shall have a minimum area of ten contiguous acres and a lot width of at least 200 feet. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1107(4)) 
Sec. 46-170. - Density. 
The maximum density of a mobile home park district development is ten units per acre. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1107(5)) 
Sec. 46-171. - Recreation and other community facilities. 
Not less than ten percent of the total area of the development shall be devoted to recreation and other community use facilities for those mobile home parks designed for or containing ten or more mobile homes. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1107(6)) 
Sec. 46-172. - Perimeter setback required. 
No mobile home or other building or structure shall be located closer than 40 feet to any mobile home park perimeter property boundary. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1107(7)) 
Sec. 46-173. - Perimeter screening required. 
A landscaped screen consisting of dense evergreen trees or shrubs and having a minimum width of 25 feet adjacent to all public rights-of-way and 15 feet along all other property lines shall be required. A minimum six-foot-high, opaque fence or wall may be erected along property lines not abutting a public right-of-way in lieu of such landscaped screen. All perimeter screening must be maintained. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1107(8)) 
Sec. 46-174. - Utilities. 
All mobile home parks shall be served by approved public water and public sanitary sewer systems. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1107(9)) 
Sec. 46-175. - Refuse collection. 
Each mobile home park shall provide refuse collection pads at locations convenient to each mobile home space, but in no case more than 50 feet from the street serving each mobile home. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1107(10)) 
Sec. 46-176. - Space numbering. 
Each mobile home space shall be provided with a sign, not less than one square foot in area, which indicates the appropriate space number or address. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1107(11)) 
Secs. 46-177—46-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-206. - Purpose and intent. 
The planned unit development district is intended to provide flexibility in the application of area, height, bulk, placement, and other zoning controls; provide for mixing a wide variety of residential housing types and arrangements; provide for the mixing of compatible residential, office, commercial and industrial land uses; encourage imaginative and innovative design for the unified development of tracts of land; provide an alternative for more efficient use of land, resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets, thereby resulting in lower construction and maintenance costs to the public; preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas within the development; and to promote land development in proper relation to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1201) 
Sec. 46-207. - Permitted uses. 
In planned unit development districts, any land uses and combinations thereof, including signs and accessory buildings and uses, that have been specifically proposed by the applicant and approved by the city council as a part of a planned unit development site plan, report, or other supporting information are permitted uses. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1202) 
Sec. 46-208. - Development summary report required. 
Applications for rezoning to, or development within, a planned unit development district shall require a written report which explains the type, nature, size, intent and characteristics of the proposed development. As a minimum, the report shall include the following: 
(1)  A complete listing of every land use proposed within the development, including total acreage and the amount of acreage devoted to each use. All uses not specifically included in the report or site plan and approved by the city council are prohibited unless subsequently the application is amended in accordance with applicable procedures. 
(2)  Proposed development standards including minimum lot sizes, minimum lot widths, minimum lot frontages, minimum floor areas or residential dwelling unit sizes, maximum number of dwelling units, maximum square footage figures for nonresidential developments, minimum yards/building setbacks, landscape strips and buffers, height limitations, restrictive covenants, and any other such applicable standard or requirement. The report should also indicate any proposed exceptions or variations from the size, setback, frontage, density or other standards which are required in other conventional zoning districts, along with justification for such proposed exceptions or variations. 
(3)  Time frame of development and provisions for ownership and management of the development. 
(4)  Intended plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer and drainage facilities. 
(5)  All streets and common open spaces not proposed for dedication to the public shall have the proposed maintenance and ownership agreements explained in detail. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1203) 
Sec. 46-209. - Site plan approval required. 
Applications for rezoning to, or development within, a planned unit development district shall require a site plan approved by the planning commission. Site plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer, architect, land surveyor, land planner or landscape architect, and his seal of registration or professional initials shall be indicated on such plans. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1204) 
Sec. 46-210. - Report and site plan are minimum requirements. 
The approved development summary report, site plan, and all other information, studies, plats, plans or architectural elevations submitted in the application, or required to be submitted by the city council, shall establish the standards and minimum requirements for the subject property and shall become the zoning regulations that apply to the subject property, regardless of changes in property ownership. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1205) 
Sec. 46-211. - Revisions to approved PUD application. 
Any additions in the types of land uses, increases in square footage or density, decreases in lot sizes, changes in the location or dimensions of streets, decreases in dwelling unit floor areas, major alterations in the land use patterns, or other substantial changes that, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, result in a development of such intent and character which has not been conceptually approved by the city council shall require additional approval in accordance with procedures established in accordance with the city's zoning regulations. Otherwise, minor changes may be approved by the zoning administrator prior to issuance of building permits. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1206) 
Sec. 46-212. - Minimum site area and frontage required. 
The minimum site area for a planned unit development district shall be ten contiguous acres, a minimum lot width of 100 feet and the site must have a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public street, which shall provide access to such public street. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1207) 
Sec. 46-213. - Suggested site planning guidelines. 
The following specifications are not regulations, but recommended guidelines to be utilized in preparation of site plans for planned unit developments: 
(1)  Land uses which have traditionally been viewed as incompatible (e.g., single-family subdivision and a manufacturing plant) should not be proposed in the same planned unit development unless considerable screening and physical separation is provided. 
(2)  Office, commercial or industrial uses should be located adjacent to major thoroughfares or in other areas with suitable access that will not result in traffic through residential areas. 
(3)  Lot sizes, lot widths, unit sizes and other characteristics of residential development within the planned unit development should be similar to those characteristics of adjacent or nearby residential subdivisions or provide a suitable transition from such adjacent uses. 
(4)  Location of land uses should conform substantially to land use plan goals, policies and suggested types of uses. 
(5)  Street lengths, alignments, patterns and other characteristics should conform to city subdivision regulations or standard planning principles. 
(6)  Proposed developments should make maximum use of natural features of the land. 
(7)  For developments that are predominantly residential, only limited commercial uses (up to 10,000 square feet, or ten percent of the total development site area) of a convenience retail nature, internally oriented and intended to serve the needs of the residents of the development, should be proposed. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1208) 
Secs. 46-214—46-234. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - NS, NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-235. - Purpose and intent. 
The NS neighborhood shopping district is intended to provide areas for limited small-scale commercial uses of a convenience nature serving nearby residential neighborhoods as opposed to a regional market. The district is not intended to accommodate automotive or other types of more intensive commercial activities that are of such magnitude or type that would result in the generation of excessive traffic, noise, odors, pollution, safety hazards, or other adverse impacts which would detract from the desirability of adjacent properties for residential use. In general, the neighborhood shopping district includes offices and retail and service establishments but excludes those highway-oriented uses which involve use of chemicals and outside sales, storage or display. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1301) 
Sec. 46-236. - Permitted uses. 
In NS neighborhood shopping districts, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to principal permitted uses and structures. 
(2)  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, and their customary accessory uses and structures, including cemeteries. 
(3)  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and other places of public assembly for membership groups, nonprofit or for-profit, not to exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(4)  Day care centers. 
(5)  Finance, insurance and real estate establishments. 
(6)  Public and semi-public buildings and uses. 
(7)  Residences of all types. Home occupations are permitted as accessory uses, without being subject to the limitations of section 46-43. 
(8)  Restaurants, but not including drive-in or drive-through facilities. Unenclosed seating area is permitted. 
(9)  Retail trade establishments, enclosed. 
(10)  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary, and public and private colleges and universities. 
(11)  Schools, parochial, private vocational, technical and others, nonprofit or operated for profit. 
(12)  Services, business. 
(13)  Services, miscellaneous. 
(14)  Services, personal. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1302) 
Sec. 46-237. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
Area, height, density and placement requirements are as specified in sections 46-30 and 46-31. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1303) 
Secs. 46-238—46-267. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - HB, HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-268. - Purpose and intent. 
The HB highway business district is intended to provide adequate space for various types of general business uses that serve residents on a community level rather than neighborhood level, including the retailing of major goods and services of large scale, automotive and other types of more intensive commercial activities and establishments that rely on highway-oriented, passer-by traffic. This district is most appropriately located along state or federal highways. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1401) 
Sec. 46-269. - Permitted uses. 
In HB highway business districts, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the NS neighborhood shopping district but not subject to any specified square footage limitations. 
(2)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to permitted principal uses. 
(3)  Commercial recreation facilities, except firearm shooting ranges, race tracks for animals or motor-driven vehicles. 
(4)  Contractor's establishments, building, electrical and plumbing. 
(5)  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, group homes, rehabilitation centers, sanitariums and similar institutionalized residential facilities involving professional care and treatment. 
(6)  Mini-warehouses and mini-storage facilities, where no individual storage stall or compartment exceeds 500 square feet of total floor area. 
(7)  Restaurants, including drive-in and drive-through facilities. 
(8)  Retail trade establishments, unenclosed. 
(9)  Services, automotive. 
(10)  Services, lodging. 
(11)  Transportation, communication and utility facilities. 
(12)  Warehousing and storage uses which occupy no more than 20,000 square feet of floor area. 
(13)  Wholesale establishments which occupy no more than 20,000 square feet of floor area. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1402) 
Sec. 46-270. - Conditional uses. 
In HB highway business districts, firearm shooting ranges, race tracks for animals or motor-driven vehicles, and other commercial recreation facilities not encompassed within the definition in section 46-1, are authorized as conditional uses. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1403) 
Sec. 46-271. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
Area, height, density and placement requirements are as specified in sections 46-30 and 46-31. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1404) 
Secs. 46-272—46-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - CBD, CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-291. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The intent of the CBD central business district is to establish and maintain a compact area containing a mixture of retail, service, government and other uses where, due to the close proximity of buildings and uses, pedestrian shopping is encouraged in favor of vehicle trips being made from one destination to another. While some commercial uses targeted at the highway traveler may be permitted to exist in the central business district, the intent is that automotive service establishments and other highway business-oriented uses be excluded, due to their encouragement of automobile rather than pedestrian travel. 
(b)  The CBD district is unique in that the existing development pattern consists of buildings covering very large percentages of the lot, little if any building setbacks on front, side and rear property lines, and a lack of off-street parking sufficient to meet the requirements of this chapter. This district therefore provides for less restrictive bulk, height, dimensional and parking requirements than do other commercial districts. 
(c)  The CBD district is appropriate only in the existing or adjacent downtown area with the above mentioned development characteristics. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1501) 
Sec. 46-292. - Permitted uses. 
In CBD central business districts, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the NS neighborhood shopping district but not subject to any specified square footage limitations. 
(2)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to permitted principal uses. 
(3)  Bus stations and taxicab stands. 
(4)  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, group homes, rehabilitation centers, sanitariums and similar institutionalized residential facilities involving professional care and treatment. 
(5)  Commercial recreation facilities, enclosed. 
(6)  Hospitals and clinics. 
(7)  Manufacturing and fabrication establishments, enclosed, which occupy no more than 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(8)  Services, lodging, including bed and breakfast inns and hotels, but specifically excluding motels, motor hotels, and tourist courts. 
(9)  Temporary or seasonal uses approved by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1502) 
Sec. 46-293. - Conditional uses. 
In CBD central business districts, unenclosed commercial recreational facilities and open air business uses are authorized as conditional uses. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1503) 
Sec. 46-294. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
Area, height, density and placement requirements shall be in accordance with sections 46-30 and 46-31. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1504) 
Secs. 46-295—46-321. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - M-1, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-322. - Purpose and intent. 
The M-1 light industrial district is established with the purpose of reserving certain areas with relatively level topography, adequate water and sewerage facilities, and access to arterial streets for industrial operations, but where such areas' proximity to residential and other districts makes it desirable to limit industrial operations to those that are not objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors or radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. Uses within this district do not require substantial quantities of water for manufacturing operations and do not necessarily require rail, air and water transportation. Certain commercial uses having an open storage characteristic, or which are most appropriately located as neighbors of industrial uses, are also included within this district. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1601) 
Sec. 46-323. - Permitted uses. 
In M-1 light industrial districts, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to permitted principal uses, including offices, showrooms and administrative facilities. 
(2)  Agricultural implement rental, repair, sales and service, and farm supply stores and storage yards. 
(3)  Airports and accessory facilities. 
(4)  Blueprinting and printing establishments. 
(5)  Building material and other outside storage yards. 
(6)  Bus passenger stations, terminals. 
(7)  Cabinet shops. 
(8)  Contractor's establishments. 
(9)  Distribution of products and merchandise. 
(10)  Dry-cleaning plants. 
(11)  Exterminators and pest control businesses. 
(12)  Junkyards and used auto parts yards, subject to screening requirements on all four sides of the lot on which the use is located. 
(13)  Kennels. 
(14)  Lumber yards, planing and sawmills. 
(15)  Machine shops. 
(16)  Mini-warehouse and mini-storage facilities. 
(17)  Parking garages and parking lots. 
(18)  Public and semi-public buildings and uses. 
(19)  Race tracks for animals or motor-driven vehicles, provided the site contains a minimum of 15 acres. 
(20)  Radio and television broadcasting towers. 
(21)  Repair of household appliances. 
(22)  Recycling plants, including any processing activities. 
(23)  Research and scientific laboratories. 
(24)  Residence for caretaker or night watchmen. 
(25)  Sign fabrication and painting shops. 
(26)  Storage buildings and storage yards. 
(27)  Soft drink bottling and distributing plants. 
(28)  Transportation, communication and utility facilities. 
(29)  Truckstops and truck terminals. 
(30)  Welding shops. 
(31)  Wholesaling and warehousing facilities. 
(32)  Wrecked motor vehicle compounds and wrecker services, subject to screening requirements on all four sides of the lot on which the use is located. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1602) 
Sec. 46-324. - Conditional uses. 
In M-1 light industrial districts, the following conditional uses are authorized: 
(1)  Asphalt plants. 
(2)  Canning establishments. 
(3)  Ceramic production facilities. 
(4)  Cold storage, frozen food lockers and ice manufacture. 
(5)  Concrete, cement, clay, mortar and plaster production. 
(6)  Extraction or removal of sand, gravel, top soil, clay, dirt, precious metals, gems, or other natural resources. 
(7)  Feed, grain, or fertilizer manufacture or storage. 
(8)  Food processing plants, including fish and poultry facilities. 
(9)  Manufacturing, processing and assembling of the following products: chemicals, floor coverings, glass, machinery, metals, rubber, textiles, tobacco, and wood, unless more specifically listed under conditional uses. 
(10)  Residences for a caretaker or night watchman. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1603) 
Sec. 46-325. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
Area, height, density and placement requirements are as specified in sections 46-30 and 46-31. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1604) 
Secs. 46-326—46-353. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 46-354. - Purpose and intent. 
The A-1 agricultural district is established to maintain those areas with land characteristics such as soil moisture, temperature and content suitable for farming, dairying, forestry operations and other agricultural activities; to protect land used or needed for food production and other agricultural uses from encroachment by untimely and unplanned residential, commercial or industrial development; to permit the continuation of agricultural uses in areas where development is anticipated, but where the present application of zoning controls for future, more intensive uses would be unreasonable and premature; prevent the subdivision of land for residential development that requires public services such as paved roads, water and sanitary sewer. In certain instances the A-1 district may be appropriate for preserving the very low density character and rural characteristics of areas in the city. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1701) 
Sec. 46-355. - Permitted uses. 
In A-1 agricultural districts, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Agricultural uses, including and production of field crops, fruits, nuts and vegetables; the raising of livestock and poultry; dairying; horticulture; forestry and fisheries; and other uses involving agricultural operations. 
(2)  Animal hospitals. 
(3)  Antique shops. 
(4)  Cemeteries. 
(5)  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship. 
(6)  Dwellings, single-family, provided each dwelling is located on a lot that is a minimum of one acre and a minimum lot width of 150 feet. 
(7)  Farm buildings, including barns, chicken houses, grain storage facilities, implement sheds, and structures accessory to agricultural use. 
(8)  Home occupations. 
(9)  Horse stables. 
(10)  Kennels. 
(11)  Marinas and boat storage yards. 
(12)  Mobile and manufactured modular homes, provided each home is located on a lot that is a minimum of three acres and a minimum lot width of 200 feet. 
(13)  Nurseries and greenhouses; plants, trees and shrubs. 
(14)  Produce stands, provided products sold are those grown or produced on the premises. 
(15)  Public and semi-public buildings and uses. 
(16)  Schools, public elementary and secondary, and public and private colleges and universities. 
(17)  Schools, parochial, private and others offering courses in general education not operated for profit. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1702) 
Sec. 46-356. - Conditional uses. 
In A-1 agricultural districts, the following conditional uses are authorized: 
(1)  Farm supply stores and agricultural-related businesses, such as agricultural implement sales and service, auction facilities, feed and grain stores and other businesses not involving sales or services to the general public, provided such business is located on property a minimum of two acres that fronts on a state or federal highway, and provided such buildings or uses are not located within 200 feet of abutting property zoned or utilized for single-family or mobile home use. 
(2)  Boarding homes, dormitories and lodginghouses for agricultural workers, provided that such dwellings are located on a farm with a minimum size of 20 acres, provision is made to meet all applicable public health requirements, land provided such lodging is intended only for the temporary or seasonal housing of farm workers. 
(3)  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and other places of assembly for nonprofit membership groups, provided such use is located on property a minimum of two acres that fronts on a state or federal highway. 
(4)  Radio and television broadcasting towers, including studios or offices, provided such use is not located within 500 feet of abutting property zoned or utilized for a residence, and provided the height of such tower does not exceed 150 feet without specific authorization from the Federal Aviation Administration and Federal Communications Commission. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1703) 
Sec. 46-357. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
Area, height, density and placement requirements are as specified in sections 46-30 and 46-31. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1704) 
Secs. 46-358—46-387. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING AND ACCESS 

Sec. 46-388. - Off-street parking and loading spaces required. 
(a)  Off-street automobile parking and loading spaces shall be provided, as specified in this article, for uses and structures hereafter established in all districts at the time of initial construction of any principal building, unless otherwise exempted from this article. For developments phased in timing, parking and loading requirements may also be phased in accordance with the requirements applying for each particular time phase of development. 
(b)  Any building or use that is subsequently enlarged or converted to another use shall meet the off-street parking and loading space requirements of this article, for the enlarged or new use. 
(c)  Required parking and loading spaces shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon by refuse containers, signs or other structures, unless an equal number of spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with these regulations. 
(d)  Required parking and loading spaces shall be provided with vehicular access to a public street or alley. 
(e)  Off-street parking and loading facilities required shall be located contiguous to the principal building or use. However, as much as 25 percent of the required number of parking spaces may be located within 200 feet of the principal building or use, provided proof of ownership of such premises is provided to the zoning administrator. Such distance shall be measured between the nearest point of the parking facility and the nearest point of the principal building or use. If this option of utilizing nearby parking is utilized, then the parking area may not be discontinued or otherwise converted to another use during the time that it is utilized to meet the minimum required number of off-street parking spaces. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 601) 
Sec. 46-389. - Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required. 
The minimum number of required off-street parking spaces for each type of permitted use shall be as indicated below. For uses not specifically listed, the off-street parking requirements shall be those of the most similar use as determined by the zoning administrator. When the application of these parking requirements results in a fractional space requirement, the fractional space requirement shall be construed to mean one additional space. 

 
(Ord. of 1993, § 602) 
Sec. 46-390. - Handicapped parking requirements. 
Each parking area of six or more spaces devoted to uses other than residential shall provide handicapped parking spaces (a minimum of twelve feet in width) counted as a part of the total parking required, in accordance with the following scale: 

 

(Ord. of 1993, § 603) 
Sec. 46-391. - Parking space and lot design flexibility. 
Individual parking spaces shall be a minimum of 160 square feet. The angle of design for parking spaces and parking lots may be 30, 45, 60, 90 degrees or parallel to the curb, provided that sufficient maneuvering isle width is provided subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 604) 
Sec. 46-392. - Minimum number of off-street loading spaces required. 
(a)  On the same lot with every building, structure or part thereof, erected or occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, goods display, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning, retail business or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for the standing, loading and unloading services to avoid undue interference with public use of streets and alleys. 
(b)  Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be an area 12 feet by 60 feet, with 14-foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the schedule in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  For the uses described in subsection (a) of this section, one loading space shall be provided for the first 25,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof. Uses in excess of 25,000 square feet shall provide loading spaces according to the following schedule: 

 
(d)  All plans for off-street loading areas shall be subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 605) 
Sec. 46-393. - Parking and loading area design requirements. 
(a)  Improvement of parking lots. All parking areas containing more than five spaces shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  They shall be graded to ensure proper drainage, surfaced with concrete or asphalt, and maintained in good condition free of obstructions. 
(2)  Parking areas shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies. 
(3)  Each parking space shall be clearly marked, and directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained at all times. 
(4)  A parking lot pavement setback of ten feet from any public street right-of-way and five feet from any exterior property line shall be provided, except where access points and interconnections to other parcels have been approved. 
(5)  The parking lot pavement setback shall be increased to 25 feet where such lot abuts a residential district. Concrete or other suitable curb stops shall be installed so as to prevent vehicle encroachment onto setback areas. 
(6)  Not less than ten percent of the total area devoted to parking shall be landscaped open space. 
(7)  Any lighting facilities installed shall be so arranged to prevent the direct illumination of adjacent residential properties or public streets. 
(8)  A site plan indicating property lines, parking areas, location of parking spaces, pavement setbacks, drainage facilities, paving materials, access and other features required to ensure compliance with this article shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. A permit shall be required prior to the construction of new parking areas, or for the expansion or alteration of existing parking areas. 
(b)  Curb cut and access specifications. Access from public streets to all parking areas, regardless of the number of parking spaces provided, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Curb cuts or access breaks for service drives, entrances and exits on public streets shall not be located within 50 feet of the intersections of two curblines, street pavement lines or such lines extended or any street intersection nor within 40 feet of another curb cut or access break on the same side of the street. 
(2)  Curb cuts shall be no greater than 40 feet in width and no closer than 25 feet to any property line, unless common use of driveways for an abutting lot is required or approved by the city Engineer. 
(3)  No more than two curb cuts or access breaks shall be permitted for any lot or parcel with a frontage of 200 feet or less on any one street. 
(4)  All curb cuts or access breaks onto public streets, except for those serving single-family detached residences, shall require a permit from the zoning administrator. 
(5)  Curb cuts for driveways that serve commercial, office or industrial zoning districts shall not be permitted to pass through residential zoning districts or to access alleys that abut a residential zoning district. 
(6)  Where the side of an accessed public street or alley does not contain curbing, such curbing or other method of approved access control shall be provided. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 606) 
Sec. 46-394. - Parking areas must be appropriately zoned. 
Parking areas, parking lots or parking garages which constitute the principal use of a lot shall only be permitted in NS, HB, CBD and M-1 zoning districts. In cases where parking areas, parking lots or parking garages exist or are proposed to serve as accessory parking for a particular building or use, regardless of whether such parking is required by this article, such land, area or lot, including all access drives, shall require the same or less restrictive zoning district as that within which such building or use it serves is located. Similarly, in cases where accessory parking serves a building or use which requires, or was approved as, a conditional use, such parking area and access drives shall require the same conditional use approval as that for which such conditional use or building it serves. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 607) 
Secs. 46-395—46-416. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TREES AND OTHER VEGETATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 46-417—46-445. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND MULTIFAMILY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-446. - Applicability. 
This division applies only to commercial, industrial, highway business, and R-3 districts. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004, intro.) 
Sec. 46-447. - Plans required. 
Prior to the planting of trees, the applicant shall submit plans to the city council for approval. Plans must include the location, genus, species, cultivar, and size in caliper of trees proposed to be plants. The plan shall also include the square footage of each planting area, a planting schedule, and planting and staking details. Plan drawings must be to scale and include all hardscape such as buildings, parking, roads and similar improvements. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004, § 2) 
Sec. 46-448. - Design standards. 
Tree plantings shall comply with the following design standards: 
(1)  Plantings shall include a minimum of one tree per every 15 parking spaces on parking spots of 75 or more and on smaller locations one tree per every ten parking spaces with a practical root zone of no less than three feet wide. 
(2)  Plantings shall include a minimum of 100 square feet of non-paved landscape area per tree to provide a practical root zone of no less than five feet wide. 
(3)  Parking lot shade trees shall be planted no closer than 25 feet on center. Parking lot shade trees shall be planted within the perimeter of the parking area. 
(4)  Not less than ten percent of the total area devoted to parking and circulation shall be devoted to landscaped open space. 
(5)  Linear planting strips between bays are required. 
(6)  There shall be a minimum of two feet of separation between the vehicle overhang and the planted tree to ensure no tree-vehicle conflicts. This separation shall be accomplished with the use of wheel stops where curbing is not used. 
(7)  Planting islands must be elevated a minimum of five inches above the parking surface and graded to provide positive drainage from these landscape areas and should consist of suitable planting soil. This area shall not hold water. 
(8)  All landscape islands shall be mulched with an average of three inches of organic mulch which covers the entire open space. 
(9)  Plants and trees with at least 25 percent or more dead or in an unhealthy condition shall be replaced. These shall be replaced within the next growing season. 
(10)  Landscaped areas will be maintained in the original designed or improved state as long as a business operates in this establishment. 
(11)  Tree and plant material shall be nursery-grown and comply with ANSI standards. 
(12)  All tree material shall be staked appropriately to ensure stability of the tree. 
(13)  All trees planted shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper in size. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004, §§ 3—16) 
Sec. 46-449. - Suggested trees for harsh conditions. 
Kousa dogwood, crepe myrtle, trident maple, red maple, sugar maple, lade bark elm, Japanese zelkova, and pin oak trees are suggested for planting in harsh conditions. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004, § 16) 
Secs. 46-450—46-466. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIGNS 

Sec. 46-467. - Purpose and intent. 
The following regulations are designed to promote the public health, safety, order, aesthetics and general welfare of the community by controlling the number, placement, size and height of signs to prevent excessive and undue distraction to motorists and pedestrians and to prevent traffic hazards; avoiding an environment that encourages visual blight; and encouraging a more attractive urban environment. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 801) 
Sec. 46-468. - Exemptions. 
Any sign designed, erected or maintained for a public purpose by a public agency or authority is exempt from the provisions of this article. Public signs include, but are not limited to, the following: signs denoting routes to any city, town, village, historic place, shrine or hospital; signs directing or regulating traffic; notices of any railroad bridge, airport or other transportation activity necessary for the direction or safety of the public; legal notices or other official instruments denoting time and place of civic meetings; signs denoting street names and street number, address or unit designations, flags of the United States, state, county, municipality or other public authority; flags, banners and other devices for celebrations, conventions, commemorations, events, festivals and other community activities authorized by the city council, and public memorial signs and tablets. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 808) 
Sec. 46-469. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. Except as otherwise excepted by the provisions of this article, it is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, replace or convert any sign without first obtaining a permit from the zoning administrator; provided, however that nothing in this section shall be construed to require a permit for the repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure. 
(b)  Application procedure. Applications for permits to erect, construct, enlarge, move or convert signs shall be made to the zoning administrator upon forms furnished by him. The application for permit shall include information such as, but not limited to, ownership information, location, construction cost, scaled site plans and elevation drawings, structural details or other information necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of these regulations and all applicable codes. 
(c)  Fees. No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed and fees have been paid as established by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 1993, §§ 804—806) 
Sec. 46-470. - Signs shall meet applicable codes. 
Signs and other advertising structures shall be constructed and maintained in strict conformity with building and electrical codes and all other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 802) 
Sec. 46-471. - Inspection required upon construction, expansion or remodeling of building. 
When a building is constructed, remodeled, or expanded, all signs shall be approved by the appropriate official before an occupancy permit is issued. Drawings containing dimensions of signs or descriptions of sign dimensions, construction materials, and methods of erection or design and stress diagrams may be approved by the building official or other appropriate official, when, in his best judgment, erection of the sign will not constitute a safety hazard and upon determination that the sign meets all the requirements of this article and the building code of the city. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 812) 
Sec. 46-472. - Signs are permitted accessory uses. 
Signs and other advertising structures are permitted as accessory uses, subject to all applicable limitations as specified in these regulations. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 803) 
Sec. 46-473. - Requirements for signs in all zoning districts. 
Signs, regardless of the zoning district in which they are located, shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Repair and maintenance. Signs, together with any supporting members, shall be kept in good repair and maintained so as to present a neat, clean appearance and be in a safe state of preservation. Painted areas and sign surfaces shall be kept in good condition, and illumination, if permitted, shall be maintained in safe and good working order. 
(2)  Minimum setback requirements. Signs shall be set back a minimum of two feet from any public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Obstruction of vision along rights-of-way prohibited. No sign shall be erected where it will interfere with vision clearance along any street or obstruct the vision of either drivers or pedestrians. 
(4)  Illumination not to cast on other properties. Any illuminated sign shall be placed so that the rays and illumination therefrom shall not be cast upon neighboring properties. 
(5)  Installation of marquee and projecting signs to be supervised by building inspector. All permitted marquee or projecting signs shall be erected under the supervision of the building inspector. Other attached signs shall be inspected for safety and compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 812) 
Sec. 46-474. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are prohibited in the city, except as otherwise specifically provided: 
(1)  Animated signs. Signs erected on or over public property including public rights-of-way, other than signs erected by public authority for a public purpose. 
(2)  Signs attached to vehicles. Signs attached to or painted onto a vehicle parked adjacent to and visible from a street for the sole purpose of advertising onto the street. 
(3)  Glaring illuminated signs. No sign shall give off light which glares, blinds, or has any other such adverse effect on traffic. The light from all illuminated signs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that the light shall not be of any intensity or brightness which will interfere with the peace, comfort, convenience and general welfare of residents or occupants of adjacent properties and roadways. 
(4)  Flashing signs; signs imitating warning signals. Flashing signs or signs imitating warning signals or signs resembling the flashing light customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, or rescue vehicles and signs using word slogans, dimensional shapes or sizes or colors of governmental traffic signs. 
(5)  Signs resembling or conflicting with traffic control devices. Signs or graphics which by color, location, or design resemble or conflict with traffic control signs or signals. 
(6)  Sign emitting colors that may be confused with emergency vehicle lights. Signs that electronically emit or use the colors that could be confused with emergency vehicles (red and blue). 
(7)  Portable animated signs with motion or sound. Animated signs involving the scrolling or flashing of messages, motion or sound, except time, temperature, and date signs as provided in this article. 
(8)  Signs placed on or over public right-of-way. Signs that are placed on or over public right-of-way to include utility poles, traffic control boxes, trashcans; attached to any street sign or markers, traffic control sign or device. 
(9)  Signs on natural features. Signs that are erected or painted on rocks, trees, or other natural features. 
(10)  Obscene signs. Any lewd, vulgar, profane, or sexually oriented messages, pictures, paintings, drawing, or structure used for the purpose of advertisement. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 807; Ord. of 2-12-2008; Ord. of 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 46-475. - Signs permitted in A-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts. 
The following signs are permitted in A-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts: 
(1)  Holiday lights and decorations, not to exceed 60 days of display in any one calendar year. 
(2)  One identification sign per premises at the entrance drive of each individual residence, estate, farm, ranch and plantation which does not exceed four square feet of area. 
(3)  One identification sign or project identification monument for each entrance to a residential subdivision or complex, or other nonresidential permitted use, not exceeding 32 square feet of area, provided such signs are not internally illuminated. 
(4)  Identification sign or bulletin board for churches, places of worship, fraternal organizations or other similar permitted institutional uses, provided only one sign not exceeding 32 square feet of area located on site is permitted per premises and provided such signs are not internally illuminated. 
(5)  Political signs, not exceeding four square feet in area. 
(6)  Real estate signs, non-illuminated, located on site, pertaining to the rent, lease or sale of the premises, not exceeding four square feet of area, provided only one sign per premises is permitted. 
(7)  Signs, non-illuminated, for permitted sales, rental and leasing offices, and manager's residences that do not exceed four square feet of area. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 809) 
Sec. 46-476. - Signs permitted in NS, HB, CBD and M-1 zoning districts. 
The following signs are permitted in NS, HB, CBD and M-1 zoning districts: 
(1)  Any sign permitted as specified in A-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, but not subject to limitations on number, area, or lighting. 
(2)  One identification sign per premises, freestanding, not exceeding 100 square feet in area, on which the name and nature of the business or other establishment operated on the premises as the principal use are shown. 
(3)  One secondary identification sign per premises, whether freestanding, attached or window, not exceeding eight square feet in area, on which the name and nature of a business or other establishment operated on the premises are shown. 
(4)  Attached signs with a total sign area not exceeding 25 percent of the area of the building wall to which the sign or signs are attached. 
(5)  Directional signs. 
(6)  Off-site signs (billboards), not exceeding 100 square feet in area. 
(7)  Window signs, not exceeding 25 percent of the total area of the window. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 810) 
Sec. 46-477. - Illuminated LED signs. 
Illuminated LED signs that incorporate time, date and temperature or any other combination of advertisement for that business are permitted and may be incorporated into the maximum 100 square feet of the sign. The width of such signs shall not exceed 36 inches, and the length of such signs shall not exceed 78 inches. Prior approval of the state department of transportation is required. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2008; Ord. of 11-10-2009(a)) 
Sec. 46-478. - Temporary signs. 
Temporary signs are permitted in the city only if they meet all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The sign shall not exceed a maximum area of eight square feet per side (two-sided). 
(2)  The sign shall not exceed a maximum height of 48 inches (four feet) or be less than a minimum height of 36 inches (three feet). 
(3)  The placement of sign must not impede the flow of traffic on sidewalks as determined by judgment of the city police. 
(4)  There shall be no more than one temporary sign per business. 
(5)  The temporary sign can only advertise the business located at that location. 
(6)  The sign must be put out and taken back in each day and may not to be left out at night. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 46-479. - Maximum sign height. 
No permitted sign, regardless of type, shall exceed a height of ten feet in the A-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts or a height of 30 feet in the NS, HB, CBD and M-1 districts. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 811) 
Sec. 46-480. - Variances permitted. 
(a)  Recognizing that the strict application of the provisions of this article may, in limited instances involving unique or unusual physical conditions or other such unanticipated situation, pose an unnecessary hardship to the owner or user of a sign, the city council is authorized to permit variances from the provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, an increase in the height of a sign, reduction of the required two-foot setback for a sign, an increase in the maximum area of a sign, and authority for temporary signs and sign devices. 
(b)  Any application for a variance from the terms of this article shall be filed and heard in accordance with variance procedures and shall require the filing of an elevation drawing of the sign or signs proposed to be erected, constructed, modified or continued, along with written justification that unusual conditions warrant such consideration. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 813) 
Sec. 46-481. - Procedure for dangerous or unlawful signs. 
(a)  Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the building inspector, the owner thereof, or the person or firm maintaining the sign, shall upon written notice from the building inspector forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case within ten days, secure the sign in a manner to be approved by the building inspector, in conformity with the applicable provisions of the building code of the city. If such order is not complied with in ten days, the sign shall be removed under instruction of the appropriate official at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. 
(b)  In case any sign shall be installed, erected or constructed in violation of any of the terms of this article, the building inspector shall notify by certified mail or written notice served personally, the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign, secure the necessary permit, make required alterations, or remove the sign. If such order is not completed within 24 hours from the time of notice being received, the sign shall be removed under instruction of the appropriate official at the expense of the owner of lessee thereof. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 814) 
Secs. 46-482—46-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES 

Sec. 46-501. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Within the districts established by this chapter, there exist certain incompatible lots, buildings, structures, signs and uses of land which were lawful before the ordinance from which this chapter is derived were adopted but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of these regulations or future amendments. 
(b)  It is the intention of this article to permit these nonconformities to continue but that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for variances or for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 501) 
Sec. 46-502. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  In any district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of these regulations, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings or any other permitted use may be erected on any single lot of record existing at the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendment of these regulations, even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, applicable to the particular district involved, provided that building setbacks are observed and the lot shall otherwise conform to the regulations for the district in which the lot is located. 
(b)  Except for those lots described above, if two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of adoption or amendment of these regulations, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by these regulations, the lands involved shall be considered an undivided parcel for the purposes of these regulations, and no portion of the parcel shall be used which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by these regulations, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the applicable requirements. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 502) 
Sec. 46-503. - Continuance of nonconforming use. 
(a)  The lawful use of any building, structure, sign or land existing at the time of enactment of these regulations may be continued, subject to the limitations with regard to expansion of nonconforming buildings, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of these regulations, except that the use of a principal building, structure or land containing a nonconforming use shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Reestablished after discontinuance or abandonment for six months. For the purposes of this section, a use shall be considered discontinued or abandoned if it has not been actively engaged in any principal nonconforming activity during the subject period; 
(3)  Expanded, enlarged or extended, unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such use is located; 
(4)  Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement value at the time of destruction as determined by the building official, and provided such rebuilding, alteration or repair is completed within one year of such damage; or 
(5)  Moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot occupied by such use, except in conformity with these regulations. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any building, structure, or portion thereof, declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety or health, upon order of such official. 
(c)  Changes in ownership or tenancy of a nonconforming use are permitted. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 503) 
Sec. 46-504. - Expansion of nonconforming buildings. 
A nonconforming building which contains a conforming use may be expanded, enlarged or extended, provided that any such additions meet the applicable yard and building setbacks, buffer and landscape strip requirements and all other regulations for the district in which it is located. This section shall not, however, be construed as to authorize the expansion of a nonconforming building for a use which is not permitted by the regulations for the district within which such building is located. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 504) 
Sec. 46-505. - Buildings under construction. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 505) 
Secs. 46-506—46-533. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-534. - Administration and interpretation. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator who shall be appointed by the city council and serve at its pleasure. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for interpretation of the provisions of these regulations and for maintenance of the official zoning map. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1906) 
Sec. 46-535. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of these regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1906) 
Sec. 46-536. - Other remedies. 
(a)  In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of these regulations, the zoning administrator or any other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of these regulations requiring the presence of the violator in the court of proper jurisdiction; institute injunction, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(b)  Where a violation of these regulations exists with respect to a structure or land, the zoning administrator may, in addition to other remedies, require that utility service be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1907) 
Sec. 46-537. - Authority of city council and board of zoning appeals; appeal procedure. 
(a)  Zoning amendments. The city council may from time to time amend the number, shape, boundary or area of any zoning district, or may amend any regulation pertaining to any district; or may amend any article or section of this chapter. The procedure for adopting and amending this chapter shall be as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Variances. The city council is hereby empowered to authorize upon application in specific cases such variance from the dimensional requirements of zoning regulations (any provisions requiring a number to be achieved, such as height in feet, setback, lot area, lot width, parking and loading requirements, etc.) as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will in an individual case result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of a nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings or structures in the same zoning district or of permitted or nonconforming uses in other districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested variance. 
(c)  Appeals. 
(1)  The city council is empowered to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator in the interpretation or enforcement of these zoning regulations. The board of zoning appeals is empowered to hear an appeal made by any person, firm, or corporation, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau affected by any decisions of the zoning administrator based on this chapter. 
(2)  This section shall not be construed as permitting an appeal of the city council's denial of a rezoning request or conditional use, the appropriate remedy of which would be suit in county superior court. 
(3)  An appeal under this section shall be taken within 60 days, or as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the zoning administrator notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. All papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken shall forthwith be transmitted to the city council. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1995, §§ 1, 7, 8) 
Secs. 46-538—46-567. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 46-568. - Development permit. 
(a)  A development permit shall be required for any proposed use of lands or buildings to indicate and ensure compliance with all provisions of these regulations before any building permit is issued or any improvement, grading, land disturbing activity or alteration of lands or buildings commences; provided, however, that development permits for individual structures within approved single-family residential subdivisions or for single-family dwelling units on individual lots shall not be required. 
(b)  If a land disturbance permit is required pursuant to the city's soil erosion and sediment control ordinance, the development permit and land disturbance permit shall be considered one and the same. 
(c)  Approval of a preliminary plat in accordance with all applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations shall constitute approval of the development permit for each subdivision, and plan approval of a planned unit development, mobile home park, or condominium development as specified in these regulations shall constitute approval of a development permit. 
(d)  All development permits shall be issued by the zoning administrator, who shall in no case approve a development permit for the use, construction, or alteration of any land or building if the land or building as proposed to be used, constructed or altered would be in violation of any of the provisions of these regulations or any other codes and laws. A development permit shall be valid for two years from its issuance. 
(e)  If work described in any development permit has not begun within 120 days from the date of issuance thereof, the permit shall expire, and further work shall not proceed until a new development permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1903) 
Sec. 46-569. - Building permit. 
(a)  No building, structure or sign, except as specifically exempted by these regulations, shall be erected, moved, extended, enlarged or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be commenced until the zoning administrator has issued a building permit for such work in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  All building permits shall be issued by the zoning administrator. In cases of uncertainty regarding whether a proposed building or structure conforms to any provisions within these regulations, the planning director shall make the determination. 
(c)  Building permits shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within 90 days of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months or more. 

BUILDING PERMIT (ILLUSTRATIVE ONLY) 
(Ord. of 1993, § 1904) 
Sec. 46-570. - Certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the zoning administrator is required in advance of occupancy or use of any lot or change or extension in the use of any lot; any building or structure hereafter erected; or any change in the use of an existing building or structure. All certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the zoning administrator, and no such certificate shall be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  Business licenses shall not be issued until the business conforms to the regulations of the district in which it is located and a valid certificate of occupancy is issued. 

(Ord. of 1993, § 1905) 
Secs. 46-571—46-588. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROCEDURE AND REVIEW STANDARDS 

Sec. 46-589. - Application requirements. 
Application materials specified in this section shall be required for petitions for amendments to the official zoning map, conditional use permits, and variances: 
(1)  An application form furnished by the zoning administrator; 
(2)  A legal description of the property to be considered in the application which shall be by metes and bounds unless an alternative legal description (such as a tax plat map) is accepted by the zoning administrator; 
(3)  Boundary surveys of the property whenever available; 
(4)  For applications regarding property in commercial or industrial zoning districts, a site plan with all information specified (which plan, unless otherwise noted in the approval, shall be considered a part of the approval and must be followed); 
(5)  A fee for the application as established by the city council from time to time; and 
(6)  If the application requires action by the city council, disclosure of any potential or actual conflicts of interest as required by state law. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1995, § 3) 
Sec. 46-590. - Site plan requirements. 
All site plans required by this article shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
(1)  Title of the proposed development and the name, address and telephone number of the property owner; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the architect, engineer or other designer of the proposed development; 
(3)  Scale, date, north arrow, and general location map showing relationship of the site to streets or natural landmarks; and 
(4)  Boundaries of the subject property, all existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way and street pavement widths; buildings; watercourses; parking and loading areas; and other physical characteristics of the property and proposed development. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1995, § 4) 
Sec. 46-591. - Criteria to consider for map amendments. 
(a)  The applicant, zoning administrator and city council should review an application for zoning map amendment with regard to the following criteria: 
(1)  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property and whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of nearby property. 
(2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions. 
(3)  The extent to which the destruction of property values promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
(4)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
(5)  The physical suitability of the subject property for development as presently zoned and under the proposed zoning district. 
(6)  The length of time the property has been vacant, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property, and whether there are existing or changed conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the rezoning request. 
(7)  The zoning history of the subject property. 
(8)  The extent to which the proposed zoning will result in a use which will or could cause excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, parks, or other public facilities. 
(9)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan, land use plan, or other adopted plans. 
(b)  The city council may consider other factors deemed relevant before taking action on a particular request. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1995, § 5) 
Sec. 46-592. - Criteria to consider for conditional uses. 
(a)  The applicant, zoning administrator and city council should review applications for conditional uses with regard to the following criteria: 
(1)  Off-street parking and loading facilities are adequate in terms of location, amount and design to serve the use. 
(2)  The number, size and type of signs proposed are compatible with the surrounding area. 
(3)  The amount and location of open space and the provision of screening is such that buffering of incompatible uses is achieved. 
(4)  Ingress and egress to the property is suitable and safe, and the effect of the proposed activity on traffic flow along adjoining streets is not adverse. 
(5)  The location and intensity of outdoor lighting is such that it does not cast light on adjacent, adjoining or neighboring properties. 
(6)  Hours and manner of operation of the proposed use are not inconsistent with adjacent and nearby uses. 
(7)  Public facilities and utilities are capable of adequately serving the proposed use. 
(8)  The proposed use will not have a significant adverse effect on the level of property values or the general character of adjacent land uses or the general area. 
(9)  The physical conditions of the site, including size, shape, topography and drainage, are suitable for the proposed development. 
(10)  The proposed use is consistent with the goals and objectives of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The city council may consider other factors deemed relevant before formulating recommendations and taking action on a particular conditional use application. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1995, § 6) 
Sec. 46-593. - Criteria to consider for variances. 
(a)  A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship, after appropriate application, upon specific findings that the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other land or structures in the same district; 
(2)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of these zoning regulations would create an unnecessary hardship and would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other property owners within the district in which the property is located; 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located; 
(4)  Relief, if granted, will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or general welfare in such a manner as will interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect their value; 
(5)  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; 
(6)  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building, or structure; and 
(7)  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, building or structures which is not permitted by right in the district involved. 
(b)  A variance shall not be granted in cases where the requested relief to the property owner can be remedied by a change to a zoning district which otherwise would not require a variance. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1995, § 7) 
Sec. 46-594. - Withdrawal of applications. 
Any petition for an amendment to this chapter text, official zoning map, conditional use approval, or variance may be withdrawn, at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such a request, at any time prior to closing the required public hearing by the city council upon written notice to the zoning administrator. If the public hearing before the city council has been completed, withdrawal by the applicant is not permitted. Any required application fees shall be refunded to the applicant only if such application has not been prepared and submitted for advertisement as determined by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1995, § 2) 
Sec. 46-595. - Simultaneous consideration of multiple applications. 
A petitioner may simultaneously submit multiple applications involving the same property, such as a rezoning request, conditional use, and variance. The city council may simultaneously hear and consider multiple applications, provided any applicable public notice and other specified requirements are met. The proper order of consideration of multiple applications shall be the rezoning request first, conditional use second, and variances third. The city council may consider and act upon a variance request at the same meeting as a rezoning request or conditional use is approved. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1995, § 9) 
Sec. 46-596. - Conditional approval permitted. 
In exercising its powers, the city council may attach any conditions to its approval which it finds necessary to accomplish the reasonable application of the requirements of these regulations, and is specifically authorized to attach rezoning conditions when necessary to render the proposed zoning district or use compatible with adjacent and nearby properties and land uses. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1995, § 10) 
Sec. 46-597. - Public notice and public hearing required. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply only to adoption of a new zoning ordinance, applications for amendments to the text of the zoning regulations, and amendments to the official zoning map. 
(b)  Publication of notice of application. Upon receipt of a completed application, fees and other information required by this article, the zoning administrator shall cause notice of such application to be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the community at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of public hearing before the city council. 
(c)  Content of published notice. The published notice shall include, as a minimum, the purpose, location, date and time of the public hearing before the city council, the location of the property being considered, and the present and proposed zoning classification of the property. 
(d)  Posting of notice of application. The zoning administrator shall also cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property one or more signs, each of which shall contain the information specified for published notices. The public hearing before the city council shall not take place until the signs have been posted for a least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing. Posting of signs shall not be required by the city council when adopting or readopting a zoning ordinance and official zoning map. 
(e)  Rescheduling and continuing hearings. Public hearings may be delayed, rescheduled or continued at another time and date, provided announcement is given at the time and place of the initially scheduled and advertised public hearing, and provided such date, time and location of the public hearing to be delayed, rescheduled or continued is announced. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1995, § 11) 
Sec. 46-598. - Conduct of public hearings. 
All public hearings required by this article shall be governed by the following procedures: 
(1)  The presiding officer shall open the hearing by stating the specific application being considered at the public hearing. At this time, the presiding officer may summarize the public hearing procedures. 
(2)  The zoning administrator or other staff may present a description of the proposed application, any applicable background material, and his recommendation regarding action on the application as appropriate. 
(3)  Persons who support the application will be asked to comment first. The petitioner may, upon recognition and upon statement of name and address, present and explain his application. The petitioner, or his designated agent, is expected to attend the public hearing unless written notice of hardship is received prior to such meeting. A time limitation may be imposed at the discretion of the presiding officer. 
(4)  Persons who oppose the application or who have questions about the subject application will be asked to comment next. All interested parties after being recognized shall be afforded an opportunity to address the proposed application by standing before the appropriate body and identifying their name, address and interest along with any comments on the proposed application. A time limitation may be imposed at the discretion of the presiding officer. 
(5)  The petitioner shall have an opportunity to answer any questions raised by the public, for summary remarks and rebuttal concerning the proposed application. 
(6)  Upon the completion of any comments from interested parties and the petitioner, the public hearing shall be completed and adjourned. 
(7)  All public comments having been heard, the members of the body considering the application may discuss the request among themselves. During this discussion period, the members of the body may call on the petitioner or other interested parties to clarify points made previously or to answer questions. The petitioner or interested parties may respond upon recognition. Additional questions from the general public may not be asked once the public hearing has been closed. 
(8)  Once the public hearing is closed, and a vote or other action is being considered, unrecognized responses from the petitioner shall be ruled out of order by the presiding officer. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1995, § 12) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
1987 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1987 Code that are included herein. Sections of the 1987 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
1999 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1999 Code, as supplemented through July 25, 2001, that are included herein. Sections of the 1999 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 

 