THE CODE OF CRISP COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted December 10, 2002 
____________ 
Published in 2002 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
OF 
CRISP COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Sam N. Farrow 
Chairman 
Arthur James Nance 
Vice Chairman 
Wallace Mathis 
Larry D. Felton 
James R. Dowdy 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Tom L. Patton 
County Administrator 
____________ 
Richard A. Lawson 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Zoning Board of Appeals 
J.C. Clark, Chairman 
Jerry Carney, Vice Chairman 
Wendy Peavy 
Wayne "Lucky" Taylor 
Dale Mitchell 
____________ 
Zoning and Codes Department 
Connie Youngblood, Planning Director 
Jimmy Mumphery, Building Inspector 
____________ 
Sheriff 
H.W. Hancock 
____________ 
Clerk of Superior Court 
Jean Rogers 
____________ 
Tax Commissioner 
Deborah Lofton 
____________ 
Probate Court Judge 
Amber Roberts Holloway 
____________ 
Magistrate Court 
Stephen J. Ingram, Judge 
Gail Sims, Judge 
OFFICIALS 
OF 
CRISP COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
J. R. Dowdy, Jr. 
Chairman 
____________ 
James D. Harris 
Wallace Mathis 
Willie J. Patrick 
Joyce Cason Pheil 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
John S. Pate, Jr. 
County Administrator and Ex Officio Clerk 
____________ 
Guy D. Pfeiffer 
County Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Crisp County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Senior Code Attorney, and Sherry A. Allbritton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Guy D. Pfeiffer, County Attorney, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Crisp, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Crisp, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Crisp, Georgia. 2002. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR CRISP COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Crisp County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 66, each inclusive, is adopted, effective July 10, 2002. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before July 10, 2002, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed; except the Ordinance adopted March 21, 2002, reaffirming the Crisp County Personal Policies application to the Crisp County Planning Department, which Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than 60 days or both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the County may pursue other remedies, including without limitation, abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of license or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the County to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after July 10, 2002, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall be effective upon adoption. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Board of Commissioners this 10th day of December, 2002. 
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF  CRISP COUNTY, GEORGIA 
BY: ____________  Chairman 
ATTEST: 
____________  County Administrator 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County, held on the 10th day of December, 2002. 
____________  Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances and resolutions have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances and resolutions that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances and resolutions that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1908 Ga. Laws, page 295, which created a board of county commissioners for the county. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Commissioner districts]. 
(a)  For purposes of electing members of the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County, Crisp County is divided into two commissioner districts. The two commissioner districts shall be and correspond to those two numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as 'Plan: crispcc-2012 Plan Type: local Administrator: crisp User: bak'. Each of the two commissioner districts is divided into posts. Commissioner District 1 shall be divided into two posts, designated as Commissioner District 1 - Post 1 and Commissioner District 1 - Post 2. Commissioner District 2 shall be divided into three posts, designated as Commissioner District 2 - Post 1, Commissioner District 2 - Post 2, and Commissioner District 2 - Post 3. Such posts shall be and correspond to those five numbered posts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as 'Plan: crispcc-2012 Plan Type: local Administrator: crisp User: bak'. Commissioner District 1 - Post 1 is identified in such plan as District D1-1, Commissioner District 1 - Post 2 is identified in such plan as District D1-2, Commissioner District 2 - Post 1 is identified in such plan as District D2-1, Commissioner District 2 - Post 2 is identified in such plan as District D2-2, and Commissioner District 2 - Post 3 is identified in such plan as District D2-3. 
(b)  For the purposes of such plan, the term 'VTD' shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Crisp County which is not included in any such district or post described in subsection (a) of this section shall be included within that district or post contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Crisp County which is described in subsection (a) of this section as being included in a particular district or post shall nevertheless not be included within such district or post if such part is not contiguous to such district or post. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district or post contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any commissioner district or post, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Those members of the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County who are serving as such on December 31, 2013, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. On and after January 1, 2014, the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County shall consist of five members all of whom shall be elected from commissioner districts and posts described in subsection (a) of this section. Commissioner District 1 - Post 1, Commissioner District 1 - Post 2, Commissioner District 2 - Post 1, Commissioner District 2 - Post 2, and Commissioner District 2 - Post 3 as they exist on December 31, 2013, shall continue to be designated as Commissioner District 1 - Post 1, Commissioner District 1 - Post 2, Commissioner District 2 - Post 1, Commissioner District 2 - Post 2, and Commissioner District 2 - Post 3, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and on and after January 1, 2014, such members of the board serving from those former commissioner districts and posts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts and posts as newly described under this Act. 
LC 35 28340 
Plan: crispcc~2012  Plan Type: local  Administrator: crisp  User: bak 

 
(1931 Ga. Laws, page 448; 1964 Ga. Laws, page 2253; 1984 Ga. Laws, page 4352; 2002 Ga. Laws, page 4091; 2013 Ga. Laws, H.B. 220) 
Sec. 2. - [Commissioners—Qualifications, terms.] 
In order for a person to offer for said county commissioner post or to be elected and qualified from any of said commissioner posts, said person must be a resident of said commissioner post, a qualified voter of Crisp County, and be a freeholder. Said commissioners are hereby appointed to perform all duties, take charge of all roads and revenues, and perform all of the other duties now incident to said office and shall remain in office until their successors shall have been elected and qualified. In case of the death of any county commissioner or his disability to serve, and the office is made vacant before the expiration of his term the vacancy shall be filled as in the case of the vacancy of any other county officer. All members of the board of commissioners shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of their terms of office and all nominations and elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Election Code.' Members shall take office on January 1 next following their election. The terms of said commissioners shall be for a period of six years, except that the terms of commissioners in office on January 1, 1985, shall terminate as follows: 
District 1 Post 1 - December 31, 1988 
District 1 Post 2 - December 31, 1990 
District 2 Post 1 - December 31, 1990 
District 2 Post 2 - December 31, 1988 
District 2 Post 3 - December 31, 1986. 
(1952 Ga. Laws, page 2241; 1964 Ga. Laws, page 2253; 1984 Ga. Laws, page 4352) 
Sec. 3. - [Same—Oath, duties, meetings, procedure.] 
Said commissioners shall make oath before the judge of the superior court, or judge of the probate court of the county, to discharge their duties faithfully and honestly, and wisely administer the affairs and funds in their charge; That regular meetings shall be held once a month, and a majority in all commissioners meetings shall control; A chairman shall be elected at their first meeting in each year, and a clerk shall also be elected at said meeting, his duties set forth, and ample bond required for the performance of the same; a complete and itemized statement of all receipts and expenditures shall be submitted to each session of the grand jury. 
(Res. of 10-14-2014) 
Sec. 4. - [Same—Powers.] 
Said Commissioners shall have direct control of all matters now vested in the judge of the probate court as relates to roads, bridges, public buildings, property, misdemeanor convicts, management of county jails and its fees, control and support of paupers, to levy a general tax for general purposes and a special tax for special purposes, according to law, to examine, settle and allow according to law, all claims of whatsoever nature that may arise against the county, to examine and audit the books and accounts of all officers having the care, custody, management, collection or disbursement of money belonging to the county, or money appropriated for its use and benefit and bringing such officers to settlement and enforcing the same, to employ public accountants or, other competent assistance in the examination and audit of all books and records kept, as required to be kept, by all county officers; to fix the compensation of the jailor or sheriff of said county for feeding and dieting the prisoners; to relieve any person, or corporation from double tax, if, in their judgment, the ends of justice so require, to make rules and regulations in accordance with law for the promotion of health, to allow the insolvent tax list of said county, to elect and appoint all minor officials for said county, not otherwise provided for by law, and by provisions of this Act, and to exercise all of the duties, vested by law in the probate court judges of this State, when sitting for county purposes, and not herein specifically enumerated. 
(1921 Ga. Laws, page 451) 
Sec. 5. - [Same—Use of convict labor]. 
A system of working roads by convicts be installed and providing commissioners with authority to either work them on the roads of Crisp County, or hire them out whenever, in their judgment, it is to the best interest of the county to do so. 
Sec. 6. - [Same—Disbursement of funds]. 
All money arising from the road tax and from the commutation tax from hire of convicts, and all other funds coming into their hands, shall be disbursed by said commissioners and applied to the work of roads in Crisp County, or for the repairs of the county's buildings or other property. 
Sec. 7. - [Same—Salary]. 
Each member of the board of commissioners other than the chairperson shall receive an annual salary of not less than $3,600.00 nor more than $15,000.00, the exact amount of such annual salary to be established by a resolution of said board of commissioners. The chairperson of the board of commissioners shall receive an annual salary of not less than $4,800.00 nor more than $15,000.00, the exact amount of such annual salary to be established by a resolution of said board of commissioners. The chairperson and members of the board of commissioners shall receive the minimum salary unless and until the board acts by resolution to approve an increase. At least ten days prior to the final adoption of any resolution providing for an increase in salary, the board of commissioners shall publish in the county legal organ a prominent notice of the board's intention to adopt the proposed increase. The members and chairperson of the board of commissioners shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred by them when traveling exclusively in the interest of the county in their capacity as commissioners. 
(1916 Ga. Laws, page 397; 1921 Ga. Laws, page 451; 1984 Ga. Laws, page 4067; 1996 Ga. Laws, page 3829) 
Sec. 8. - [Same—Commissioning]. 
Commissioners shall be commissioned in the same manner as justices of the peace. 
Sec. 9. - [Disbursements—Vouchers]. 
All disbursements shall be made by voucher-checks to be signed by two commissioners, or by one commissioner and the clerk. 
Sec. 10. - [Same—Monthly statements]. 
Said commissioners [shall] be required to prepare a monthly itemized statement of all receipts and disbursements and have same printed in one of the papers published in Cordele, Georgia. 
Sec. 11. - [Commissioners have sole powers; exemption from road, jury and militia duty]. 
The judge of the probate court of said county of Crisp shall deliver to said commissioners all books and papers relating to the jurisdiction and powers herein conferred upon said commissioners, and said judge of the probate court shall have no power to exercise any of the powers herein conferred upon said commissioners after their election and qualification; Said commissioners to be exempt from road, jury and militia duty, and shall be subject to prosecution for malpractice in office in the same manner as justice of the peace. 
Sec. 12. - [Conflicting laws repealed]. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act be, and the same are, hereby repealed. 
Approved August 6, 1908. 
ARTICLE II. - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1968 Ga. Laws, page 1757 which amended the state constitution to create the Crisp County-Cordele Industrial Development Authority. The amendment was continued in force and effect by 1987 Ga. Laws, page 3548. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citation to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Generally. 
A.  Created. There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Crisp County-Cordele Industrial Development Authority," which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and by that name, style and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. 
B.  Composition; appointment of members; terms; vacancies. The Authority shall be composed of seven members, one of whom shall be the chairman of the Crisp County Board of Commissioners, one of whom shall be the Chairman of the City Commissioners of Cordele, one of whom shall be the Chairman of the Crisp County Power Commission, and one of whom shall be the president of the Cordele-Crisp County Chamber of Commerce. The Crisp County Board of Commissioners shall appoint one member who shall be a resident of Crisp County within or without the city limits of Cordele, and such member shall serve for a term of three years and until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. Thereafter, successors to the member appointed by the Crisp County Board of Commissioners shall serve for terms of three years and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. The City Commissioners of Cordele shall appoint one member who shall be a resident of Crisp County within or without the city limits of Cordele, and such member shall serve for a term of two years and until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. Thereafter, successors to the initial member appointed by the City Commissioners of Cordele shall serve for terms of three years and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. The Crisp County Power Commission shall appoint one member who shall be a resident of Crisp County within or without the corporate limits of the City of Cordele, and such member and successors to such member shall be appointed for a term of three years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. Provided, however, under no circumstances shall the Crisp County Board of Commissioners, the City Commissioners of Cordele, or the Crisp County Power Commission appoint a member of any of such bodies as a member of the Authority. No vacancy shall impair the power of the Authority to act, provided that five members are in accord with such action. In the event a vacancy occurs on the Authority for any reason, the appointing authority shall appoint a member to serve the unexpired term. The Authority is empowered to elect its own chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary from its members. The members of the Authority shall receive no compensation for their services on the Authority. 
C.  Definitions. As used in this amendment, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
1.  The word "Authority" shall mean the Crisp County-Cordele Industrial Development Authority. 
2.  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition of lands, properties and improvements for development, expansion and promotion of jobs and payrolls in industry, commerce, agriculture, and natural resources; the construction of buildings and plants or the acquisition of equipment for the purpose of selling, leasing or renting such structures or equipment to private persons, firms or corporation. 
3.  The term "cost of project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, easements, rights and franchises acquired, the cost of machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural and legal expenses, and plans and specifications and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and placing the same in operation. The funds the Authority may borrow and the interest paid thereon, for interim or temporary financing for any of the above named items for the use of a designated project, pending the issue and validation of revenue anticipation bonds for such project, shall be considered a "cost of project" which may be paid or repaid from the proceeds of the revenue anticipation bonds authorized herein in paragraph "G." 
D.  Contracts. The County of Crisp, the City of Cordele, the State of Georgia and any political subdivision thereof are expressly authorized to enter into contracts with the Authority as a public corporation. 
E.  Quorum. Any five members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the ordinary business of the Authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the Authority must be approved by not less than five affirmative votes, subject, however, in the event of a vacancy, to the provisions of subparagraph B. hereof. 
F.  Powers. The Authority shall have powers: 
1.  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
2.  To acquire, hold, and dispose of personal property, including the stock of other corporation[s], for its corporate purposes. 
3.  To enter into contracts for periods of time not in excess of fifty (50) years. 
4.  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions, and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or liens or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of same or to dispose of same in any manner the Authority deems to its best advantage. If the Authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall then be in the County of Crisp or the City of Cordele, the governing authority of the County of Crisp or City of Cordele is authorized in its discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, to the Authority. 
5.  To appoint and select officers, agents, and employees, including engineers, architects, builders, and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. 
6.  To make contracts, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases and rental and sale of projects, or contracts with respect to the use of projects, which it erects or acquires. 
7.  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, sell, equip, expand and to operate and manage projects and to pay the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue anticipation certificates or bonds or any other income of the Authority, or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms, or corporations, all of which the Authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
8.  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds and such other instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing. It is specifically provided that in addition to the pledge of revenue from any project for the payment of revenue anticipation bonds and for the benefit of the bondholders, the Authority is authorized to execute mortgages, deeds, to secure debts, trust deeds and such other instruments as may be necessary or convenient covering property of any particular project as additional security for the bondholders of such project. 
9.  To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public or private corporations, performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. 
10.  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this amendment. 
11.  To adopt, alter or repeal its own bylaws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the power granted to it may be enjoyed, as the Authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
G.  Bonds. In addition to the purposes for which Revenue Bonds are now permitted by this Constitution to be issued, the Authority, in order to carry out public purposes of this amendment, is hereby authorized to issue Revenue Bonds bearing rate or rates of interest and maturity at the years and amounts determined by the Authority, and the procedure of validation, issuance and delivery shall be in all respects in accordance with the Revenue Bond Law (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761), as heretofore or hereafter amended, Ga. Code Ann. Supp. Chapter 87-8, [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.] as if said obligations had been originally authorized to be issued thereunder; provided, however, that any property, real or personal, of the Authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered as security for any lawful debt of the Authority. The Authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture not in conflict with the provisions of this amendment to provide security for any bonds issued as provided herein, and such trust agreement or indenture may provide for foreclosure, or forced sale of any property of the Authority upon default on such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or under any terms or condition under which such bonds are issued. 
H.  Property. The Authority is hereby specifically authorized to purchase or otherwise acquire land and to improve and develop same so as to make said land more desirable for industrial purposes. Such land acquisition and development may be undertaken by the Authority at any time whether or not there is at such time a prospective industry considering the purchase or lease of an industrial site in the County of Crisp or City of Cordele. Such land and improvements may be held by the Authority for any length of time it deems desirable, but any sale, lease or other disposition of same when made, shall be subject to the provisions of Paragraph "J" hereof. 
I.  Gifts. No moneys derived by the Authority from any source other than gifts and contributions from private individuals, firms or corporations shall at any time be used for entertainment or other promotional expenses. 
J.  Self-liquidating basis. All projects of the Authority shall be on a self-liquidating basis, and the Authority shall not make gifts, directly or indirectly, to any person, firm or corporation. 
K.  Title to property. Should said Authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the Authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to the County of Crisp and the City of Cordele in proportion to their respective interest subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
L.  Taxes. All lands and improvements and personal property, the title to which is vested in the Authority, and all debentures, notes, bonds, and revenue anticipation certificates issued by the Authority shall be exempt from State and local taxation. The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not include exemption from sales and use taxes on property purchased by the Authority or for use by the Authority. 
M.  Debts. The Authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt as against the State of Georgia, the County of Crisp or City of Cordele. 
N.  Construction. This amendment, being for the purpose of developing and promoting the public good and the welfare of the County of Crisp, City of Cordele and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
O.  Purpose. This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare industry and trade within the County of Crisp and City of Cordele and reducing unemployment to the greatest extent possible, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the Authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes. 
P.  The General Assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the Authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the Authority; provided, however, nothing herein shall be construed so as to authorize the General Assembly to provide by law that the governing authority of the County of Crisp or the City of Cordele may levy an ad valorem tax to carry out the purposes of this amendment. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 2570) 
ARTICLE III. - POWER COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1925 Ga. Laws, page 72 which provided for a power commission. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citation to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Article 7, Section 7, Paragraph 1 of Constitution amended; bonds; acquisition of sites of Flint River; machinery for power transmission; eminent domain; generation of power; sinking fund; nontaxable bonds; dam site; bond elections; ballots; proclamation; composition; terms; compensation; employees; taxation to pay bonded indebtedness. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, that Article 7, Section 7, Paragraph 1, of the Constitution of Georgia as heretofore amended, shall be further amended, by adding at the end thereof a new subparagraph in the following words, to-wit: "And except that the County of Crisp may incur a bonded indebtedness in addition to debts hereinbefore in this paragraph allowed to be incurred, to the amount in the aggregate not to exceed the sum of one million two hundred and fifty thousand dollars and at a rate of interest not to exceed five per centum per annum; which said bonds shall run for a period or periods of time not to exceed thirty years and may be issued from time to time and in such denomination as may be determined by the county authorities of said county, to be signed by the Chairman and the Clerk of the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of said county and shall be known and designated as Hydro-Electric Power Bonds; and which said bonds shall be sold and the proceeds thereof used and handled by the Power Commission hereinafter provided for. The proceeds of all bonds issued and sold under this authority shall be used for the purpose of acquiring water power sites and locations on the Flint River within and, or without Crisp County, including the necessary overflow lands; and for the purpose of acquiring rights-of-way for power transmission lines; and for the purpose of improving, building, constructing, equipping, maintaining, leasing, or operating the necessary power dams, ponds, plants, machinery, transmission lines and distribution stations, including all necessary machinery and apparatus for the manufacture, generation, transmission, sale and distribution of water power and electric current. The right of eminent domain is conferred upon said County of Crisp for the purpose of acquiring such sites, locations, overflow lands, and rights-of-way necessary for the proper exercise of the rights conferred by this amendment. Said County of Crisp is fully authorized hereby to engage in the manufacture, generation and sale of water power and electric current for purposes of promoting the agricultural, industrial, and civic interests of said County and for any and all other purposes and to make all necessary contracts relating to the sale and disposition thereof including the right to fix the rate or rates to be charged for all water power and electric current used for lighting, heating, power, and other purposes in said county. The bonds issued pursuant to this authority shall be a first lien upon all properties acquired, and all improvements made, and all plants and lines and stations constructed and machinery and apparatus purchased with proceeds thereof; and in the event of the sale of all or any portion of said properties the proceeds thereof shall be used for the purpose of payment of said bonded indebtedness. The bonds issued pursuant to this authority and the interest thereon, shall be paid by preference out of the net receipts of the water power and electric current used, sold or disposed of, manufactured and generated under this authority, after the payment of maintenance and operating expenses; and the Power Commission hereinafter provided for shall provide a sinking fund for the retirement of the principal of said bonds out of said net receipts whenever the amount of said net receipts becomes sufficient therefor, after payment of the interest on said bonds and any excess of said net receipts; after providing for interest and sinking fund charges, may be used for the purpose of additions, enlargements, and betterments, or for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, and equipping other water power sites and locations, and plants, or be paid into the county depository for general county purposes. All bonds issued pursuant to this amendment shall be and are declared to be nontaxable for any and all purposes. Any dam constructed pursuant to the authority hereof shall be equipped with passageways for the passage of fish over the same. Said passageways to be approved by the Department of Game and Fish. 
Provided, however, that any dam built pursuant to the authority aforesaid shall be located on the Flint River between Drayton Bridge on the north, and the confluence of Chokee Creek with said river on the south. Provided, further, that in event of sale by Crisp County or any of its assigns or successors of all or any part of the properties acquired, built or improved pursuant to the foregoing authority, to any person or corporation controlled by private capital, such property so sold shall become subject to taxation under existing laws. Said County of Crisp is authorized and empowered to issue bonds pursuant to this amendment, in the event this amendment be ratified and becomes a part of the Constitution; and in the event a majority of the electors of Crisp County voting at the election at which this amendment is submitted for ratification, or at any subsequent special bond election called for that purpose, in which special election the ballot of those voting in favor of bonds shall bear the words, "For Hydro-Electric Power Bonds," and the ballot of those voting against bonds shall bear the words: "Against Hydro-Electric Power Bonds," vote in favor thereof. The probate court judge of said county is directed to consolidate the vote and to declare the result of all elections therefor and if the result of any such election is favorable to the issuance of such bonds, the same shall be validated in the manner now provided by law. The sale of the bonds provided for above, and all the rights, powers and duties incident to the use, investment, and expenditure of the proceeds thereof including the sites, locations, and rights-of-way and the building, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and managing of the sites, locations[,] rights-of-way, plants, lines, stations, dams and ponds and all properties of all and every kind acquired, built, and constructed pursuant to the foregoing authority shall be, and is hereby vested in a Power Commission of seven to consist of the members of the Board of Commissioner[s] of Roads and Revenues of said county as constituted from time to time and four other citizens of Crisp County who shall be elected by the Grand Jury of said county, two of those first elected to be for a term of one year and the other two for a term of two years, and the terms of all commissioners so elected thereafter shall be for a period of two years and the Grand Jury of said county shall fix the compensation of all Power Commissioners to be paid out of the proceeds from the operations of said power plant or out of the general fund of said county and said commission is authorized and empowered to employ such agents, servants, and employees, and to make and enter into such contracts as are reasonable and proper in the exercise of the duties and powers herein conferred upon said commission. The taxing authorities of said County of Crisp are hereby empowered and it shall be their duty to provide by taxation for the payment of the principal and interest of any bonds issued hereunder in the event the net profits derived from the use, sale and disposition of water power and electric current hereunder shall prove insufficient therefor. The General Assembly may confer further and additional authority upon the County of Crisp touching the construction, maintenance, control, and disposition of the Hydro-Electric power plant and properties herein provided for not inconsistent herewith. 
Sec. 2. - Publication; submitted to popular vote; ballots; proclamation. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that when said amendment shall be agreed to by two-thirds vote of the members elected to each House it shall be entered upon the Journal of each House with the "ayes" and "nays" thereon and published in one or more newspapers in each congressional district of this State for two months previous to the time for holding the next general election and shall at the next general election be submitted to the people for ratification. All persons voting at said election in favor of adopting the said proposed amendment to the Constitution shall have written or printed on their Ballots the words "For ratification of amendment to Article 7, Section 7, Paragraph 1, of the Constitution authorizing the County of Crisp to increase its bonded debt for Hydro-Electric Power purposes," and all persons opposed to the adoption of said amendment shall have written or printed on their ballots the words, "Against ratification of amendment to Article 7, Section 7, Paragraph 1 of the Constitution, authorizing the County of Crisp to increase its bonded debt for Hydro-Electric Power purposes," and if a majority of the electors qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly, voting thereon, shall vote for ratification thereof when the results shall be consolidated as now required by law in elections for members of the General Assembly, then said amendment shall become a part of Article 7, Section 7, Paragraph 1 of the Constitution of this State, and the Governor shall make a proclamation therefor as provided by law. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws published in the Related Laws and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances, resolutions and other enactments embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Crisp County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the county, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Board of commissioners, board, commissioners, commission, county commission, governing authority, governing body. Each such term shall mean the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County, Georgia. 
Chairman, other officers and officials. Whenever the term "chairman" is used it shall mean the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County. Whenever titles of various officers or officials are used, they shall refer to the persons holding such positions with Crisp County. 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean "The Code of Crisp County, Georgia," as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The terms "the county" and "this county" shall mean Crisp County, Georgia. 
County administrator. The term "county administrator" means the county administrator of Crisp County, Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males or any other legal entity when applicable under federal or state law. 
Joint authority. All terms giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A term importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as described in this section. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Seal. The term "seal" shall mean the county seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" shall mean the Sheriff of Crisp County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The terms "state" and "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the county. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(3); construction of statutory definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; general statutory definition, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; computation of time under Civil Practice Act and court rules, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by their omission from affected reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County, as follows": 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of Crisp County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Crisp County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability of state legislation, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of commissioners, which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance. 
(b)  Each day any violations of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(a); alternative punishments for traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); display of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-70-20 et seq., the county has executed an agreement for the implementation of a local government service delivery strategy. An official copy of the service delivery strategy is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Cross reference— Any contract or obligation assumed by the county saved from repeal, § 1-6(3); any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-6(4); any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions saved from repeal, § 1-6(13); civil emergencies, ch. 26; taxation, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 66; administration and enforcement of development code, app. A, § 12.01 et seq. 
State Law reference— Claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); county body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1 et seq.; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; authority to control property of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1(a)(1); matters over which county governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; county property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq.; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ I; election, term and compensation of county officers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III. 

Sec. 2-31. - Meetings. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall hold regular meetings on the second Tuesday of each month at 9:00 a.m., unless otherwise ordered by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Special meetings may be held upon call by the chairman of the board of commissioners or a majority of the board members. Due notice of such meetings shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
(c)  Meetings shall be held in room 305 of the Crisp County Government Center, 210 South Seventh Street, Cordele, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2014(1)) 
State Law reference— Due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-32. - Parliamentary procedure. 
The proceedings of the board of commissioners shall be generally governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, so far as applicable and not inconsistent with the special rules of the board of commissioners, state law and this Code. 
Secs. 2-33—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste management authority, § 54-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-61. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The bylaws for the Cordele-Crisp County Clean and Beautiful Commission, the Crisp County Clean and Beautiful Committee and the Cordele-Crisp Clean Community Commission are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
Secs. 2-62—2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AIRPORT BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Aviation, O.C.G.A. § 6-1-1 et seq.; authority to acquire, construct and maintain airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq.; general powers of counties and municipalities as to airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-25; authority to enforce police regulations in airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-27. 

Sec. 2-81. - Declaration of need. 
There is declared a continuing need of an airport board to function as an advisory board to the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 6-13-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 2-82. - Name; members. 
The airport board is renamed the Crisp County-Cordele Airport Board and shall continue to consist of not less than five nor more than seven members. Such board shall continue to choose its chairman from its members. 
(Res. of 6-13-1989, § 2) 
Editor's note— The Cordele Municipal Airport Board was created by a resolution adopted June 7, 1955. 
Sec. 2-83. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the airport board shall be to advise the board of commissioners on matters of concern at the Crisp County-Cordele Airport, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The hiring and discharge of employees; 
(2)  The number, size and rental of hangar facilities; 
(3)  Furnishing of fuel and other service; 
(4)  Maintenance, improvement, leasing and acquisition of facilities, equipment and structures; and 
(5)  The production and implementation of plans for the development of the Crisp County-Cordele Airport. 
(Res. of 6-13-1989, § 3) 
Secs. 2-84—2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Development code, app. A. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; Georgia Development Authority Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-101. - Declaration of need; activation. 
(a)  There is determined and declared to be a pressing, existing and future need for a development authority (as more fully described and defined in the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.), to function in the county for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in the county thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry. 
(b)  There is activated in the county the public body corporate and politic known as the "development authority of the county" which is created under the adoption and approval of the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
(Res. of 3-8-1979) 
Sec. 2-102. - Board of directors; terms. 
(a)  The board of directors of the development authority shall consist of seven members. The first members of the board of directors shall be appointed for terms of two for two years, two for four years, and three for six years. Thereafter, the terms of office of all board members shall be for six years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  The board of directors of the development authority of the county elected pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq., as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Res. of 3-8-1979) 
Sec. 2-103. - Industrial development authority. 
Action taken by the board of commissioners under this division is not intended in any way to affect the Crisp County-Cordele Industrial Development Authority, including, without limitation, its existence, purpose, organization, powers or function. 
(Res. of 3-8-1979) 
Secs. 2-104—2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - JOINT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITIES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; Georgia Development Authority Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-10-1 et seq. 

Subdivision A. - Crisp/Dooly Joint Development Authority 

Sec. 2-121. - Declaration of need; creation; name. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq., the Boards of Commissioners of Crisp and Dooly Counties declare that there is a need for a joint development authority to function in the Crisp/Dooly County region of the state and activates and creates, jointly with other counties pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1, a development authority for such region. 
(b)  The development authority activated and created in subsection (a) of this section shall be known as the Crisp/Dooly Joint Development Authority. 
(Res. of 3-1-1995, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 2-122. - Members; terms. 
The development authority created under this division shall consist of five members from each participating county. The five members from each county shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of such county and shall be residents of the county they represent. The terms of office of each member shall be for four years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Res. of 3-1-1995, § 3; Res. of 9-13-2005) 
Subdivision B. - Crisp-Sumter Counties Joint Development Authority 

Sec. 2-123. - Public purpose. 
The authority is created for the public purpose of promoting and expanding business, industry and trade in Crisp and Sumter Counties and to attract and support new business industry, to provide increased employment for the citizens living within the jurisdiction of the authority and to expand the ad valorem property tax base for the two counties. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 2-124. - Board of directors. 
The authority shall be controlled by a board of directors (the "board") consisting of members as follows: 
(a)  Five members of the board shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners for Crisp County; and 
(b)  Five members of the board shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners for Sumter County. 
Two of the members appointed by the board of commissioners of each county shall serve an initial two-year term. The remaining members shall serve an initial four-year term and all subsequent members appointed to the board shall serve four-year terms. Each member appointed to the board shall be a taxpayer residing within the county making the appointment to the board. The members of the board shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as members of the board. The initial members appointed by each respective county to the board shall be named in the activating concurrent resolutions approved by the board of commissioners of the two counties and attached as Exhibits "A" and "B" to the ordinance from which this section derived. Each member of the board shall serve his or her stated term noted in the resolution(s) and continue to serve as a member of the board until his or her successor is qualified and chosen. In the event of the death or resignation of a member of the board, his or her successor shall be duly appointed by the respective board of commissioners of the county where the former member was a resident. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 2) 
Sec. 2-125. - Officers. 
At the initial meeting of the board, there shall be elected by majority vote, a chairman, vice-chairman, secretary and treasurer for the authority, all of whom shall serve a one-year term. The chairman or the vice-chairman shall sign, on behalf of the authority, all official documents which shall be attested to by either the secretary or the treasurer. All resolutions of the board binding the authority to any legal obligation must be approved by a majority vote of the members of the board. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 3) 
Sec. 2-126. - Staff. 
The authority shall have authority to hire an executive director who will act as chief operating officer of the authority. The executive director shall serve as secretary of the authority and shall hire all staff, be responsible for the annual work plan and budget creation. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 2-127. - Term. 
The authority shall be deemed formally created and authorized to do business upon the filing with the Secretary of State of these articles of organization with supporting resolutions from the two counties, attached as Exhibits "A" and "B" to the ordinance from which this section derived. The authority shall have perpetual existence but may be dissolved at any time by a two-thirds vote of the members of the board. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 5) 
Sec. 2-128. - Taxation. 
The authority shall not be required to pay any state and local taxes or other assessments imposed by the state, or any county, municipal corporation or other political subdivision or taxing district, nor shall there be any ad valorem property taxing district, nor shall there be any ad valorem property taxes assessed against any property acquired and owned by the authority or under its jurisdiction, control, possession, supervision or leased to a private entity, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-3. The foregoing exemption from taxes shall not include an exemption from sales and use taxes on property purchased by or used by the authority. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 6) 
Sec. 2-129. - Powers of the authority. 
The authority shall have all powers provided for under O.C.G.A. § 36-62-6, including, but not limited to, the power: 
(a)  To bring and defend action; 
(b)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(c)  To make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary to exercise the powers of the authority, any of which contracts may be made with the county in which the authority is located or with any one or more municipal corporations in such county; 
(d)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and devises of any property and to administer trust; 
(e)  To acquire, by purchase, gift or construction, any real or personal property desired to be acquired as part of any project or for the purpose of improving, extending, adding to, reconstructing, renovating, or remodeling any project or part thereof already acquired or for the purpose of demolition to make room for such project or any part thereof; 
(f)  To sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, mortgage, dispose of, or grant options for any real or personal property or interest therein for any such purposes; 
(g)  To dispose of any real property for fair market value, regardless of prior development of such property as a project, whenever the board may deem such disposition to be in the best interests of the authority if the board prior to such disposition shall determine that such real property no longer can be used advantageously as a project for the development of trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities; 
(h)  To mortgage, convey, pledge or assign any properties, revenues, income, toll, charges, or fees owned or received by the authority; 
(i)  To extend credit or make loans to any person, firm, corporation, or other industrial entity for the planning, design, construction, acquisition or carrying out of any project, which credit or loans shall be secured by loan agreements, mortgages, security agreements, contracts and all other instruments, fees or charges, upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall determine reasonable in connection with such loans, including provision for the establishment and maintenance of reserves and insurance funds; and, in the exercise of powers granted by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-6 in connection with a project for such person, firm, corporation, or other industrial entity to require the inclusion in any contract, loan, agreement, security agreement, or other instrument, of such provisions for guaranty, insurance, construction, use, operation, maintenance and financing of a project as the authority may deem necessary or desirable; 
(j)  To acquire, accept or retain equitable interest, security interests, or other interest in any property, real or personal, by mortgage, assignment, security agreement, pledge, conveyance, contract lien, loan agreement, or other consensual transfer, in order to secure the repayment of any money loaned or credit extended by the authority; 
(k)  To construct, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve and equip projects located on land owned or leased by the authority or land owned or leased by others and to pay all or part of the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms, or corporations or any other contribution, all of which the authority is authorized to receive, accept and use; 
(l)  To borrow money and issue its revenue bonds and bond anticipation notes from time to time and to use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or part of the cost of any project, including the cost of extending, adding to or improving the project, or for the purpose of refunding any such bonds of the authority theretofore issued and to otherwise carry out the purposes for which the authority was created and to pay all other costs of the authority incident to or necessary and appropriate to such purposes, including the providing of funds to be paid into any fund or funds to secure such bonds and notes, provided that all such bonds and notes shall be issued in accordance with the procedures and subject to the limitations set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-8; 
(m)  As security for repayment of authority obligations, to pledge, mortgage, convey, assign, hypothecate or otherwise encumber any property, real or personal, of the authority and to execute any trust agreement, indenture or security agreement containing any provisions not in conflict with law, which trust agreement, indenture or security agreement may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default, on such obligations, either in payment or principal or interest or in the performance of any term or condition, as are contained in such agreement or indenture; 
(n)  To expend for the promotion of industry, agriculture and trade within its jurisdiction any funds of the authority determined by the board to be in excess of those needed for the other corporate purposes of the authority. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 7) 
Sec. 2-130. - Limitations of the authority and prohibited transactions. 
The authority shall be prohibited from directly owning or operating a project, except for an industrial park, as provided under O.C.G.A. § 36-62-7, and all members of the board shall be prohibited from transacting business for pecuniary gain with the authority, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5(e) with such exceptions as provided therein. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 8) 
Sec. 2-131. - Job tax credits. 
The authority shall be able to take advantage of tax credits as outlined in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-7-40 and 36-62-5.1. Each county shall be able to offer its credit plus $500.00. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 9) 
Sec. 2-132. - Authority to create a multicounty business/industrial park. 
Acting as an agent for the counties involved, the authority may create a multicounty business/industrial park as allowed under Amendment 1 to the Georgia Constitution passed by the citizens November 6, 1994. The counties will enter into a single contract relating the expenses and tax sharing no matter in which county the park is located. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 10) 
Sec. 2-133. - Debt. 
The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against the State of Georgia, Crisp or Sumter Counties or any municipal corporation located therein. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 11) 
Sec. 2-134. - Bonds. 
The authority shall be entitled to issue bonds, bond anticipation notes, trust indentures, deed to secure obligations, security agreements and mortgages as provided under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-62-8, subject to the limitations of O.C.G.A. § 36-63-9. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 12) 
Sec. 2-135. - Dissolution. 
If for any reason the separate corporate existence of the authority is terminated and dissolved, any and all property owned by the authority shall be transferred and assigned to the host county wherein the property is located. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 13) 
Sec. 2-136. - Amendment. 
The board, by majority vote, shall have the right to amend these articles of organization, so long as such amendment does not violate any of the provisions of the Development Authority Law for the State of Georgia, as referenced herein. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2007, § 14) 
Subdivision C. - Crisp-Turner Counties Joint Development Authority 

Sec. 2-137. - Public purpose. 
The authority is created for the public purpose of promoting and expanding business, industry and trade in Crisp and Turner Counties and to attract and support new business industry, to provide increased employment for the citizens living within the jurisdiction of the authority and to expand the ad valorem property tax base for the two counties. 
(Res. of 11-10-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 2-138. - Board of directors. 
The authority shall be controlled by a board of directors (the "board") consisting of members as follows: 
(a)  Five members of the board shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners for Crisp County; and 
(b)  Five members of the board shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners for Turner County. 
Two of the members appointed by the board of commissioners of each county shall serve an initial two-year term. The remaining members shall serve an initial four-year term and all subsequent members appointed to the board shall serve four-year terms. Each member appointed to the board shall be a taxpayer residing within the county making the appointment to the board. The members of the board shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as members of the board. Each member of the board shall serve his or her stated term and continue to serve as a member of the board until his or her successor is qualified and chosen. In the event of the death or resignation of a member of the board, his or her successor shall be duly appointed by the respective board of commissioners of the county where the former member was a resident. 
(Res. of 11-10-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 2-139. - Officers. 
At the initial meeting of the board, there shall be elected by majority vote, a chairman, vice-chairman, secretary and treasurer for the authority, all of whom shall serve a one-year term. The chairman or the vice-chairman shall sign, on behalf of the authority, all official documents which shall be attested to by either the secretary or the treasurer. All resolutions of the board binding the authority to any legal obligation must be approved by a majority vote of the members of the board. 
(Res. of 11-10-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 2-140. - Staff. 
The authority shall have authority to hire an executive director who will act as chief operating officer of the authority. The executive director shall serve as secretary of the authority and shall hire all staff, be responsible for the annual work plan and budget creation. 
(Res. of 11-10-2009, § 4) 
Sec. 2-140.1. - Term. 
The authority shall be deemed formally created and authorized to do business upon the filing with the Secretary of State of the supporting resolutions from the two counties, attached as Exhibits "A" and "B" to the ordinance from which this section derived. The authority shall have perpetual existence but may be dissolved at any time by a two-thirds vote of the members of the board and in conformance with O.C.G.A. § 36-62-14. 
(Res. of 11-10-2009, § 5) 
Sec. 2-140.2. - Taxation. 
The authority shall not be required to pay any state and local taxes or other assessments imposed by the state, or any county, municipal corporation or other political subdivision or taxing district, nor shall there be any ad valorem property taxing district, nor shall there be any ad valorem property taxes assessed against any property acquired and owned by the authority or under its jurisdiction, control, possession, supervision or leased to a private entity, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-3. The foregoing exemption from taxes shall not include an exemption from sales and use taxes on property purchased by or used by the authority. 
(Res. of 11-10-2009, § 6) 
Sec. 2-140.3. - Powers of the authority. 
The authority shall have all powers provided for under O.C.G.A. § 36-62-6, including, but not limited to, the power: 
(a)  To bring and defend action; 
(b)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(c)  To make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary to exercise the powers of the authority, any of which contracts may be made with the county in which the authority is located or with any one or more municipal corporations in such county; 
(d)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and devises of any property and to administer trust; 
(e)  To acquire, by purchase, gift or construction, any real or personal property desired to be acquired as part of any project or for the purpose of improving, extending, adding to, reconstructing, renovation, or remodeling any project or part thereof already acquired or for the purpose of demolition to make room for such project or any part thereof; 
(f)  To sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, mortgage, dispose of, or grant options for any real or personal property or interest therein for any such purposes; 
(g)  To dispose of any real property for fair market value, regardless of prior development of such property as a project, whenever the board may deem such disposition to be in the best interests of the authority if the board prior to such disposition shall determine that such real property no longer can be used advantageously as a project for the development of trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities; 
(h)  To mortgage, convey, pledge or assign any properties, revenues, income, toll, charges, or fees owned or received by the authority; 
(i)  To extend credit or make loans to any person, firm, corporation, or other industrial entity for the planning, design, construction, acquisition or carrying out of any project, which credit or loans shall be secured by loan agreements, mortgages, security agreements, contracts and all other instruments, fees or charges, upon such terms and conditions as the Authority shall determine reasonable in connection with such loans, including provision for the establishment and maintenance of reserves and insurance funds; and, in the exercise of powers granted by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-6 in connection with a project for such person, firm, corporation, or other industrial entity to require the inclusion in any contract, loan, agreement, security agreement, or other instrument, of such provisions for guaranty, insurance, construction, use, operation, maintenance and financing of a project as the authority may deem necessary or desirable; 
(j)  To acquire, accept or retain equitable interest, security interests, or other interest in any property, real or personal, by mortgage, assignment, security agreement, pledge, conveyance, contract lien, loan agreement, or other consensual transfer, in order to secure the repayment of any money loaned or credit extended by the authority; 
(k)  To construct, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve and equip projects located on land owned or leased by the authority or land owned or leased by others and to pay all or part of the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms, or corporations or any other contribution, all of which the Authority is authorized to receive, accept and use; 
(l)  To borrow money and issue its revenue bonds and bond anticipation notes from time to time and to use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or part of the cost of any project, including the cost of extending, adding to or improving the project, or for the purpose of refunding any such bonds of the authority theretofore issued and to otherwise carry out the purposes for which the authority was created and to pay all other costs of the authority incident to or necessary and appropriate to such purposes, including the providing of funds to be paid into any fund or funds to secure such bonds and notes, provided that all such bonds and notes shall be issued in accordance with the procedures and subject to the limitations set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-8; 
(m)  As security for repayment of authority obligations, to pledge, mortgage, convey, assign, hypothecate or otherwise encumber any property, real or personal, of the authority and to execute any trust agreement, indenture or security agreement containing any provisions not in conflict with law, which trust agreement, indenture or security agreement may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default, on such obligations, either in payment or principal or interest or in the performance of any term or condition, as are contained in such agreement or indenture; 
(n)  To expend for the promotion of industry, agriculture and trade within its jurisdiction any funds of the authority determined by the board to be in excess of those needed for the other corporate purposes of the authority. 
(Res. of 11-10-2009, § 7) 
Sec. 2-140.4. - Limitations of the authority and prohibited transactions. 
The authority shall be prohibited from directly owning or operating a project, except for an industrial park, as provided under O.C.G.A. § 36-62-7, and all members of the board shall be prohibited from transacting business for pecuniary gain with the authority, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5(e) with such exceptions as provided therein. 
(Res. of 11-10-2009, § 8) 
Sec. 2-140.5. - Job tax credits. 
The authority shall be able to take advantage of tax credits as outlined in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-7-40 and 36-62-5.1. 
(Res. of 11-10-2009, § 9) 
Sec. 2-140.6. - Debt. 
The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against the State of Georgia, Crisp or Turner Counties or any municipal corporation located therein. 
(Res. of 11-10-2009, § 10) 
Sec. 2-140.7. - Bonds. 
The authority shall be entitled to issue bonds, bond anticipation notes, trust indentures, deed to secure obligations, security agreements and mortgages as provided under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-62-8, subject to the limitations of O.C.G.A. § 36-62-9. 
(Res. of 11-10-2009, § 11) 
Sec. 2-140.8. - Dissolution. 
If for any reason the separate corporate existence of the authority is terminated and dissolved, any and all property owned by the authority shall be transferred and assigned to the host county wherein the property is located. 
(Res. of 11-10-2009, § 12) 
Sec. 2-140.9. - Amendment. 
The board, by majority vote, shall have the right to amend these articles of organization, so long as such amendment does not violate any of the provisions of the Development Authority Law for the State of Georgia, as referenced herein. 
(Res. of 11-10-2009, § 13) 
DIVISION 5. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-141. - Declaration of need. 
The board of commissioners declares that there is need for a hospital authority to function in the county. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1946, § a) 
Sec. 2-142. - Created; terms. 
(a)  There is created in and for the county a public body corporate and politic to be known as the hospital authority of the county, which shall consist of a board of not less than five, nor more than nine trustees, which board of trustees are authorized to exercise the powers in the county conferred under 1941 Ga. Laws, page 241 and O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72 et seq. 
(b)  The initial board of trustees shall consist of five members to serve from one year to five years, and their successors shall serve for five years. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1946, §§ b, c) 
DIVISION 6. - BOARD OF ELECTORS AND REGISTRATION 

Sec. 2-143. - Established. 
The Georgia General Assembly established a Crisp County Board of Elections and Registration, to be effective July 1, 2005, through enactment of Act. No. 182 (H.B. 415) by the General Assembly. 
(Res. of 12-14-2004) 
Sec. 2-144. - Members; appointment. 
The membership of the county board of elections and registration, shall be a chairperson and four members; the chairperson to be appointed by the board of commissioners of Crisp County, one member to be appointed by the Democratic Executive Committee, one member to be appointed by the Republican Executive Committee, and two members to be nominated by the Grand Jury of Crisp County and appointed by the Chief Superior Court Judge of the Cordele Judicial Circuit. 
(Res. of 12-14-2004) 
DIVISION 7. - BOARD OF TAX ASSESSORS 

Sec. 2-145. - Board of tax assessors term. 
The Board of Commissioners of Crisp County establish the regular terms of the Crisp County Board of Tax Assessors to be terms of four years. In order to align these terms to assure that a majority of the board of tax assessors' terms do not expire within the same year, the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County directs that two of the terms of the Crisp County Board of Tax Assessors of those appointed in 2007 be extended for one year for an initial term of five years with subsequent terms being of four years. 
(Res. of 7-10-2007) 
Secs. 2-146—2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— The county compiles and publishes separately additional administrative regulations in its manual of personnel policies and procedures. The manual includes the county's drug free work place policy and retirement plan for county employees. Official copies of the referenced documentation are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Cross reference— Office of director of emergency management, § 26-33. 
State Law reference— Expenditure of county funds for insurance and employment benefits authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11.1; employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11; civil service system for county employees authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21(a); Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Public Employee Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-161. - Employment status of planning department personnel. 
The ordinance enacted on October 9, 1990, which adopted various standard construction codes, is hereby, rescinded to the extent that the same grants the building official and chief building inspector employment status which may be terminated only for cause. The personnel of the county planning department shall be, and are hereby, employees subject to the provisions of the county personnel policies. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2002) 
Secs. 2-162—2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— County manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22. 

Sec. 2-181. - Responsibilities. 
The responsibilities of the county administrator shall include, but not be limited to, serving as ex officio clerk to the board of commissioners, performing general administrative and supervisory work in coordinating day-to-day operation of county government, the maintenance of records and documents for the board of commissioners, serving as liaison with county departments and elected officials, interpreting and implementing policies set by the board of commissioners, assisting department heads and elected officials in the solution of technical problems on request, representing the Board of Commissioners at meetings of state and county boards and agencies as requested by the board of commissioners, conferring with department heads and preparing, together with the financial director, an annual budget for approval by the board of commissioners, preparing the agenda for the meetings of the board of commissioners, administering the county personnel policy, supervising the administration of the county retirement system and life and health insurance programs; and performing other related duties as required or directed by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 7-10-2002) 
Secs. 2-182—2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECREATION DEPARTMENT RETIREMENT PLAN TRANSFER[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— State parks, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; Georgia state games commission, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq.; authority to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 

Sec. 2-201. - Termination of participation in the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. 
The recreation department's participation in the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System is terminated effective as of the close of business Friday, June 30, 2000. The agreement providing for the recreation department's participation in the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System, the trust agreement between the recreation department and the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System, and the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System-administered recreation department retirement plan shall be considered terminated effective as of such date. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 2-202. - Designation of successor trustees. 
The Board of Trustees of the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia (ACCG) Defined Benefit Plan is designated to serve as successor trustees to the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System board of trustees and is authorized and directed to receive assets to be transferred to it from the recreation department trust fund held by Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2000, § 2) 
Sec. 2-203. - Transfer of balance. 
(a)  The board of trustees of Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System is authorized and directed to transfer the balance of any and all assets in the recreation department trust fund held by Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System on and as of June 30, 2000, to the Board of Trustees of the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia (ACCG) Defined Benefit Plan as successor trustees. Trust fund earnings for the month of June 2000, shall be calculated and applied by multiplying the balance in the account as of June 30, 2000, by 1/12 of eight percent. Any earnings or losses which would have otherwise been credited to or debited from the trust fund after June 30, 2000, shall not be taken into account. Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System is authorized to deduct from the trust fund balance an appropriate fee for administrative services provided in effecting the termination of the recreation department's participation in Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System and the transfer of assets. 
(b)  Within a reasonable time prior to the transfer of assets as stated in subsection (a) of this section, the county shall provide to Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System information necessary to calculate the accrued benefits of participants under the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System-administered recreation department retirement plan as of June 30, 2000. Upon receipt of such information and prior to the transfer of assets, Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System is authorized and directed to prepare and submit to the Pension Service Company, the administrator of the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia (ACCG) Defined Benefit Plan, a list of all such participants, showing for each the present value of his accrued benefit, determined based upon the information provided by the county and in accordance with actuarial assumptions contained in article VIII, section 7 of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System-administered recreation department plan. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2000, §§ 3, 4) 
Sec. 2-204. - Retirement rights of employees, participants and beneficiaries. 
The county shall ensure that the retirement rights of employees, participants and beneficiaries accrued as of June 30, 2000, under the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System-administered recreation department retirement plan shall not be impaired by virtue of the transfer of recreation department employees to the county, or by their transfer to the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia (ACCG) Defined Benefit Plan. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2000, § 5) 
Sec. 2-205. - No further responsibility or obligation after transfer of assets. 
Upon the transfer of assets to the Board of Trustees of the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia (ACCG) Defined Benefit Plan, the City of Cordele, Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System and the Georgia Municipal Association (GMA) shall have no further responsibility or obligation to provide or administer retirement or other benefits for employees or retirees of the recreation department or their beneficiaries. The Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System Board of Trustees' responsibility for the investment of assets held on behalf of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System-administered recreation department retirement plan trust fund shall also cease upon such transfer. Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System, the Georgia Municipal Association and their officers and employees are specifically held harmless by the county from any liability, claims or suits arising from the transfer of recreation department employees to the county, or their transfer to the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia (ACCG) Defined Benefit Plan. Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System and Georgia Municipal Association shall be responsible only for the proper accounting and transfer of assets held in the recreation department retirement plan trust fund in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2000, § 6) 
Secs. 2-206—2-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— The county has adopted policies and procedures, revised in 1993, relating to the Crisp County Revolving Loan Fund. Official copies of the policies and procedures are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-6(2); taxation, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; local government finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(a); appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance or budget resolution, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; designation of depository, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-14; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-221. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the county shall commence on July 1 and conclude on June 30. 
State Law reference— Establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(a). 
Secs. 2-222—2-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - UNIFORM CHART OF ACCOUNTS 

Sec. 2-241. - Findings. 
O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(e) requires the state department of community affairs, in cooperation with the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia and Georgia Municipal Association to develop local government uniform charts of accounts. O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(e) further requires the state auditor approval prior to the adoption of uniform charts of accounts by the state department of community affairs. O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(e) further requires all units of local government in the state to adopt the initial uniform chart of accounts adopted by the state department of community affairs. The state department of community affairs has adopted an initial uniform charts of accounts. 
Sec. 2-242. - Adopted. 
The initial uniform chart of accounts, adopted by the state department of community affairs, is adopted and shall be used by all departments and agencies of the county for all budgetary and accounting purposes effective on or after July 1, 2001, including without limitation, all accounting records, audited financial statements, including comprehensive annual financial reports, and reports to state agencies. 
(Res. of 8-14-2001) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Club means any religious, charitable or fraternal organization holding a current national charter and shall not include locally chartered corporations or local organizations operating under a registered or unregistered name. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Restaurant means an establishment maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, being provided with an adequate and sanitary kitchen conforming to applicable laws and regulations, with dining room equipment and personnel to serve complete meals, and which serves at least one complete meal per day at least six days per week (with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating), food service being the principal business conducted with the sale of wine and malt beverages being only incidental thereto. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail distilled spirits dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail malt beverages dealer means any person who engages in selling malt beverages at retail within the county and shall include any person serving malt beverages for a pecuniary consideration within the county. 
Wholesale malt beverages dealer means any person who sells malt beverages to a retail malt beverages dealer. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The terms does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. I, § 1.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Violations. 
Violations of this chapter shall be punished upon conviction in the magistrate court of the county as provided in section 1-11. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. I, § 1.08) 
Sec. 6-3. - Sale on election days. 
Alcoholic beverages which are licensed for sale in the county may be sold on all election days during normal business hours established by this chapter and regulation of sales of alcoholic beverages by ordinance. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. I, § 1.02) 
Sec. 6-4. - Possession on county property or public places. 
(a)  Drinking. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverage upon property of the county or upon any open premises adjacent to any public business in the county, whether or not such person is located in a vehicle. 
(b)  Containers. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his hand, or upon his person, or in any vehicle, any open container used, or which has been used, for alcoholic beverages, upon the property of the county or upon any open premises adjacent to any public business in the county. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. I, §§ 1.03, 1.04) 
Sec. 6-5. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  Prescribed. It shall be unlawful for any person holding a retail consumption dealer license in the county, or for any unlicensed person, to offer for sale at retail, or to give away in or upon any such licensee's premises, or the premises of an unlicensed person, any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday, or between the hours of 12:00 midnight Saturday and 12:30 p.m. Sunday or between the hours of 12:00 midnight Sunday and 7:00 a.m. Monday. 
(b)  Patron on premises during closing hours. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any retail consumption dealer, including, but not limited to, restaurants and clubs, to keep open for business or admit the public to, or permit the public to remain within, or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages in or upon the premises in which alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for a period of longer than 30 minutes after the hours within which the sale of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, during which 30 minutes customers will be permitted to consume alcoholic beverages which were purchased during legal hours of sale. 
(2)  Food service establishments also holding a retail consumption license may reopen for business between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. Sunday, during which time retail customers may be provided service and products not prohibited by section 6-6. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to admit the public to, or permit the public to remain within, the licensee's premises on Sunday at any times other than between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. I, §§ 1.05, 1.06; Ord. of 11-12-2014(2)) 
Sec. 6-6. - Sale of other commodities; drinking on premises prohibited. 
No licensed retailer may sell or offer for sale or display or keep in stock at his place of business where distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages are offered for sale any other product or commodity except packaged ice and beverages containing no alcohol which are commonly used to dilute distilled spirits and wine, and the sale of such excepted beverages and ice may be conducted only upon payment of the appropriate occupation tax. Drinking any beverages containing alcohol upon the retailer's premises is prohibited. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. I, § 1.07) 
Sec. 6-7. - Suspension or revocation of license for violation. 
(a)  In addition to all other fines and penalties provided by this chapter or by applicable state law, the board of commissioners may suspend or revoke for cause appearing sufficient to the commission the alcoholic beverage license of any person in the county, including, but not limited to, cause arising for violation of the provisions of this chapter and/or conviction of such violation in the county magistrate court. 
(b)  Upon written notice delivered to a licensee under this chapter signed by the county administrator, the sheriff or the chairman of the board of commissioners recommending that the license of such licensee should be revoked under the provisions of this section, the board of commissioners may conduct a hearing at a regular or special meeting wherein evidence shall be heard and the board of commissioners by majority vote may suspend or revoke such alcoholic beverage license. The notice shall state the time and place of hearing and a copy thereof shall be filed in the permanent records of the board of commissioners by delivery to the county administrator. 
(c)  A licensee under this chapter to whom notice is given must appear at such hearing or his absence shall be considered a waiver of his right to appear and a consent to the action taken by the board of commissioners. Such licensee may be represented by an attorney and shall be allowed to present evidence. 
(d)  Appeal from the decision of the board of commissioners under this section shall be governed by the laws of the state. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. I, § 1.08) 
Secs. 6-8—6-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-41. - License required for malt beverage dealers. 
There is levied, assessed and required an annual license for any person to engage in the sale of malt beverages in the county. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale of malt beverages in the county without first registering and paying the license fee, which shall be $75.00 per calendar year or any part thereof. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. II, § 2.01) 
Sec. 6-42. - Tax levied. 
There is imposed and levied a specific excise tax upon all malt beverages dealers within the county as follows: 
(1)  Per 12 ounces or fractional part thereof, regardless of container, $0.05. 
(2)  Per container of 15½ gallons, or fractional part thereof, of tap or draft malt beverages, $6.00. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. II, § 2.02) 
Sec. 6-43. - Possession of specified number of bottles, presumption of business. 
Any person having located in his place of business more than 24 bottles of malt beverages at any one time shall be presumed to be in the business of selling malt beverages for a pecuniary consideration. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. II, § 2.03) 
Sec. 6-44. - Additional to other taxes and licenses; payment and collection procedure. 
The taxes imposed and levied by section 6-42 shall be in addition to all other taxes or licenses or license fees levied or imposed upon malt beverage dealers, and it may be added by the retail malt beverages dealer to the retail price and collected from each customer. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. II, § 2.04) 
Secs. 6-45—6-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WINE 

Sec. 6-81. - Sale in package store only; exception; license for food service establishments. 
Retail sales of wine shall be made in the county at retail package stores duly licensed by the county for the sale of distilled spirits, provided that a separate retail license for the sale of wine in the county may be purchased from the county by a restaurant, hotel, motel or other business engaged in selling food to the public for consumption upon the premises where sold, when each of the following conditions are complied with: 
(1)  Application for a separate retail wine license for the sale of wine shall be made in writing to the board of commissioners, setting forth the same information required for application for a retail license for the sale of distilled spirits. Any application for a separate retail wine license under this section acknowledges by such application that such license is a privilege and not a right. 
(2)  The fee for a separate retail wine license shall be $500.00 per year and shall be renewable on the anniversary date of the initial application, which amount shall accompany the application, provided, however, that renewals of such license shall not require formal application, but shall be as provided by sections of this chapter regulating the sale of distilled spirits, as the same provides for renewals of licenses. 
(3)  An establishment licensed under a separate retail wine license shall be subject to the same tax per case of wine purchased as is provided by section 6-82. 
(4)  An establishment licensed under a separate retail wine license is expressly authorized to sell wine by the bottle and/or by the glass to retail customers upon the premises to be consumed with food, and any other sale of wine under this article, other than with food, is expressly prohibited. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. III, § 3.01) 
Sec. 6-82. - Tax on cases purchased by retail package store. 
Any duly licensed retail package store in the county shall also have the right and privilege to sell wine without any additional license fee, except that there shall be a specific tax in the amount of $2.40 on each case of wine purchased by a retail package store. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. III, § 3.02) 
Sec. 6-83. - License required for wholesaler. 
There is levied, assessed and required a license fee in an amount as determined by the board of commissioners from time to time and listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained in the county administrator's office for any person to engage in the wholesale sale of wine in the county. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. III, § 3.03) 
Sec. 6-84. - Retailers subject to laws, regulations governing sale of spirits. 
All retail sales of wine shall be subject to the ordinances, rules and regulations of the county applicable to the retail sale of distilled spirits. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. III, § 3.04) 
Secs. 6-85—6-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISTILLED SPIRITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-111. - Excise tax. 
There is levied on all sales of distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine, an excise tax of $0.22 per liter. This tax is in addition to all other licenses or taxes imposed by the county. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.04) 
Sec. 6-112. - Wholesaler's invoices. 
Any wholesale dealer who sells to retail package stores in the county shall file a copy of each invoice with the county administrator. This invoice shall be identical to the one furnished to the United States Internal Revenue Service. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.06) 
Sec. 6-113. - Additional remedy in default in payment of sums due. 
In the event of default in the payment of any amount due under the provisions of this article on the part of any person, the collection of the same shall, in addition to other penalties, be enforced and executed as for county taxes. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.07) 
Sec. 6-114. - Stock to be kept on premises; only one entrance permitted; premises to be open to view. 
All distilled spirits possessed by a licensee under this article shall be kept in the package store. No retailer's place of business shall have more than one entrance which must open on a public street and such place of business shall have no other entrance and shall contain no vestibule, closet, booth or other place where persons may conceal themselves to consume alcoholic beverages. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.14) 
Sec. 6-115. - Access to other establishments prohibited; windows to face on same street as entrance. 
No package store shall be operated in conjunction with or open into or have access to or from any restaurant, lunchroom, dining room, dancehall or other store or business of any kind or character. The windows in every package store shall face the same public street faced by the entrance to the package store and such windows shall not be obstructed or obscured in any manner, except as provided in section 6-116. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.15) 
Sec. 6-116. - Obstructing windows. 
No place of business operating under this article shall display on the exterior thereof any neon or fluorescent signs to advertise either the name or the products of the store. Any interior sign shall be confined to the upper part of the window so as not to obstruct the view of the interior of the package store. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.16) 
Sec. 6-117. - Persons under 21 years of age prohibited on premises. 
No person under 21 years of age shall be permitted to enter a retail package store, and each licensee under this article shall be held strictly responsible for the enforcement of this section. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.17) 
Secs. 6-118—6-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-141. - Required. 
There is levied, assessed and required an annual license for any person to engage in the sale of distilled spirits in the county. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale of distilled spirits without first registering and paying such license fee; which license fee shall be in the amount of $4,000.00 per calendar year, payable $2,000.00 on January 1 of each year and $2,000.00 on July 1 of each year. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.01) 
Sec. 6-142. - Application—Contents. 
(a)  The person desiring a license under this division shall first make written application under oath to the board of commissioners setting forth the following information: 
(1)  The name of the applicant, and if a firm the names of all the members thereof, and if a corporation the names of all the directors, officers and stockholders thereof. 
(2)  Whether any other person is to be interested directly or indirectly in the proposed business and if the interested party is a person, the name of such person, and if the interested party is a firm, the names of all the members thereof, and if the interested party is a corporation, the names of all the directors, officers and stockholders thereof. 
(3)  The location of the proposed business giving the name of the street and the street number. 
(4)  The length of residence in the county of the applicant or the persons listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(5)  Any additional information that the board of commissioners may request of the person applying for the license. 
(b)  The making of any untrue or misleading statement in the application for a license under this division shall be sufficient cause for the denial, suspension, revocation or cancellation of such license by the board of commissioners without refund of any part of the license fee. 
(c)  Application for renewal of a license issued under this division shall be executed in the same manner as the application for the original license. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.02) 
Sec. 6-143. - Same—Forms; submitting fee; refund. 
All applications and notices provided for in this division shall be made on forms provided by the county. Application for a license shall be accompanied either in lawful money of the United States, certified check or cashiers check payable to the county for the proper amount of the license fee. If the applicant is refused a license by the revenue commissioner of the state, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant. The provisions of this section do not apply to suspension or revocation of a license by the board of commissioners or by the revenue commissioner of the state, or by any agency of the United States of America or by any court. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.03) 
Sec. 6-144. - License period; credit for fee on partial year; no proration; transferability. 
(a)  The license or privilege to sell distilled spirits shall be issued or granted for a period no longer than 12 months. The license shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is granted. However, any person having paid the full year's license fee shall be entitled to a credit on the next year's license in an amount representing the unused portion of the license for the initial year of purchase. In calculating the unused portion of such license, credit shall be allowed by quarters so that any person commencing business between January 1 and April 1 shall not be allowed any credit on the next year's license. Any person commencing business after April 1 and before July 1 shall be allowed credit on the next year's license for one quarter. Any person commencing business on or after July 1 and before October 1 shall be allowed credit on the next year's license for one-half. Any person commencing business on or after October 1 and before December 1 shall be allowed credit of three-fourths on the next year's license. The credit so calculated shall not be transferable or payable except in a license granted for the next succeeding year, and in order to get credit for the unused portion of the license the person must apply and pay for the license before February 1 of the next succeeding year. 
(b)  No license to sell distilled spirits shall be prorated for any part of the year. 
(c)  No license to sell distilled spirits shall be transferable from one licensee to another person. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.05) 
Sec. 6-145. - Payment of delinquent sums due county prerequisite to issuance of license. 
In addition to the licenses imposed under this division, there is further imposed as a condition precedent to the issuance of any license under this division, the payment of all past due licenses, ad valorem taxes and other taxes due to the county. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.08) 
Sec. 6-146. - Private club license. 
Upon the payment of a fee as determined by the board of commissioners from time to time and listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained in the county administrator's office, any club, patriotic organization, charitable organization or fraternal organization which has been in operation in the county for a continuous period of five years immediately prior to application for a license under this division, under a national charter, and which is nonprofit in that the individual members do not receive any dividends or share in the profits shall be licensed to make retail sales provided retail sales shall be made on the premises at its principal location to its members only. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.09) 
Sec. 6-147. - Other laws and regulations applicable; revocation of license for violation. 
Every licensee under this division shall strictly comply with the laws and regulations of the United States of America, the state and the state revenue commission which regulate and control distilled spirits. In the event that any licensee is convicted of violating any federal or state law relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, such license is automatically revoked and no part of the license money shall be refunded. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.10) 
Sec. 6-148. - Change of licensee's location. 
The location named in a licensee's application under this division shall not be changed without permission of and approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.11) 
Sec. 6-149. - Sale declared privilege, not right; privilege denied to convicted felon. 
No person who has been convicted of a felony under federal laws or the laws of any state shall be granted a license to sell distilled spirits. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.12) 
Sec. 6-150. - Zoning requirements; exceptions. 
No license for the sale of spirituous liquors or distilled spirits shall be granted for a business location in any district designated as R-1 residential, R-2 residential, R-12, R-7.5S, R-7.5, R-4, E-I, PEH, PW or M-1 industrial under the zoning ordinance. Private clubs, patriotic organizations or fraternal organizations meeting all of the requirements of section 6-146 are excepted if in compliance with such zoning regulations. 
(Res. of 5-12-1992, art. IV, § 4.13) 
Secs. 6-151—6-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LIQUOR BY THE DRINK 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-170. - Purposes. 
(a)  The purposes of this chapter shall include, without necessarily being limited to, the following: 
(1)  Compliance with and effectuation of the general state law. 
(2)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by certain persons; 
(3)  Ensuring that any licenses issued for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises are issued only to a legitimate restaurant or private club as defined in this chapter. 
(4)  The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions. 
(5)  Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  To the maximum extent permissible under state and federal law, the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall under this chapter be considered to be a privilege to be accorded in conformity with the foregoing and other public policies of the county, rather than a right. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-171. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, the following terms used in this chapter shall have the following meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, malt beverages, distilled spirits, wine and fortified wines defined in this section. 
County means the Crisp County and when used in a geographical sense means the territorial limits of the unincorporated portion of Crisp County. 
County Administrator means the county administrator of Crisp County. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Interest includes any pecuniary interest and any ownership interest, whether present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, contingent or vested, direct or indirect, and any right, power, or authority of control. 
Licensed premises includes not only the room wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or served but also the entire building in which such room is located, except that when such a room is located in a hotel, motel, or similar facility or in a shopping center only such room and any adjoining storage, office, toilet, and other similar rooms shall constitute the "licensed premises." 
Licensee includes an individual licensee and in the case of a partnership or corporation includes both the partnership or corporation and the named licensee. 
Majority stockholder means the person, if any, who owns more than 50 percent of the voting stock of a corporation; if no person owns more than 50 percent of the voting [stock] of a corporation, the "majority stockholder" is the person owning more of the voting stock than any other person; and if two or more persons each own the same amount of the voting stock of a corporation and each own more of the voting stock than any other person, then any one of such persons may act as the "majority stockholder." 
County commission means the board of commissioners of Crisp County. 
Mixed drink or liquor by the drink means any distilled spirits served for consumption on the premises, whether or not diluted by water or any other substance. 
Named licensee means the person acting as such for a partnership or corporation pursuant to this section. 
Person includes a corporation, partnership, association, club or institution. 
Semipublic parking facility means any privately owned area wherein motor vehicles may be parked by the public in conjunction with any business, enterprise, commercial establishment, office building, church, school, or multiple-family residential building. 
(b)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as when used in comparable provision of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. title 3. 
(c)  As used in this chapter, the singular and plural shall each include the other, the masculine and feminine shall each include the other, and any verb tense may include any other verb tense. 
(d)  As used in this chapter, the term "may" is permissive and the term "shall" is mandatory. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-172. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction in the court of appropriate jurisdiction, be punished as provided in this Code, which may include a fine. Any such punishment, if imposed, shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any license suspension or revocation under this chapter. 
(b)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, including the maximum occupant load, shall be grounds for fines, suspension, or revocation of any license issued hereunder. 
(1)  For the first violation there shall be a $1,000.00 fine. 
(2)  For the second violation, the date of occurrence of which is within any 60-month period of the first violation, there shall be a $1,000.00 fine and a 30-day suspension of the license privileges. 
(3)  For any third violation, the date of occurrence of which is within any 60-month period of the first violation, there shall be a $1,000.00 fine and a revocation of the license privileges by the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County. 
(4)  Any suspension, or revocation of a license shall first require notice to the license holder of a due process hearing before the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County, as required by section 6-199 herein. 
(5)  A license holder who receives a suspension or revocation of his license may not be an officer, director or shareholder of any succeeding entity that holds a license from the county during his period of suspension. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-173. - County administrator's duties. 
The county administrator, or the county administrator's designee, is hereby vested with the following duties and powers: 
(a)  To take all applications, to screen, verify, investigate and review all initial applications for licenses for the sale of liquor by the drink. 
(b)  To recommend to the county commission modifications to the ordinances and policies of the county pertaining to the regulation control and taxing of liquor by the drink. 
(c)  To hear complaints, suggestions and recommendations from the sheriff's department, state officials, alcoholic beverage providers, and the public at large as to the operation of liquor-by-the-drink outlets within the county. 
(d)  After screening, investigating and complying with all parts of this chapter, the county administrator or the county administrator's designee, with the approval of the county commission, shall grant the applicant's desired license or shall deny said license, applying all requirements of this article. 
(e)  An applicant, or any county or state official objecting to the request of the applicant, who is dissatisfied with the decision, may appeal the aggrieved action to the county commission, whose decision on the appeal shall be final. Any appeal from the decision must be filed within 30 days, and the chairman of the county commission will schedule the appeal for a hearing within 30 days. 
(f)  All renewal decisions shall be made by the county administrator with the approval county commission employing the rules and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-174—6-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING 

Sec. 6-191. - Required classifications, etc. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any liquor by the drink within the county except under a valid license issued under this article and in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Pay schedule. License fees shall be payable in advance for an entire year beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of each year. If an initial fee is paid on or before June 30 of the year of application, the license fees shall not be prorated for a part of year. If an initial fee is paid after June 30 of the year of application, the license fee shall be reduced to 50 percent. The suspension or revocation of any license granted pursuant to this article shall not entitle the licensee to a return of any portion of the license fee. 
(c)  Classification fee. Class of license issued under this article, activities permitted and regulated hereunder, and the annual license fee shall be as follows: 
Liquor-by-the-drink license (for consumption on the premises) ..... $2,500.00 
(d)  Application fees. Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $650.00. 
(e)  Payment of fees. Application fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed and shall not be refunded under any circumstances. An applicant may pay the annual license fee at the time the application is filed; and in such event the annual license fee shall be refunded if the license applied for is not issued. If the annual license fee is not paid at the time of the application, the annual license fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the license by the county administrator, and no later than 90 days after notification of approval. Failure to pay within 90 days shall render the application void and a new application must be submitted including a new $650.00 application fee. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-192. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  A license issued to an individual shall be issued in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one of the partners who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation having as its business the sale of liquor by the drink shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the majority stockholder or a principal officer of the corporation; and such majority stockholder or officer shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation having as its business an activity other than the sale of liquor by the drink shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises; and such officer or employee shall be the named licensee. 
(b)  In the case of a partnership, each partner shall join as an applicant for the license and each partner must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided herein. 
(c)  In the case of a corporation having as its business the sale of liquor by the drink, the majority stockholder and each principal officer of the corporation shall join as applicants for the license; and each such person must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee. 
(d)  In the case of a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of liquor by the drink, the officer or employee who is to be the named licensee shall be the applicant and must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided herein; provided, however, that the county administrator, with the approval of the county commission, may require the fingerprinting and investigation of officers and shareholders of the corporation if they deem it necessary in making their investigation. 
(e)  In the case of a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. In the case of a corporation, the corporation shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-193. - Qualifications. 
(a)  A licensee must be at least 21 years of age and a citizen of the United States of America. 
(b)  A licensee shall not have been convicted within the past five years of any felony or, misdemeanor, or violation of county alcohol ordinances within the past two years, or at any time of any criminal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, drugs, taxes or gambling. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. The county commission may at its discretion waive the conviction of a misdemeanor for a nonalcoholic offense for purposes of this subsection if the county commission determines that the misdemeanor does not have a bearing on the applicant's fitness for a license. 
(c)  A licensee shall not have been denied a license or had a license revoked, within the five years next preceding the application, any license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by any governmental entity. 
(d)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a restaurant or a private club as defined in sections 6-230 and 6-231. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-194. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Application for a license for the sale of liquor by the drink in the county shall be filed with the county administrator upon forms prescribed by the county administrator (Form LD-2) and made available at the county courthouse. The application shall be subscribed by the applicant under oath and fully completed and executed. 
(b)  There shall be attached to the application a bank money order, certified check or like remittance of the application. 
(c)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of the license, the applicant shall furnish, to the sheriff of Crisp County, a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, which shall search the files to determine past criminal activity. 
(d)  Failure to fully complete and execute an application for a license or to furnish accurately all data, information and records required by the application form as well as failure to accompany the application with the payment of the prescribed fee shall be deemed just cause for denying the application with prejudice. 
(e)  Upon proper completion of the application and payment of fees, the county administrator shall refer the application to the sheriff of Crisp County. Thereafter, the sheriff of Crisp County shall present his findings and recommendations to the county commission on the "Report of Findings and Recommendation—Sheriff's Office (Form LD-2A)." 
(f)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of a license, all businesses where liquor by the drink is consumed on the premises shall satisfy all requirements of a fire and life safety inspection performed by the county fire official and county building inspector. The prescribed inspection form shall be provided by the county fire official. In addition, all businesses where liquor by the drink is consumed on the premises, and the occupancy load is 100 or more, shall provide the county administrator with a signed fire safety report and certificate of occupancy from the state fire marshal's office. The local fire official may cause to be inspected any building or portion of any building licensed under this ordinance. 
(g)  Upon full compliance with the requirements of the fire and life safety inspections, the county fire official and building inspector shall jointly notify the county administrator for further processing of the license application. This notification shall be made using the verification form, "Fire—Life Safety—Occupancy Load Form (LD-2B)." The administrator shall sign the form and maintain it as part of the official record for the license. 
(h)  After all areas of the investigation have been completed, the county administrator will place the liquor-by-the-drink license application on the county commissioners' meeting agenda for consideration by the board of commissioners. 
(1)  If the board of commissioners approves the license application, it will be so recorded in the minutes of the meeting, the decision will be recorded on the "Application Decision Form (LD-2E)" and maintained as part of the official record for the license and the county administrator will issue the liquor-by-the-drink license to the applicant. 
(2)  If the board of commissioners denies the license application, it will be so recorded in the minutes of the meeting, the decision will be recorded on the "Application Decision Form (LD-2E)" and maintained as part of the official record for the license. The license application fee shall not be refunded. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-195. - Renewal. 
All liquor-by-the-drink licensees shall be required to apply for renewal of their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the county administrator and must comply with all provisions of this article, with the exception that publication of notice, fingerprinting and background checks, as required shall not be required for renewal of a license unless there has been a change of ownership of the business or other interests therein. On renewal, the applicant shall be administered and take the oath specifically contained on the application form. The county administrator may within their discretion require fingerprinting and a full background check on any renewal at any time. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-196. - Transfer. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no license shall be transferable to any other person or location. 
(b)  If a licensee seeks to move his place of business from the licensee's premises to another place within the county, application shall be made as for an original license. 
(c)  In the case of death of an owner of a license or financial interest therein, such license or interest therein may be transferred to the administrator, executor, or adult heir or heirs of the deceased unless the county administrator, with the approval of the county commission, determines that it would otherwise violate this chapter. If the transferee cannot meet all the requirements of this chapter within 30 days, the license shall be revoked. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more partners in a partnership from retiring therefrom in favor of one or more of the other partners; provided such withdrawal shall not, without application for an issuance of a new license, introduce any new partner or result in any new person acquiring an interest in the licensed business. 
(e)  Where a license is issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of liquor by the drink, a change in the named licensee may be permitted by the county administrator, with the approval of the county commission, if the new named licensee meets the requirements of new license applicants. 
(f)  In the circumstances described in subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section, the license may be revoked if the county commission determines that the change results in a failure to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-197. - Change in business ownership. 
(a)  If any licensee withdraws from, sells or otherwise transfers the licensee's interest in the licensed business, the licensee shall immediately notify the county administrator and surrender the license. 
(b)  In the case of such a withdrawal, transfer, or sale, a new application shall be made as for an original license. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-198. - Temporary license. 
(a)  A temporary license may be issued by the county administrator, with the approval of the county commission if, in their judgment, the denial of a temporary license would create an undue hardship such as the closing of an existing business. The temporary license shall be issued for an extra fee of $650.00 for a 90-day period with one additional 90-day extension, if needed. 
(b)  A temporary license may be revoked, with or without cause, by the county commission at any time, and the grant or denial of a temporary license shall not affect or have any bearing upon the grant or denial of a permanent license. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-199. - Suspension/revocation. 
(a)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the county commission for any violation of this chapter and/or other county ordinances, for any violation of state or federal law, for any material misrepresentation or omission in the application for the license, or if the licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for license. The county administrator shall schedule a due process hearing before the county commission for any license holder alleged to have violated any provision of this article by sending at least 14 days prior to the date of the due process hearing, a certified letter to the license holder containing the date, time, and location of the hearing, the date and nature of the allegations, and the license holder's right to be represented by an attorney and to present evidence. In lieu of a certified letter, the county administrator may elect to have service perfected by personal service by a sheriff's deputy. 
(b)  The county commission is authorized to suspend the sale of liquor by the drink under any license for any emergency situation such that the county commission finds such suspension necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare. Such suspension may be made effective immediately and may remain in force until the county commission determines that the emergency is over or until the next meeting of the county commission, at which time the suspension shall cease unless it is extended by the county commission. 
(c)  A licensee, or any citizen of the county, who is dissatisfied with the decision of the county commission, may appeal to the Superior Court of Crisp County, Georgia. Any appeal from a decision of the county commission must be filed within 30 days after such decision. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-200. - Automatic revocation. 
A license shall be automatically revoked by operation of law if: 
(1)  The licensee's state alcoholic beverage license is revoked, suspended, canceled or not renewed. 
(2)  The licensed business fails to properly account for, file, report and pay any excise tax levied and due under this article. 
(3)  The licensed business fails to properly account for, file, report or maintain any records or remit any license fee imposed or taxes required under this article. 
(4)  The named licensee is convicted of a felony by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-201—6-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOCATION 

Sec. 6-206. - Sale/service in public places. 
It shall be unlawful to furnish or dispense liquor by the drink in public places, or to be consumed in public places. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-207. - Proximity restrictions. 
(a)  No person may sell or offer to sell: 
(1)  Liquor by the drink in or within 100 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of liquor by the drink was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application, unless the location does not have adequate parking to accommodate the restaurant or private club. Adequacy of parking under this subsection shall be determined as required by Crisp County Unified Land Development Code. 
(2)  A church building in a business zoning district is defined as a freestanding structure built for and used as a church, and does not apply to commercial or retail space that has been converted to occupancy as a church. 
(3)  Liquor by the drink within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and/or operated by the state or Crisp County. 
(4)  All persons seeking a license for liquor by the drink shall have the proximity requirements of this section (6-207), the maximum occupant loads in section 6-230(g)(3) and the property zoning verified by the Crisp County Planning Department using "Verification Form, Planning Department (Form LD-2D)." The planning director or her designee shall investigate all liquor-by-the-drink applications for conformity and report same to the county administrator on Form LD-2D for further processing of the license application. The administrator shall sign the form and maintain it as part of the official record for the license. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the licensing of the sale or distribution of liquor by the drink by: 
(1)  Bona fide private clubs, owning their own premises, subject to licensing under state law. 
(2)  For the purposes of this article, distances shall be measured by drawing a straight line from the nearest point of the outside wall conditioned (mechanically heated or cooled) space of the applicant's business establishment to the nearest point of either: 
a.  The outside wall enclosing conditioned (mechanically heated or cooled) space of a church, school, or educational building; or 
b.  The real property of a school grounds or college campus. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-208—6-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SALES 

Sec. 6-211. - Responsibility of named licensee. 
The named licensee shall be active in the operation of the licensed business and shall be personally present on the licensed premises sufficiently to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-212. - Rentals paid restricted. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for a licensee to enter into any agreement whereby the rental paid for the licensed premises is based in whole or in part on the volume of sales of liquor by the drink by the licensed business or whereby the renter otherwise shares in the profits or receipts from the licensed business's sale of liquor by the drink. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-213. - Display of license. 
Each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-214. - Retention of records. 
(a)  Each licensee shall keep and preserve records of all alcohol and alcoholic beverages purchased and all liquor by the drink sold by the licensee and shall keep and preserve records of all food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased and sold by them. Such records shall at all times during normal business hours be open for inspection by an authorized agent of the county. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years. 
(b)  All liquor-by-the-drink licensees shall file with the county administrator the following reports by 5:00 p.m. on the 20th day of the month immediately following the end of each calendar month for which the report is filed: 
(1)  "Food Sales and Alcoholic Beverage Sales Affidavit (Form LD-3)." This is a record of the gross receipts from food sales and alcoholic beverage sales for the monthly reporting period. 
(2)  Certified copies of the licensee's monthly state sales tax reports as filed with the state department of revenue for the monthly reporting period. 
(3)  Any other documents, reports, records, or books as shall be required by the county commission to confirm the accuracy of the reported information. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-215. - Knowledge of chapter provisions. 
Every licensee shall, prior to applying for a license, read and familiarize himself with the provisions of this article and an application shall constitute a certification by the applicant that he has done so. Every licensee shall maintain a copy of this article on the licensed premises and shall instruct each employee engaged in the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages on the relevant provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-216. - Sales to underage persons prohibited. 
Furnishing to, purchase of or possession of [by] persons under 21 years of age of liquor by the drink (or any form of alcohol) shall be controlled by state law O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. Additionally, any alleged violation of this subsection by a license holder, or its or his employee(s), shall result in a due process hearing before the county commission being called by the county chairman to determine if a license should be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-217. - Days of sales prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on any day or any time when such sales are prohibited by state law. 
(b)  The sale of liquor by the drink shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit the sale of liquor by the drink between the hours of 1:00 a.m. Sunday and 12:30 p.m., Sunday or between the hours of 12:00 midnight Sunday and 8:00 a.m. Monday. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006; Ord. of 11-12-2014(2)) 
Sec. 6-218. - Sales to intoxicated persons; gambling; disorderly conduct. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of liquor by the drink to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or allow persons who are noticeably intoxicated to congregate on licensed premises. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit any gambling, betting, illegal lottery, or other device to hazard money or other thing of value on the licensed premises, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a properly licensed bingo game. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct, breach of the peace, or noise or activity which is disturbing to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-219. - Container, storage, illumination. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to and received at licensed premises only in the original container and only in a conveyance owned and operated by a licensed wholesale dealer (or licensed common carrier acting for a wholesaler). Alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail only as liquor by the drink on the licensed premises. 
(b)  A retail licensee shall store alcoholic beverages only on the licensed premises and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by an authorized agent of the county. Any alcoholic beverages found in any retail licensee's stock, which were not received from a wholesaler licensed to make deliveries in the county, shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(c)  The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-220. - Cleanliness of premises; inspections. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with all regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. All licensed premises shall be open at all times for inspection by authorized agents of the county. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-221. - Employees of on-premises consumption liquor-by-the-drink licensees; alcohol service permit required. 
(a)  The following regulations regarding employees shall apply to all establishments holding a license for liquor by the drink on the premises: 
(1)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license hereunder until such person has been issued a permit indicating that such person is eligible for this employment. However, a seven-day grace period shall be given from the date of employment until the permit is issued. The permit shall be provisional until the sheriff has had the applicant fingerprinted, photographed and cleared by the sheriff's department after a computerized background check. If the applicant's background check reveals a record that would make the employee ineligible to keep a permit, the sheriff shall revoke the permit. The permit issued to a person under this section shall be an alcohol service permit, which shall be issued only to a person who must be at least 18 years of age and who sells, serves or dispenses liquor by the drink, or is employed as a manager, host, hostess, doorman or bouncer in such establishment. A permit shall be valid for a two-year period, and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. All persons seeking employment at establishments holding a license for liquor by the drink on the premises shall complete an "Alcohol Service Permit Application (Form LD-4)" and a Georgia Bureau of Investigation, Georgia Crime Information Center consent form. 
(2)  The sheriff or his designee shall investigate all alcohol service permit applications made pursuant to this section. The sheriff may refuse to issue an alcohol service permit to any proposed employee who: 
a.  Has been convicted of a felony within a period of five years immediately prior to the date upon which the alcohol service permit application was made. 
b.  Has been convicted of two or more misdemeanors within two years immediately preceding the alcohol service permit application. Misdemeanors will be defined as violations other than minor traffic violations such as speeding, stop sign, failure to yield, following too close and etc. The two convictions for misdemeanor violations for which the violator was convicted shall have arisen at different times. 
c.  Has been convicted within a period of five years immediately preceding the application of any of the following offenses: 
1.  Pandering, prostitution or soliciting prostitution; 
2.  Gambling; 
3.  Illegal sale of controlled substance or narcotic; 
d.  This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for the purposes of this subsection. 
(3)  A permit shall be issued provisionally in the first seven days of employment upon a signed application and payment of the application fee having been filed with the sheriff, until a search of the criminal record of the applicant has been completed. The application fee shall be $100.00, as currently set by the county commission; said amount may be changed from time to time at the discretion of the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County. Such application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The sheriff shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. In the event there is no record of a violation of this article, the sheriff shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the sheriff shall notify by letter the applicant and the employer that this person is not eligible for employment. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell liquor by the drink to file with the sheriff as part of their liquor-by-the-drink license renewal application the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their most recent local addresses and telephone numbers, and social security numbers. An applicant for an initial license shall furnish the same information prior to the date when on-premises consumption sales are authorized to begin. 
(6)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the sheriff. 
(7)  This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of delivery driver, busboy, cook, or dishwasher. 
(8)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, a clearly legible copy of the current, valid permit of each such employee. The employee must keep the original permit on his person when at work in a licensed establishment, though it need not be publicly displayed. 
(9)  In the event that any permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately notify the sheriff's department. 
(10)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the county and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer of the sheriff's department or a state law enforcement officer with jurisdiction in such matters. 
(11)  The sheriff may revoke the permit and demand its return where the employee violates the provisions of this article or becomes one who adversely affects the public health, safety, or welfare. The first such offense shall result in a suspension of the permit for 120 days. Any subsequent offense shall result in revocation of the permit, and the employee being ineligible to reapply for such a permit. 
(12)  When any employee permit is revoked, the sheriff shall issue a letter to the permit holder, and a copy to the licensee for whom he works, stating that the person does not meet the requirements of this article. 
(13)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose permit has been revoked and upon whom demand for return of the card has been made, to refuse to return the card, or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the card. 
(14)  A new search may be conducted on any person issued a permit if the sheriff receives information that warrants such a new search. If the new search reveals evidence that warrants revocation of the permit, he may revoke the permit. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall in any way be construed to limit the liability of the licensee for the conduct of its employees. Any violation of this chapter by an employee remains a violation of this chapter by the licensee, who is subject to fines, suspension, or revocation as set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-222. - Drive-through sales of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage within the county by means of drive-through sale. 
(b)  For purposes of this chapter, the term "drive-through sale" means the sale of alcoholic beverages by any means that allows the customer to remain in his vehicle. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
DIVISION 5. - EMPLOYMENT OF UNDERAGE PERSONS 

Sec. 6-223. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  No liquor-by-the-drink licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-224. - Brown-bagging prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for patrons of restaurants as defined under section 6-230 or private clubs as defined under section 6-231 to bring onto the premises their own alcoholic beverages, which is commonly known as "bring your own bottle" (BYOB) or "brown-bagging". It shall be unlawful for restaurants as defined under section 6-230 or private clubs as defined under section 6-231 to allow customers to bring onto the premises their own alcoholic beverages, which is commonly known as "bring your own bottle" (BYOB) or "brown-bagging". Note: For clarification, this paragraph prohibits "bring your own bottle" (BYOB) or "brown-bagging" at any establishment whatsoever that is open to the public. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-225—6-228. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES 

Sec. 6-229. - Eligibility restricted—generally. 
A liquor-by-the-drink license may be granted only to a restaurant, as defined under section 6-230 and a private club as defined under section 6-231. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-230. - Same—restaurant. 
To be eligible for a liquor-by-the-drink license, a restaurant shall: 
(a)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals prepared on the premises are regularly served to the public for adequate pay each day the establishment is open for business; 
(b)  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and refrigeration as required by the Crisp County Health Department and staff to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. 
(c)  Have the ability to serve meals prepared on the premises during any time the establishment is open for business. 
(d)  Have a valid Crisp County Health Department Food Service Permit and any other applicable local, state or federal permits, licenses, etc., required for food service establishments. 
(e)  Have at least 60 percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises; and for this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other nonfood or nonalcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale; 
(f)  Have a permanent seating capacity at tables, not counting bar stools, of at least 25 persons. 
(g)  The occupancy load for purposes of this section must meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The square footage of the interior area of the restaurant, which is enclosed and under roof and is conditioned air space, shall be determined using a set of building plans showing the fixed and other seating and tables. 
(2)  The food preparation service areas (kitchen, buffet and salad bar areas), storage, the preparation area behind bars, restrooms and all connecting hallways shall be removed from the total square footage of the floor space. 
(3)  The maximum occupant load for the remaining areas shall be calculated in accordance with the building code and life safety code as follows: 
a.  The assembly area where restaurant seating is located shall be calculated using 15 square feet per person. 
b.  The waiting area at the entrance/exit shall be calculated using three square feet per person. The number of occupants allowed in the calculation for waiting area cannot exceed 50 percent of the occupant load of the assembly area in subsection 6-230(g)(3)a., above. 
c.  An additional area for live entertainment and dancing shall be calculated using seven square feet per person. The number of occupants allowed in the calculation for this additional area cannot exceed 20 percent of the occupant load of the assembly areas in subsection 6-230(g)(3)a., above. 
d.  The county commission may consider a request for consumption on the premises of a deck or patio attached or adjacent to the principal restaurant assembly area. If such a request is granted, it does not alter the calculation of the maximum occupant load. 
e.  The establishment's "Certificate of Occupant Load (Form LD-2C)" issued by the county administrator for each location shall be posted for public view at all times. 
(h)  Maintain at all times the number of tables, chairs, and booths for patrons in substantially the same general configuration as submitted on the set of building plans used to determine the occupancy load. Nothing herein shall prohibit the temporary placing of tables together to accommodate a larger dining party, provided the total number of tables, chairs and booths available for patron use in the assembly area where restaurant seating is located must equal the number shown on the building plans submitted for occupancy purposes, with adequate space between them for normal movement of patrons and employees. The intent of this provision is to prohibit the removal at any time of the restaurant's seating or table capacity, as shown for occupancy load purposes, to accommodate more than the allowed number of patrons within the assembly area of the restaurant. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-231. - Private club. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a liquor-by-the-drink license, a private club must be a veterans organization, fraternal organization or other nonprofit organization all of which must be incorporated, and: 
(1)  The local chapter has been in existence at least five years prior to the filing of its application for a license. 
(2)  Have at least 40 regular dues-paying members. (Exceptions may be made on a case-by-case basis by the Crisp County Board of Commissioners.) 
(3)  Be organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofit purposes. 
(4)  Own, hire, or lease a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members. 
(b)  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(c)  No liquor-by-the-drink license shall be granted to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Private clubs licensed under the provisions of this section shall not be required to maintain the percentage sale of food/nonalcoholic beverages as compared to alcoholic beverages, however such organization shall be subject to all regulations of this article dealing with general licensing and consumption of liquor by the drink on the premises. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-232. - Ratio of alcoholic/nonalcoholic sales. 
Should the total sales from food and nonalcoholic beverages reported by any liquor-by-the-drink licensee not equal those from the sale of all alcoholic beverages for any two consecutive reporting periods, or for two nonconsecutive reporting periods in any 12-month period, the license may be suspended or revoked by the county commission after a hearing as provided for in section 6-199. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-233. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-234. - Illumination of premises, location of sales restricted. 
(a)  All restaurants, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room that is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Private parties that have been scheduled in advance; 
(2)  Room service to hotel guests in their hotel rooms provided a properly licensed restaurant is located on the premises. 
(3)  Private clubs. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-235. - Hours of sale. 
Liquor-by-the-drink licensees shall only engage in the sale and/or service of liquor by the drink between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight Sunday, with consumption of purchased beverages on the premises until 1:00 a.m. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006; Ord. of 11-12-2014(2)) 
Sec. 6-236. - Dancing on premises prohibited. 
Patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for liquor-by-the-drink sales only where: 
(a)  Adequate space exists. 
(b)  All fire and safety regulations are met. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-237. - Removal of beverages prohibited. 
All alcoholic beverages sold by liquor-by-the-drink licensees shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises to any public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way, or in any public or semipublic parking facility within the county. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-238. - Prohibition of certain types of entertainment, attire and conduct. 
(a)  Findings; public purpose. Based on the experience of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia; Richmond County, Georgia; Amarillo, Texas; Austin, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Houston, Texas; Renton, Washington; Phoenix, Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; St. Paul, Minnesota; Tucson, Arizona; Augusta, Georgia; LaGrange, Georgia; Dalton and Whitfield County, Georgia; Carrollton, Georgia; Smyrna, Georgia; and Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences the county commission believes are relevant to the problems faced by Crisp County, the county commission takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the finding of the county commission that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest, and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments that serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. To that end, this section is hereby adopted. 
(b)  Enactment. The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or disperse liquor by the drink. 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of liquor by the drink while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft or the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (1) of this subsection. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-239. - Pricing of liquor by the drink. 
(a)  This section shall be construed to cover, include and apply to liquor by the drink. 
(b)  No licensee or holder of a license to sell liquor by the drink, or employee or agent of a licensee, shall: 
(1)  Offer to deliver any free liquor by the drink. 
(2)  Deliver more than one liquor drink to one person at one time, or allow any patron to possess more than one liquor drink at one time. 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons two or more or an unlimited number of liquor drinks during any set period of time at a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver liquor by the drink to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(5)  Sponsor, conduct, encourage or allow on the licensed premises any game or contest or promotion which either: 
a.  Involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as the prize; or 
b.  Has as its primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(6)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to a customer liquor by the drink in any container other than a glass or plastic cup. 
(7)  Sell, offer to sell, deliver, or allow any alcoholic beverage to be inserted into the mouth of a customer in any manner by anyone other than by the customer. 
(8)  Charge any minimum charge, cover charge, admission charge, or any other non-food or nonalcoholic beverage charge that discriminates on the basis of gender, race, age, creed, or national origin. 
(9)  Deny entry or service to any person at any time on the basis of gender, race, age, creed, or national origin. 
(c)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room services to registered guests. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-240. - Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for licensees under this article or their agents to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-241—6-243. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - EXCISE TAX ON MIXED DRINKS 

Sec. 6-244. - Imposition. 
There is imposed upon the sale of liquor by the drink in the county a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of each drink to the consumer. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction of three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of such taxes, provided that such tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. A record of each sale shall be made in writing and maintained for inspection by any authorized agent of the county. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-245. - Collection. 
Every liquor-by-the-drink licensee shall collect the tax imposed by this article from purchasers of all such drinks. The licensee shall furnish such information as may be required by the county commission to facilitate the collection of the tax. In all cases where the purchase is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee becomes liable for the collection and payment of the tax at the time of delivery of such drink to the purchasers. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-246. - Payment to county. 
(a)  Each licensee shall pay over the amount of taxes collected and coming due under this article in every calendar month to the county not later than the 20th day of the following calendar month. 
(b)  On or before the 20th day of each month, a return shall be filed with the county administrator for the preceding month by each licensee liable for the payment of tax under this article. Returns shall be in a form the county administrator may specify and shall show the licensee's gross receipts from the sale of liquor by the drink and the amount of taxes collected or coming due thereon. Report shall be made on the "Gross Receipts & Excise Tax Report (Form LD-5)." 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
DIVISION 8. - EFFECTIVE DATE; SEVERABILITY; SHORT TITLE 

Sec. 6-247. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective on December 1, 2006. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-248—6-250. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-251. - Provisions herein are severable. 
Should any provision herein be declared unconstitutional or illegal by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall remain of full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 6-252. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Crisp County 2006 Liquor by the Drink Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 11-14-2006) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e); Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq.; authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2; state licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 10, 2005, revised, amended and readopted, in its entirety, the Crisp County Adult Entertainment Ordinance adopted Oct. 27, 1994, to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; nudity and related acts on premises where alcoholic beverages are sold, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.; employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42; restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1; use of rooms in roadhouses, public dance halls, etc., for immoral purposes, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-61. 

Sec. 10-31. - Rationale and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of Crisp County, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually-oriented businesses within the county. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings and rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the Board of Commissioners, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 124 S.Ct. 2219 (June 7, 2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); Pap's A.M. v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); and 
Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, GA, 331 F.3d 1196 (11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, GA, 223 F.3d 1306 (11th Cir. 2000); Gary v. City of Warner Robins, 311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange, 217 F.3d 1350 (11th Cir. 2000); Boss Capital, Inc. v. City of Casselberry, 187 F.3d 1251 (11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, 200 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker, 670 F.2d 943 (11th Cir. 1982); International Food & Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale, 794 F.2d 1520 (11th Cir. 1986); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); and other cases, including: 
Fairfax MK, Inc. v. City of Clarkston, 274 Ga. 520 (2001); Morrison v. State, 272 Ga. 129 (2000); Sewell v. Georgia, 233 S.E.2d 187 (Ga. 1977), dismissed for want of a substantial federal question, 435 U.S. 982 (1978) (sexual devices); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan, 601 S.E.2d 106 (Ga. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County, 272 Ga. 887 (2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee, 270 Ga. 33 (1998); World Famous Dudley's Food & Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park, 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson, 242 Ga. 214 (1978); 
and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually-oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Houston, Texas - 1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona - 1979, 1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Minneapolis, Minnesota - 1980; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Spokane, Washington - 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Littleton, Colorado - 2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; New York, New York Times Square - 1994; and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually-oriented businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), 
the Board of Commissioners finds: 
(1)  Sexually-oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on property values, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. 
(2)  Sexually-oriented businesses should be separated from certain land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses and the surrounding area, and should be separated from other sexually-oriented businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually-oriented businesses in one area. 
(3)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the county has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the county's rationale for this article, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and nonsexually-oriented businesses. Additionally, the county's interest in regulating sexually-oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually-oriented businesses that may locate in the county. The county finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this article are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 10-32. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the words and phrases defined in the sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context: 
Administrator means the Crisp County Zoning Administrator. 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude. 
Adult motel means a motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
(a)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, other photographic reproductions, or live performances which are characterized by the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and which advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any on or off-premises advertising, including but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or 
(b)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours; or 
(c)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration. 
Board or board of commissioners means the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County, Georgia. 
Characterized by means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this article, no business shall be classified as a sexually-oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
County means Crisp County, Georgia. 
Employ, employee, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually-oriented business, on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Establish or establishment shall mean and include any of the following: 
(a)  The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a new business; 
(b)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually-oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business; or 
(c)  The addition of any sexually-oriented business to any other existing sexually-oriented business. 
Hearing body shall mean the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County. 
Influential interest means any of the following: 
(a)  The actual power to operate the sexually-oriented business or control the operation, management or policies of the sexually-oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually-oriented business; or 
(b)  Holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually-oriented business. 
Licensed day-care center means a facility licensed by the State of Georgia, whether situated within the county or not, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than 12 children under 14 years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers. 
Licensee shall mean a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually-oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually-oriented business license. In case of an employee, it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually-oriented business employee license has been issued. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
Operate or cause to operate shall mean to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. Operator means any person on the premises of a sexually-oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall operational control of the business premises. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually-oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Person shall mean individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Premises means the real property upon which the sexually-oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually-oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a business license pursuant to section 10-34 of this article. 
Principal purpose means that the commercial establishment: 
(a)  Has a substantial portion of its displayed merchandise which consists of said items; or 
(b)  Has a substantial portion of the wholesale value of its displayed merchandise which consists of said items; or 
(c)  Has a substantial portion of the retail value of its displayed merchandise which consists of said items; or 
(d)  Derives a substantial portion of its revenues from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration of said items; or 
(e)  Maintains a substantial section of its interior business space or floor area for the sale or rental or said items. 
Regularly means and refers to the consistent and repeated doing of the act so described. 
Semi-nude or state of semi-nudity means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Semi-nude model studio means a place where persons regularly appear in a state of semi-nudity for money or any form of consideration in order to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. This definition does not apply to any place where persons appearing in a state of semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(a)  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(b)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credited are transferable to college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(c)  In a structure: 
(1)  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
(2)  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class. 
Sexual device means designed or marketed as useful primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs. This definition shall include devices commonly known as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
Sexual device shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services, nor shall this definition be construed to include commercial establishments which do not restrict access to any portion of their premises by reason of age. 
Sexual encounter center shall mean a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of consideration, physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex when one or more of the persons is semi-nude. 
Sexually-oriented business means an adult arcade, an adult bookstore or adult video store, an adult cabaret, an adult motel, an adult motion picture theater, a semi-nude model studio, a sexual device shop, or a sexual encounter center. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region; buttock; and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(b)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal activity means: 
(a)  Any of the following specified crimes for which less than five years elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
(1)  A sexual offense as enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 (rape); § 16-6-4 (child molestation); § 16-6-22.1 (sexual battery); § 16-6-22.2 (aggravated sexual battery); or § 16-6-8 (public indecency); 
(2)  A prostitution-related offense as enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-9 (prostitution); § 16-6-10 (keeping a place of prostitution); § 16-6-11 (pimping); or § 16-6-12 (pandering); 
(3)  An obscenity offense as enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 (distributing obscene material), provided that, consistent with the decision in This That And The Other Gift And Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002), a conviction for advertising obscene materials enumerated in subsection (c) of the statute shall not be considered a specified criminal activity; 
(4)  A controlled substance offense as enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30; § 16-13-30.1; § 16-13-30.2; or § 16-13-31; 
(5)  A racketeering offense as enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 14-14-4; 
(6)  A locational restriction offense as enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; 
(b)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses; 
(c)  Any Georgia municipal ordinance violation based upon any of the crimes set forth above in subparagraphs (a)(1) through (6), inclusive; or 
(d)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Georgia, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(a)  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(b)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subsection (a) above. 
Substantial means at least ten percent of the item(s) so modified. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually-oriented business shall mean any of the following: 
(a)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(b)  The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(c)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
Viewing room shall mean the room, booth, or area where a patron of sexually-oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 2) 
Sec. 10-33. - Classification. 
The classifications for sexually-oriented businesses shall be as follows: 
(a)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(b)  Adult cabarets; 
(c)  Adult motels; 
(d)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(e)  Semi-nude model studios; 
(f)  Sexual device shops; 
(g)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 3) 
Sec. 10-34. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually-oriented business in Crisp County without a valid sexually-oriented business license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be an "employee," as defined in this article, of a sexually-oriented business in Crisp County without a valid sexually-oriented business employee license. 
(c)  An applicant for a sexually-oriented business license or a sexually-oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of Crisp County Zoning Department a completed application made on a form provided by the zoning department. The application shall be signed as required by subsection (e) herein and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in paragraphs (1) through (7), below, accompanied by the appropriate fee identified in section 10-36: 
(1)  The applicant's full true name and any other names used by the applicants in the preceding five years. 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address of the applicant. 
(3)  Written proof of age consisting of either: (i) a driver's license, or (ii) a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(4)  If the application is for a sexually-oriented business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually-oriented business. 
(5)  If the application is for a sexually-oriented business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(6)  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
(7)  A statement of whether any sexually business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest) been: 
a.  Declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Subject to a court order of closure or padlocking. 
(8)  The information provided pursuant to paragraphs (1) through (7) of this subsection shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the zoning department within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  An application for a sexually-oriented business license shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who are required to comply with sections 10-44 and 10-48 of this article shall submit a diagram indicating that the interior configuration meets the requirements of those sections. 
(e)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 10-35 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(f)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this article shall be maintained by the zoning department on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by court order or state law. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 4; Ord. of 2-14-2006, §§ I—III) 
Sec. 10-35. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Within 20 days of the filing date of a completed sexually-oriented business license application, the administrator shall issue a license to the applicant or issue to the applicant a letter of intent to deny the application. The administrator shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  An applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information as required by section 10-34 for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  The sexually-oriented business, as defined herein, is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this article or is not in compliance with locational requirements of this article or the locational requirements of any other part of the Crisp County Code. 
(5)  Any sexually-oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest) been: 
a.  Declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(6)  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(7)  The sexually-oriented business, as defined herein, is not in compliance with the locational requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3 (i.e., is located within 1,000 feet of any school building, school grounds, college campus, public place of worship, or area zoned for residential purposes), or the locational requirements of section 10-40 of this article. 
(b)  Upon the filing of a completed application under section 10-34(c) for a sexually-oriented business employee license, the Crisp County Administrator shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant, which temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the county to deny or grant an annual license. Within 20 days of the filing date of a completed sexually-oriented business employee license application, the administrator shall either issue a license or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The administrator shall approve the issuance of a license unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by section 10-34 for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  Any sexually-oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest) been: 
a.  Declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually-oriented business, the address of the sexually-oriented business. The sexually-oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually-oriented business so that it may be read at any time. A sexually-oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 5; Ord. of 2-14-2006, §§ IV, V) 
Sec. 10-36. - Fees. 
The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually-oriented business licenses and sexually-oriented business employee licenses shall be as follows: $200.00 for the initial fee for a sexually-oriented business license and $100.00 for annual renewal; $100.00 for the initial sexually-oriented business employee license and $50.00 for annual renewal. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 6) 
Sec. 10-37. - Inspection. 
(a)  Sexually-oriented businesses and sexually-oriented business employees shall permit the administrator and his or her agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually-oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this article, during those times when the sexually-oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the county to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
(b)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 7) 
Sec. 10-38. - Expiration of license. 
(a)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in sections 10-34 and 10-36. 
(b)  Application for renewal should be made pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 10-34 at least 90 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 90 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 8) 
Sec. 10-39. - Suspension. 
(a)  The county shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a sexually-oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the sexually-oriented business licensee has knowingly violated this article or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article. 
(b)  The county shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a sexually-oriented business employee license if the employee has knowingly violated this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 9) 
Sec. 10-40. - Revocation. 
(a)  The county shall issue a letter of intent to revoke a sexually-oriented business license or a sexually-oriented business employee license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly violates this article or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article and the licensee's license has been suspended within the previous 12-month period. 
(b)  The county shall issue written intent to revoke a sexually-oriented business license or a sexually-oriented business employee license, as applicable, if: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for the sexually-oriented business license; 
(2)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the sexually-oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; or 
(5)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises; 
(6)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly committed a specified criminal activity on or through the licensed premises. 
(c)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. 
(d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in section 10-41, the board of commissioners revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented business license or sexually-oriented business employee license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 10) 
Sec. 10-41. - Hearing; denial, revocation, and suspension; appeal. 
(a)  When the administrator issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the administrator shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or license (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the administrator for the respondent. The notice shall specify a date, not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after the date the notice is issued, on which the board of commissioners shall conduct a hearing on the administrator's intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license. 
At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the administrator's witnesses. The administrator shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The board of commissioners shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five business days after the hearing. 
If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall not become effective until the 30th day after it is rendered, and the decision shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the board's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the board shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the administrator to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the administrator shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(b)  If any court action challenging the board's decision is initiated, the board shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within ten business days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The board shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 11) 
Sec. 10-42. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually-oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually-oriented business license application. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 12) 
Sec. 10-43. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually-oriented business shall be or remain open for business between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 13) 
Sec. 10-44. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each application for a sexually-oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, video cameras and monitors installed for monitoring purposes and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction equipment. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Administrator may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection. 
(3)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot-candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no specified sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one person. 
b.  That specified sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
c.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
d.  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
e.  That violations of aubparagraphs b., c., and d. of this paragraph are unlawful. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in subsection (5)a. though d., above. 
(7)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator's station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the premises has two or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the operator's stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 14) 
Sec. 10-45. - Loitering, exterior lighting, visibility, and monitoring requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually-oriented business to: 
(1)  Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on such property; 
(2)  Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once every 90 minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and monitors; and 
(3)  Provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(c)  No sexually-oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or other barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment from being visible from a public right of way. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 15) 
Sec. 10-46. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  A person who knowingly violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable by fines not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be fined as such. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), the violation of provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 16) 
Sec. 10-47. - Prohibited activities. 
It is unlawful for a sexually-oriented business to knowingly violate the following regulations or to knowingly allow an employee or any other person to violate the following regulations: 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for a patron, employee, or any other person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually-oriented business, appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public nudity is expressive in nature. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually-oriented business, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, remains at least six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least 18 inches from the floor in a room of at least 1,000 square feet. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article for any employee who regularly appears seminude in a sexually-oriented business to knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of a sexually-oriented business. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually-oriented business. 
A sign in a form to be prescribed by the administrator of the zoning department and summarizing the provisions of paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this section, shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually-oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 17) 
Sec. 10-48. - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
This article does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this article, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually-oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this article, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 18) 
Sec. 10-49. - Failure of county to meet deadline not to risk applicant/licensee rights. 
In the event that a county official is required to take an act or do a thing pursuant to this article within a prescribed time, and fails to take such act or do such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act required of the county official under this article, and not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval by the county of an applicant or licensee's application for sexually-oriented business license or a sexually-oriented business employee's license (including a renewal), the license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the county's action has passed. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 19) 
Sec. 10-50. - Location of sexually-oriented businesses. 
(a)  Sexually-oriented businesses shall not be required to obtain a conditional use permit or special use permit. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually-oriented business in Crisp County, unless said sexually-oriented business is at least: 
(1)  One thousand feet from any parcel occupied by another sexually-oriented business or by a business licensed by the State of Georgia to sell alcohol at the premises; and 
(2)  Five hundred feet from any parcel occupied by a church or other place of worship, licensed day-care center, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, or any residence or residentially zoned district. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest part of any structure, including signs and roof overhangs, used in conjunction with the sexually-oriented business to the closest point on a property boundary or right-of-way associated with any of the land use(s) identified in subsection (a)(1) and (2), above. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Crisp County Code, a nonconforming sexually-oriented business that is in all respects legally existing and operating prior to the effective date of this article, may continue to operate for two years following that date in order to make a reasonable recoupment of its investment in its current location. At the conclusion of said two years, the use will no longer be recognized as a lawful nonconforming use, provided that a nonconforming sexually-oriented business may apply for one or more six-month extensions of the original two-year period upon a showing financial hardship. An application for an initial extension based upon financial hardship ("hardship exception") shall be made at least 60 days before the conclusion of the aforementioned two-year period. If a hardship extension is granted, subsequent applications for hardship extensions shall be made at least 60 days before the conclusion of the non-conforming sexually-oriented business's current extension period. 
(e)  Procedure for seeking hardship extension. An application for a hardship extension shall be filed in writing with the zoning department, and shall include evidence of purchase and improvement costs, income earned and lost, depreciation, and costs of relocation. Within ten days after receiving the application, the zoning department shall schedule a public hearing on the application before the zoning board of appeals, which public hearing shall be conducted within 30 [days] after the zoning department's receipt of the application. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published at least ten days before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published within the county, and shall contain the particular location for which the hardship extension is requested. 
The zoning board of appeals shall issue a written decision within ten days after the public hearing on the application for a hardship extension. The hardship extension shall be granted upon a showing that the nonconforming sexually-oriented business is unable to recoup its investments, made prior to the effective date of this article, in its current location unless the hardship extension is granted. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2005, § 20) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; fishing in private ponds, O.C.G.A. § 27-4-30 et seq.; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RABIES CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-21. - Identification and inoculation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or maintain any dog or cat that does not have a current rabies inoculation. 
(b)  All dogs and cats shall be inoculated against rabies in accordance with the procedures set forth in the rabies control rules and regulations of the county, as promulgated and from time to time amended by the county board of health, which by reference are expressly incorporated as a part of this section as if fully set out in this article. Violation of such rules and regulations may be enforced by the rabies control officer the Crisp County Board of Health, Crisp County Sheriff's Department, and/or a Crisp County Animal Control Officer acting on behalf of the Crisp County Sheriff's Department and the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. I, § 1) 
Sec. 14-22. - Vaccination of dogs and cats. 
(a)  The owner of a dog or cat four months of age or older shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated against rabies. If such dog or cat is less than one year of age upon vaccination it shall be revaccinated at least one year from the date of the original vaccination. When dogs and cats of one year of age or older are vaccinated with a vaccine approved by the animal control director providing three years' protection, such animals shall be revaccinated within three years. When other approved vaccines are used, yearly inoculations shall be required. 
(b)  The owner of any dog or cat brought into the county for a permanent stay from outside the county shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated in accordance with this division; except, however, when the owner of such dog or cat produces evidence satisfactory to the animal control director that such dog or cat has been vaccinated in a manner and by procedures comparable to the requirements of this division, then a county certificate of vaccination may be issued in lieu of revaccination. 
(c)  No person shall vaccinate dogs and cats against rabies who is not licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. I, § 2) 
Sec. 14-23. - Animal license. 
(a)  The owner, possessor or harborer of each dog or cat residing in the unincorporated areas of the county must obtain and posses a current rabies vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. Upon vaccination, county veterinarians shall be responsible for issuing a metal tag with a vaccination and identification number. Tags shall be valid for 12 months from the date of vaccination, and must be renewed within 30 days of the expiration date. County veterinarians shall furnish to the animal control unit records of the vaccination and identification numbers for all tags issued. 
(b)  No person keeping or harboring an animal shall fail or refuse to exhibit a certificate of vaccination required by this article upon demand of the animal control officer, health department representative, sheriff or any other county official. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. I, § 3) 
Sec. 14-24. - Collar and rabies vaccination tag. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each dog and cat owner or possessor to provide a collar and tag for each dog and cat, and the tag and collar shall be on the animal at all times when the animal is not under the immediate control of the owner or possessor of the animal. All animals required to be vaccinated shall wear the vaccination tag issued for the current year in a clearly visible location. Animals participating in organized or controlled competitions are exempt from this subsection only for the duration of the competition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination of owner's license tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove such tags from any animal without the consent of its owner or possessor. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. I, § 4) 
Sec. 14-25. - Vaccines used. 
(a)  All dogs and cats being owned, possessed, harbored or residing within the incorporated and unincorporated limits of the county shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, and using only those vaccines prescribed and/or approved by the state department of human resources. 
(b)  Any person keeping, owning, harboring or having any type of animal in possession, excluding dogs and cats, is not required to have the animal vaccinated against rabies but does so at his own risk and assumes all liabilities for adverse actions of the animal. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. I, § 5) 
Sec. 14-26. - Certificate of vaccination. 
(a)  Upon administering anti-rabies vaccines, a certificate of vaccination must be issued and signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine, to prove evidence of vaccination. 
(b)  Any veterinarian is authorized and required in connection with his practice to issue certificates of vaccination, provided he furnishes one copy to the animal owner, one copy to the animal control unit, and one copy is retained by the veterinarian. In addition, a fourth copy may be given to the animal owner and delivered to the animal control unit for the license. 
(c)  The certificate of vaccination furnished to the department of animal control shall be maintained in an orderly indexed file for a period of not less than three years. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. I, § 6) 
Sec. 14-27. - Summons. 
The rabies control officer, animal control officer or sheriff's department at his/her discretion may not impound a dog or other animal found in violation of any section of this article, but return the animal to its owner or possessor and issue or cause to be issued a summons directing the owner or possessor of the animal to appear before the magistrate court on a certain day to stand trial for the violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. I, § 7) 
Sec. 14-28. - Liability of the county, animal control unit, officers and employees. 
The county, the board of health, sheriff's department, the animal control unit and their officers and employees shall not be held responsible or liable for any accidents, diseases, injuries, or deaths to any animal while being impounded or boarded at the control facility or any facility designated by the animal control unit to house such animal. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. I, § 8) 
Sec. 14-29. - Interference with animal control officers. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any rabies control officer or other officer empowered to act by law, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the county vehicle used to transport the animal, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control facility. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. I, § 9) 
DIVISION 2. - PROTECTION AGAINST RABIES 

Sec. 14-30. - Report of animal bite required of person bitten. 
It shall be the duty of every person bitten by an animal to report immediately to the animal control department, giving: 
(1)  His full name, age and address; 
(2)  The circumstances surrounding the bite and the extent of the bite; 
(3)  The medical treatment given; and 
(4)  The name and address of the owner or custodian of the animal. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. II, § 1) 
Sec. 14-31. - Report of animal bite required of owner of animal; failure to report. 
It shall be the duty of every person owing or having custody of an animal which has bitten a human being to report the incident to the animal control department and confine the animal in a secure enclosure for observation and examination by the animal control officer and/or representatives of the health department. No person having the custody or possession of such animal shall fail, refuse or neglect to immediately notify the animal control department, or shall fail, refuse or neglect to allow the animal control official and/or a representative from the health department to make an inspection or examination of such animal for the purpose of determining whether such animal has rabies. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. II, § 2) 
Sec. 14-32. - Bite report required of those providing care. 
It shall be the duty of every physician to report immediately to the animal control department the full name, age and address of any person under his care or observation who has been bitten by an animal in the county. If no physician is in attendance and the person is a child, it shall be the duty of the parent or guardian to make such report immediately. If the person is an adult, such person shall make the report, or if incapacitated, it shall be made by whoever is caring for the person bitten. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. II, § 3) 
Sec. 14-33. - Reporting animals suspected of having rabies. 
It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of the existence of an animal apparently afflicted with rabies to report immediately to the animal control department the existence and description of such animal; the place where seen; the owner's name, if known; and the symptoms suggesting rabies. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. II, § 4) 
Sec. 13-34. - Reporting of suspected rabies cases by owners. 
Whenever the owner or person having the custody or possession of any animal shall observe or learn that such animal has shown symptoms of rabies, or has acted in a manner that would lead to a reasonable suspicion that it might have rabies, such owner or person shall immediately notify the animal control department and shall allow the animal control officer and/or a representative of the health department to make an inspection or examination of such animal until it shall be established that such animal does or does not have rabies. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. II, § 5) 
Sec. 14-35. - Disposition of body of suspected rabies cases. 
It shall be the duty of the owner or person having custody of any animal suspected of having rabies to surrender the carcass of the animal, or such portion of the carcass as may be requested, to the animal control officer after the death of the animal. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. II, § 6) 
Sec. 14-36. - Veterinarian to quarantine suspected rabies cases. 
All veterinarians treating an animal indicating symptoms of rabies shall hold such animal in quarantine until the disposition of the animal by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. II, § 7) 
Sec. 14-37. - Report of animal biting animal required. 
It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of any animal that bites another animal to report immediately to the animal control department: 
(1)  The existence and description of such animal; 
(2)  The place where biting incident occurred; 
(3)  The owner's name; if known; and 
(4)  A description of animal that was bitten and the owner's name, if known. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. II, § 8) 
Sec. 14-38. - Management of animals that scratch or bite humans. 
(a)  Dogs and cats . A healthy dog or cat that bites or scratches a person or another animal should be confined and observed for ten days. This required quarantine applies to dogs and cats only. Rabies vaccine should not be administered during the observation period. While in confinement, any signs of illness should be evaluated by a licensed veterinarian. The place of confinement shall be at the agency designated by the board of commissioners as the animal shelter at the expense of the owner or person having custody or possession of the animal, the veterinarian chosen by the owner or person having the custody or possession of the animal at the owner's expense, or any other confinement location so designated and approved by the animal control officer. If symptoms suggestive of rabies are observed, the animal should be humanely killed and a specimen submitted to a qualified laboratory for testing. If the animal dies during the quarantine period, the specimen should be submitted immediately for rabies testing. 
(b)  Stray domestic animals and other species . Any stray or unwanted animal that bites or scratches a person or domestic animal may be humanely euthanized and a specimen submitted for testing. Animals other than dogs or cats that bite or scratch a person and are suspected of being rabid should immediately be reported to the animal control department. Management of animals other than dogs and cats is dependent on the animal species, the circumstances of the bite, and the epidemiology of rabies in the area, and shall be at the discretion of the animal control officer or the county health department or their authorized representative. 
(c)  Livestock . Cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, goats, swine and sheep are not likely to be reservoirs of rabies. Treatment will be weighed against the circumstances of exposure by the animal control officer or the health department or their authorized representative. If at the time of exposure the animal is clinically ill with signs suggestive of rabies, the animal control officer or his authorized representative, or an authorized representative from the health department will immediately and humanely kill the animal and a specimen submitted to a qualified laboratory for testing. The cost of testing will be the responsibility of the animal owner, if known. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. II, § 9) 
Sec. 14-39. - Management of animals exposed to rabies. 
(a)  Animals bitten or scratched by wild animal . Any animal bitten or scratched by a bat or wild carnivorous mammal (particularly bobcat, raccoon, fox, skunk or coyote) that is not available for testing should be considered exposed to rabies. 
(b)  Unvaccinated or unwanted dogs and cats exposed to rabies. Unvaccinated or unwanted dogs and cats bitten or scratched by a known or potentially rabid animal should be humanely euthanized immediately. If the owner of the animal is unwilling to have this done (upon approval of the animal control department) the exposed animal must be placed in strict isolation for six months and vaccinated one month prior to being released. The responsibility for isolation of an exposed unvaccinated animal remains with the owner. The animal must be kept in a pen that has been built to the specifications of the state rabies control manual appendix "C" and approved by the head of the animal control department and the chief animal control officer. Additionally, a second fence 18 to 24 inches in distance from the inner pen must be erected around the perimeter to guarantee complete isolation of the quarantined animal from other animals and human contact. The total construction costs of this confinement area is the sole responsibility of the pet owner. Previously vaccinated dogs and cats whose rabies vaccination has lapsed for more than 30 days are considered unvaccinated and will be treated as such. 
(c)  Vaccinated dogs and cats exposed to rabies . Dogs and cats that are currently vaccinated (vaccinated at least one month prior to exposure) should be revaccinated immediately, confined, and observed for 45 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the animal control department and/or health department. 
(d)  Livestock exposed to rabies . Vaccinated livestock (vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with a USDA approved vaccine for that species at least 30 days prior to the attack) bitten by a rabid animal should be revaccinated immediately, confined and observed for 45 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the animal control department and/or health department. 
(e)  Other animals exposed to rabies . Unvaccinated animals bitten by a rabid animal should be euthanized immediately. If an animal has been vaccinated with a USDA approved vaccine for that species, the animal must be revaccinated immediately and placed in confinement for a minimum of 90 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the animal control department and/or the health department. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. II, § 10) 
Sec. 14-40. - Quarantine of area of county. 
Whenever in the judgment of the board of commissioners, after consultation with the animal control department and the health department, the public health and safety so require the board shall declare and establish a quarantine zone or area consisting of the whole or any part of the county, and maintain such quarantine until such time as they may deem it advisable to lift the quarantine. During the existence of such quarantine, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the rules and regulations proscribed by the board of commissioners with reference to such quarantine. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. II, § 11) 
Sec. 14-41. - Retention of animals suspected of having rabies. 
(a)  If the animal control officer or pound keeper for the agency operating a pound for the county suspects that any animal impounded has rabies, he shall notify the animal control department. A qualified veterinarian shall examine such animal; and if he believes such animal should be held for future observation, he shall so inform the animal control officer. 
(b)  If an animal does not have rabies, the animal control officer or agency operating a pound for the county shall release it or dispose of it in the manner proscribed in this article. 
(c)  After observation by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state, if symptoms suggestive of rabies are observed, the animal should be humanely killed and its head carefully removed and shipped on ice for examination by the state public health laboratory. If the animal dies during the quarantine period, the head shall be submitted immediately for rabies testing. If the animal lives through the duration of the quarantine and no symptoms of rabies are observed, that animal shall be released to the owner or turned over to the agency operating the county's animal shelter. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. II, § 12) 
Sec. 14-42. - Animal exposed to rabies barred from county. 
No person shall bring any animal into the county in which rabies has been present within the prior six months. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. II, § 13) 
DIVISION 3. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 14-43. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer under the direction of the Crisp County Sheriff's Department to enforce this article. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable as provided by in state law, with each day such violations continue constituting a separate offense. 
(c)  Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violations of this article, to recover damages, and to restrain, correct or abate a violation; and these remedies shall be in addition to other penalties assessed. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. III, § 1) 
Sec. 14-44. - Rights of officials to enter premises. 
(a)  Whenever an animal control officer, a representative from the health department or any law enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any violation of the provisions of this article or other applicable law, or whenever it is necessary for such official to make an inspection to enforce any provisions or perform any duty imposed by this article or any other applicable law, he shall have the right to enter such property at any reasonable time to inspect and perform any duty imposed by this article or other applicable law; provided that: 
(1)  If such property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry explaining his reasons: 
(2)  If such property is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or the person having charge or control of the property and request entry, explaining his reasons; and 
(3)  If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having charge or control of the property cannot be found after due diligence, recourse shall be had to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspection of the property. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall affect or otherwise abridge the right of any animal control officer to pursue or impound an animal or to issue a citation when an animal is on property other than that of the owner of the animal or that of a person who has a right to control such animal. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. III, § 2) 
Sec. 14-45. - Rights of officials for emergency entry. 
If an animal control officer, health department representative or any law enforcement officer, has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of any animal is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to save the animal or protect the public health or safety, he shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property, and may use reasonable means required to effect such entry and make inspection whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining his reasons and the purpose of the inspection. Failure to permit inspection shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, Art. III, § 3) 
Secs. 14-46—14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 14-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board means the animal control board. 
County governing authority means the board of county commissioners. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans with provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Dog control officer means an individual selected by the county governing authority or its designee pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22 to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within this county. 
Potentially dangerous dog means: 
(1)  Any dog that without provocation bites a human being on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989; or 
(2)  Any dog that without provocation attacks and bites another animal or fowl and is sufficient size, and has sufficient aggressive behavior to endanger the safety of other domestic animals, far animals and human beings on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and secure top; and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state or local court; or records of a dog control officer as provided in this article and by the laws of the state. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 1; Ord. of 11-9-2004) 
Sec. 14-52. - Exceptions to definitions. 
The term "dangerous dog" and "potentially dangerous dog", as defined in section 14-51, shall not include the following: 
(1)  A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties; or 
(2)  A dog who inflicts an injury within the meaning of this article if the injury was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or had in the past observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 2; Ord. of 11-9-2004) 
Sec. 14-53. - Dangerous dog warning symbol. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21 et seq., the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County hereby adopts by reference the uniform dangerous dog warning symbol. An official copy of such symbol shall remain on file in the office of the clerk of board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 3; Ord. of 11-9-2004) 
Sec. 14-54. - Animal control board. 
(a)  There is created and established an animal control board. The purpose of the board shall be to conduct the hearings provided for in section 14-56. 
(b)  The board shall be the Crisp County Board of Health. 
(c)  In event of a vacancy during the term of any member by reason of death, resignation, or otherwise, the appointment of a successor by the county governing authority shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of such member. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 4; Ord. of 11-9-2004) 
Sec. 14-55. - Dog control officer. 
The Crisp County Sheriff, having consented to serve, is hereby appointed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c) as dog control officer, and shall serve as such at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 5; Ord. of 11-9-2004) 
Sec. 14-56. - Procedure for classifying dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs; notice. 
(a)  The dog control officer, upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the county from law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer, or county board of health shall make such investigations and inquires with regard to such report as may be necessary to determine the validity of such report and whether the dog should be classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or reclassified as a dangerous dog if previously classified as a potentially dangerous dog. 
(b)  Should the dog control officer determine that a dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the dog control officer shall classify such dog accordingly. The dog control officer shall then notify the dog's owner of such classification. The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to owner's last known address. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the board of health; 
(5)  The notice shall state that, if a hearing is not requested, the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has the right to request a hearing; and 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the board of health and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the board. 
(c)  When the board of health receives a request for a hearing as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of the date, time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence. In addition, the board shall receive at the hearing such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify or overrule the dog control officer's classification of the dog. 
(d)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the animal control board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 6; Ord. of 11-9-2004) 
Sec. 14-57. - Requirements for possessing a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(a)  No one shall have, own or possess within the county a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without certificate of registration. 
(b)  The dog control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the dog control officer or the dog control officer otherwise finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; and 
(2)  The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall receive such sign from the dog control officer at the time the owner pays the annual registration fee as required in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the dog control officer evidence of: 
(1)  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
(2)  A surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
(d)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual registration fee at the time the annual certificate of registration is issued. The annual registration fee shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Certificates of registration shall be renewed in the month of the initial registration. 
(e)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer if the owner is moving from the county. 
(f)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the state shall register such dog as required by this article within 30 days after becoming a resident of the state and county. 
(g)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves to the county from any other county within the state shall register such dog as required by this article within ten days after becoming a resident of the county. 
(h)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the dog control officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 7; Ord. of 11-9-2004) 
Sec. 14-58. - Restrictions on permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs outside a proper enclosure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will prevent it from biting any person but not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 8; Ord. of 11-9-2004) 
Sec. 14-59. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds; disposition. 
(a)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the dog control officer if: 
(1)  The owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or surety bond required by section 14-57(c); 
(2)  The dog is not validly registered as required by this article; 
(3)  The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as defined in this article; or 
(4)  The dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 14-58(a). 
(b)  A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if: 
(1)  The dog is not validly registered as required by this article; 
(2)  The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as defined in this article; or 
(3)  The dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 14-58(b). 
(c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article as determined by the dog control officer and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs. If the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog is confiscated, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 9; Ord. of 11-9-2004) 
Sec. 14-60. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of section 14-57 or section 14-58 or whose dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under section 14-59(a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for the second conviction, a fine of not less than $500.00 shall be imposed; and for a third or subsequent conviction, a fine of not less than $750.00 shall be imposed. 
(b)  The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of section 14-57 or section 14-58 of this article or whose potentially dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under section 14-59(b) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for a second conviction, a fine of not less than $150.00 shall be imposed; and for a third or subsequent conviction, a fine not less than $300.00 shall be imposed. 
(c)  If an owner who has a previous conviction for a violation of this article knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this article, such owner shall be guilty of a felony if the owner's dangerous dog attacks or bites a human being under circumstances constituting another violation of this article. The owner of a dangerous dog who is convicted for a violation of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $5,000.00 or by imprisonment for not less than one nor more than five years or by both such fine and imprisonment as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(c). 
(d)  An owner who knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a felony if the owner's dangerous dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of a human being under circumstances constituting a violation of this article. The owner of a dangerous dog who is convicted of a violation of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5,000.00 nor more than $10,000.00 or by imprisonment for not less than one nor more than ten years or by both such fine and imprisonment as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(d). 
(e)  In addition to the penalties for violations under subsection (c) or (d) of this section, the dangerous dog involved shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or another person authorized by the dog control officer and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time as determined by the county board of health; and thereafter the dangerous dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(f)  No owner of a dangerous dog shall be held criminally liable under this article for injuries inflicted by the owner's dog to any human being while on the owner's property. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2002, § 10; Ord. of 11-9-2004) 
Secs. 14-61—14-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCE ANIMAL 

Sec. 14-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal shall not include any fish nor shall such term include any pest that may be exterminated or removed from a business, residence, or other structure. 
Animal bite means any physical contact with the teeth, nails or claws of an animal and human flesh, including but not limited to a scrape, puncture, pierce, scratch or tear, so long as an abrasion to the skin or puncture results. 
Animal services center means those facilities designated by the board of commissioners or the sheriff's office for the housing and care of animals pursuant to this chapter. 
Animal services division means the department of the Crisp County Sheriff's Office created by the Crisp County Sheriff, whose officials are referred to as animal services officers, and employed by the sheriff, and implement the provisions of this ordinance and those of Georgia law related to animals. 
Animal services officer means an individual selected by the Crisp County Sheriff who is charged with implementing the provisions of this article. 
Board of health means the Crisp County Board of Health or its authorized representatives, which may include officers or employees of the animal services division. 
Nuisance animal means any animal that: 
(a)  Bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation, or 
(b)  Repeatedly molests or disturbs persons or vehicles by chasing or biting; acts in a manner that would make a reasonable person believe they were in imminent danger of being attacked or bitten by the animal, or 
(c)  Engages in an unprovoked attack against another animal, or 
(d)  Repeatedly molests or damages property other than that of the owner; (i.e.; damaging landscaped yards, scratching paint on cars, tearing up trash or other items outside the home). 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a nuisance animal within this county. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 14-72. - Jurisdiction and interlocal agreements. 
The jurisdiction for enforcement of this article shall be in the unincorporated area of the county; however, the county may contract or enter into agreements with other municipalities to enforce this chapter for joint animal control services or for the provision of animal control services and for the separate or joint use of personnel, facilities and equipment for such services. Such agreements or contracts shall be subject to any state law, which may govern. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007, § 2) 
Sec. 14-73. - Animal services division; animal services officers. 
The animal services division shall: 
(1)  Operate the animal services center and perform such duties and keep such records as the board of commissioners may require. 
(2)  Cooperate with the county board of health in the enforcement of rabies control regulations and of animal services directives. 
(3)  Cooperate with the animal welfare organizations of the county through the animal services board. 
(4)  Confiscate and impound animals that are in violation of this chapter. 
(5)  Record the number, description and disposition of all animals impounded or otherwise taken into custody, showing in detail in the case of each animal the following: 
a.  A general description by sex, breed and approximate age, together with any identification tag, vaccination tag or other marking, if any; 
b.  The date of receipt; 
c.  The date and manner of disposal; 
d.  The name and address of the person reclaiming or adopting; 
e.  The condition of the animal when received; 
f.  Such additional records as the board of commissioners may require. 
(6)  Cooperate with the animal services board. 
(7)  House and humanely care for animals at the animal services center. 
(8)  Upon receiving a report of a nuisance animal, make such investigation and inquiries as may be necessary to identify nuisance animals and the possible owners of the nuisance animals within the animal services officer's jurisdiction. 
(9)  Notify the animals' owners pursuant to this ordinance and any applicable state law. 
(10)  Investigate all animal complaints and enforce the animal services ordinance and all other state laws pertaining to animals. 
(11)  Place, upon request, live-capture animal traps on private property of the requestor or public property to trap and remove nuisance animals. 
(12)  Take such actions as are reasonably necessary in the judgment of the animal services officer to prevent injury to person or property, including tranquilizing, trapping or humanely destroying the nuisance animals. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007, § 3) 
Sec. 14-74. - Interference with animal services officer. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal services officer by taking or attempting to take any animal from any vehicle used to transport such animal, or by taking or attempting to take any animal from an authorized humane animal trap, or taking or attempting to take any animal from the animal services impounding areas, or by any other method which would block or hinder any officer referred to in this section from performing his duties. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than an animal services officer or their designee to remove any animal from the trap or to damage, destroy, move, or tamper with the trap. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 14-75. - Animal services board. 
(a)  Membership. The animal services board shall be constituted as an "animal control board" as defined and authorized under O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24. The animal services board constituted as defined herein shall be separate from the animal services board defined in section 14-54 of the Crisp County Code and shall consist of at least three members, one of which shall be a state-licensed veterinarian. Members of the animal services board shall be appointed and removed by the county commission by majority vote thereof once every two years. Members of the animal services board shall adopt procedures and policies to govern potential conflicts of interest arising from the responsibilities and duties of their positions. All members of the animal services board, except the state-licensed veterinarian, shall be residents of Crisp County. The state-licensed veterinarian must practice veterinarian medicine within Crisp County. 
(b)  Duties. The animal services board shall: 
(1)  Recommend to the board of commissioners and the sheriff's office regulations and amendments to this chapter concerning the control and welfare of animals in the county. 
(2)  Conduct hearings as defined in this article. 
(3)  Make recommendations to the board of commissioners guidelines and the sheriff's office concerning the operation and maintenance of the animal services center. 
(4)  Hold a public meeting at least semiannually. 
(5)  Furnish the board of commissioners and the sheriff's office with semiannual reports or recommendations as provided for in this section or at such other intervals as may be designated by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007, § 5) 
Sec. 14-76. - Investigations; notices of determination. 
(1)  The procedures provided for in this Code section must be carried out as a necessary condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this article against any owner. 
(2)  Upon receiving a report of a nuisance animal, an animal services officer shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(3)  If upon completion of any investigation concerning a nuisance animal, the animal services officer determines that the animal is a nuisance animal, the animal services officer shall notify the animal's owner of such classification. 
(4)  The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last known address. 
(b)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal services officer findings that formed the basis for the animal's classification as a nuisance animal; 
(c)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within seven days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal services officer's determination that the animal is a nuisance animal; 
(d)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the animal services board; 
(e)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal services officer's determination that the animal is a nuisance animal will become effective for all purposes under this article on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(f)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal services board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the animal services board. 
(5)  Notice under this section shall be complete upon its mailing. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007, § 6) 
Sec. 14-77. - Hearings. 
(1)  When the animal services board receives a request for a hearing as provided hereinabove, it shall schedule such hearing within seven days after receiving the request. The animal services board shall notify the animal's owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the owner at least two days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the animal services board shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the governing authority or board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal services officer's classification of the animal. 
(2)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, animal services board shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of its determination on the matter. If the determination is that the animal is a nuisance animal, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007, § 7) 
Sec. 14-78. - Enclosure or restraint required; confiscation. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a nuisance animal to permit the animal to roam at large or be unrestrained. The animal may be restrained by a substantial chain or by a leash under the physical control of an adult or in a suitable enclosure that would prevent the animal's escape. The enclosure must provide the animal with the proper shelter from the elements. 
(2)  A nuisance animal shall be immediately confiscated by an animal services officer or by other law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the animal services officer if the animal is not maintained in a proper enclosure. 
(3)  Any animal that has been confiscated under the provisions of this subsection shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Payment of all fees, charges, and costs attributable to the seizure, care and confinement of the animal; 
(b)  Payment of all costs and fines assessed by any court relative to the animal; 
(c)  Satisfaction of all conditions, limitations, prohibitions and restrictions relative to the animal as may be imposed by the animal services board or any court; 
(d)  Execution of a statement by the owner that the conditions giving rise to the seizure of the animal have been remedied and/or will not be repeated; and 
(e)  Obtaining of any required rabies vaccination and required rabies tags. 
(4)  If the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within ten days of the date the animal was confiscated, the animal may be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner or placed for adoption with another owner. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007, § 8) 
Sec. 14-79. - Attacking and biting animals; report of; confiscation. 
(1)  Any person having information that an animal has bitten or attacked a person shall immediately report such information to the animal services division/sheriff's office or the county health department. 
(2)  The owner of a nuisance animal shall notify the animal services division immediately, and in any case within 24 hours of knowing that the dog is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the animal control/sheriff's office with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007, § 9) 
Sec. 14-80. - Penalties. 
(1)  Upon conviction by the Magistrate Court of Crisp County or other court of competent jurisdiction for violation of any provision of this ordinance, an owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall pay the following fines: for the first conviction, a fine of not less than $250.00; for the second conviction, a fine of not less than $500.00; and for a third or subsequent conviction, a fine of not less than $750.00. 
(2)  In addition to the penalties for violations under this subsection, the nuisance animal involved shall be confiscated by the animal services officer or by a law enforcement officer or another person authorized by the animal services officer and disposed of pursuant of order of the court or pursuant to this article. 
(3)  No owner of a nuisance animal shall be held criminally liable under this article for injuries inflicted by the owner's animal to any human being while on the owner's property. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007, § 10) 
Sec. 14-81. - Civil injunction and order of abatement. 
Any provision of this article may be enforced by injunction and order of abatement and shall be subject to enforcement under the contempt powers of the court. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007, § 11) 
Sec. 14-82. - Interpretation of chapter. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal or state law. In addition, nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any liability on the county, or any employee, board or official which enforces or fails to enforce any of the provisions provided in this chapter or any provisions in the state nuisance animal or a dangerous dog control law. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007, § 12) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Registration and licensing of building and repair services, § 26-111 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 34; manufactured homes, ch. 38; planning, ch. 46; roads and bridges, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 54; clean community standards for construction sites and demolition sites, § 54-154; utilities, ch. 66; development code, app. A; lot and building standards, app. A, § 5.01; building construction, app. A, § 10.08; grandfathered development, app. A, § 11.01 et seq. 
State Law reference— Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.; authority to adopt codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Sewer line inspections. 
The board of commissioners exempts the county from the alternative inspection provisions of 1996 Ga. Laws, page 1632, codified as O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). 
(Res. of 5-14-1996) 
Secs. 18-2—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.; authority to adopt codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

Sec. 18-31. - Adopted. 
(a)  The following state minimum standard codes are adopted by reference and incorporated as part of this Code: 
(1)  International Building Code with Georgia State Amendments; 
(2)  National Electrical Code with Georgia State Amendments; 
(3)  Standard Gas Code with Georgia State Amendments; 
(4)  Standard Mechanical Code with Georgia State Amendments; 
(5)  Standard Plumbing Code with Georgia State Amendments; 
(6)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings with Georgia State Amendments; 
(7)  Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings as adopted by the State Building Administrative Board pursuant to an Act approved April 10, 1978 (1978 Ga. Laws, page 2212), as such code existed on September 30, 1991; and 
(8)  Standard Fire Prevention Code (SBCCI). 
(b)  The edition of the codes stated in subsection (a) of this section, as currently adopted by the state department of community affairs, shall be used and enforced, except where a subsequently published edition of any such code has been adopted by the state department of community affairs, with approval of its board, or such code has been amended or revised as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-23. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1(5-1), 3-23-1998; Ord. of 10-8-2002) 
Secs. 18-32—18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 18-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-62. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the county planning department. Citations for violations may be issued by the building inspector of the county, or his designee. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the magistrate court of the county. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 6) 
Sec. 18-63. - Prohibited construction. 
No construction may be initiated within the unincorporated areas of the county for any residential or commercial building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 2) 
Sec. 18-64. - Repair, renovation and addition requirements. 
The requirements of section 18-63 shall apply to any residential construction and to any commercial construction which involves the repair or renovation of, or addition to, any existing building when such repair or renovation of, or addition to, such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 3) 
Sec. 18-65. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair and renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 18-63 and 18-64 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of, or addition to the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing building; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by persons with disabilities; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (a)(3) or (a)(4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the county planning department. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 4) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; emergency services, ch. 30; commercial establishments for clean community standards, § 54-151; taxation, ch. 58; depository financial institutions business license tax, § 58-31 et seq.; hotel-motel excise tax, § 58-161 et seq.; utilities, ch. 66; home occupations, app. A, § 4.07. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Fortunetelling license. 
The fortunetelling license fee shall be in the amount of $100.00 per month. 
(Mo. of 12-10-1968) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit, regulate or tax fortunetelling, astrology and palmistry and similar practices, businesses and professions, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-15. 
Secs. 22-2—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAWNBROKERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq.; pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 22-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pawnbroker has the same meaning as found in O.C.G.A. title 44, ch. 12. 
Precious or semiprecious metals or stones means metals such as, but not limited to, gold, silver, platinum and pewter and stones such as, but not limited to, alexandrite, diamonds, emeralds, garnets, opals, rubies, sapphires and topaz. For the purpose of this section, ivory, coral, pearls, jade and such other minerals, stones or gems as are customarily regarded as precious or semiprecious are deemed to be precious or semiprecious. 
Secondhand dealer means any person whose business is that of engaging in the sale or trade of secondhand property, or whose business is selling new goods, but who buys or sells secondhand articles, goods, wares or merchandise of the same type or class as the new goods sold. The term does not include a person: 
(1)  Selling or trading secondhand property at a garage sale/yard sale as defined in the zoning regulations for the county. 
(2)  Or organization selling or trading secondhand property at an exhibition or show which is intended to display a particular commodity or class of products, including, but not limited to, antique exhibitions, firearm exhibitions, home and garden shows, and recreational vehicle shows; excluding, however, precious or semiprecious metals, stones, gold or silver shows. 
(3)  Or organization which is charitable, nonprofit, recreational, fraternal, or political in nature or which is exempt from taxation under the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. 
Secondhand property means the following items of tangible personal property sold or traded by secondhand dealers: 
(1)  Cameras, camera lenses, slide or movie projectors, projector screens, flashguns, enlargers, tripods, binoculars, telescopes, and microscopes; 
(2)  Televisions, phonographs, tape recorders, video recorders, compact disc players, radios, tuners, speakers, turntables, amplifiers, record changers, citizens band broadcasting units and receivers, and video games; 
(3)  Golf clubs, guns, jewelry, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, coins, luggage, boots, furs, clothing and rugs; 
(4)  Typewriters, adding machines, calculators, computers, portable air conditioners, cash registers, copying machines, dictating machines, automatic telephone answering machines and sewing machines; 
(5)  Bicycles, bicycle frames, bicycle handrail assemblies, bicycle hand brake assemblies, and other bicycle components; 
(6)  Ranges, stoves, dishwashers, refrigerators, garbage disposals, boats, airplanes, clothes washers, clothes dryers, freezers, furniture, as well as any other restaurant and household items or appliances; 
(7)  Auto accessories, including, but not limited to, wheels and hub caps, but not including core charges for automobile parts which are not rebuilt on the premises; and 
(8)  Any item or tangible personal property which is marked with a serial or identification number. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1992, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-32. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in section 1-11. In addition, any person violating any of the provisions of this article who holds a county business license shall be subject to a revocation of the license for a violation of any provisions contained in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1992, § 6) 
Sec. 22-33. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer within the unincorporated area of the county without having first obtained a license from the county administrator's office. The cost of such license shall be $75.00 per year or any part of a calendar year. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1992, § 2) 
Sec. 22-34. - Daily reports. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer doing business in the unincorporated area of the county will deliver to the county sheriff department, on a monthly basis, by 10:00 a.m. on the fifth day of each month daily reports of all tangible property accepted during the previous month, whether such purchases were unconditional or with the privilege of redeeming the property on the part of the seller. Such report shall give the full description of all such articles, including any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name or other identifying marks. The report shall also include the name of the pawner, vendor or person from whom such goods were obtained, and his address. 
(b)  Any deputy sheriff who exhibits a written order from the sheriff or his designee shall be authorized to inspect all records required to be retained under state law, as well as all goods on the premises. The proprietors of all such establishments shall give all assistance in their power to enable the deputy sheriff to identify stolen goods. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer who accepts in trade or otherwise obtains any secondhand property in which there is no cash paid or given to the customer, shall not be required to submit to the sheriff's department the name and address of the person from whom such property or goods were obtained; provided, however, that such information shall be retained by the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer for a period of three years, and such information shall be available to the sheriff's department as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1992, § 5) 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - National Incident Management System; adopted. 
Crisp County hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations in Crisp County train and exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Res. of 9-13-2005) 
Secs. 26-2—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor or the President of the United States. 
Emergency means any natural or manmade event requiring the activation of the local emergency operations plan. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services; police services (public safety); medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; nuclear power plant protection; temporary restoration of public service utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. (Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, as amended December 1992, Chapter 3, Article 1, § 38-3-3.) 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the governor to head the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. of 10-20-1999, § I; Ord. of 10-14-08, § I) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-32. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 10-20-1999, § VI; Ord. of 10-14-08, § VI) 
Sec. 26-33. - Local organization for emergency management. 
In agreement with the governing officials of the cities within the county, there is hereby established the Crisp Emergency Management Agency. The chairperson of the Crisp County Commissioners, with the concurrence of officials of the cities within the county, shall nominate, for appointment by the state emergency management director, a director of the Crisp County Emergency Management Agency. Upon appointment, the local emergency management agency director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the executive officer or governing body and shall serve at the pleasure of such executive officer or governing body. When appointed, the local emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(a)  Represent the governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(b)  Assist local officials in organizing county departments for emergency operations. 
(c)  Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the Crisp County Emergency Operations Plan for emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the Georgia Emergency Operations Plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of Crisp County and the cities within the county for approval, and thence to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency for approval. 
(d)  Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the Crisp County Emergency Management Program, including the submission of required reports, to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
(e)  Submit reports as required by governmental officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activities, etc. 
(f)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the Crisp County Emergency Operations Center. 
(g)  Coordinate the activities of the Crisp County Emergency Operating Staff during periods of emergency, and under the supervision of Crisp County governing officials. 
(Ord. of 10-20-1999, § II; Ord. of 10-14-08, § II) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-161 et seq. 
Sec. 26-34. - County agency. 
(a)  The Crisp County Emergency Management Agency shall be established around existing county and city departments. The emergency support functions (ESFs) and department/agency assignments are as follows: 

 
(b)  Heads of county departments listed above are responsible for developing appropriate annexes and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to the emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes and/or SOPs will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Ord. of 10-20-1999, § III; Ord. of 10-14-08, § III) 
Sec. 26-35. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of Crisp County, the chairperson of the Crisp County Commissioners and/or county administrator separately, or jointly with the chairperson of the Cordele City Commission and/or city manager, and mayor of Arabi, or in their absence their legally appointed successors may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such periods as such emergency or disaster continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes; 
(2)  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans set by the federal and state emergency management agencies; 
(3)  To appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers; 
(4)  To establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster; 
(5)  Subject to the order of the governor or the chief executive of the political subdivision, to assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the subdivision relating to firefighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, and to police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes, within or outside of the physical limits of the subdivision; 
(6)  In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease, or otherwise, sites required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims; and to enter into whatever arrangements, including purchase, of temporary housing units and payment of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such sites to utilize the housing units. 
(Ord. of 10-20-1999, § IV; Ord. of 10-14-08, § IV) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. ch. 3, art. 2, § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 26-36. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of Crisp County performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. Immunity does not apply in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith. 
(Ord. of 10-20-1999, § V; Ord. of 10-14-08, § V) 
Sec. 26-37. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, home land security, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the Crisp County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-26-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 26-38. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the county and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the Chairman of the Crisp County Board of Commissioners may declare a local emergency for Crisp County. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the chairman may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the county to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance . The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the chairman finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the chairman shall execute and file with the county administrator a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the chairman. The board of commissioners may, by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the chairman shall automatically activate the county emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The Crisp County Emergency Management Agency Director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the emergency management agency, including implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency response of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disasters sites. 
2.  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations the director or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the county; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the board of commissioners. 
3.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the county who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the chairman is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the chairman may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: Section 26-41 (registration of building and repair services) to become effective if the governor declares a state of emergency; and section 26-42 (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If any of these sections is included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the county administrator and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to declaration of emergency, the board of commissioners is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 26-40 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the county administrator. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The chairman of the board of commissioners shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation, and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and flammable liquids and substances; 
4.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
5.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any county departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
6.  To utilize all available resources of the county and subordinate agencies over which the county has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
7.  To commandeer or utilize public or private property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
8.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of county business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any county agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
9.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
10.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration of local emergency. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "declaration of local emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the county administrator and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
WHEREAS, Crisp County, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [description of event]_________________________ on [date]______________________; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Chairman of the Crisp County Board of Commissioners, with advice from the Crisp County Emergency Management Agency, there exist emergency circumstances located in [describe geographic location]______________________________ requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Crisp County, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event. 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the Crisp County Emergency Management Agency activates the Emergency Operations Plan; 
(2)  That the following sections of the Crisp County Code be implemented: ____________ [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: 
Section 26-41 Registration of Building and Repair Services; and/or 
Section 26-42 Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews]; and 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented: ____________ [If deemed appropriate, select items from section 26-38(a)(4)(c) or (d) or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at ____________ [time] on __________________[date]. 
Crisp County Board of Commissioners 
By: 
_________________________________________________ 
Chairman, Crisp County Board of Commissioners 
Attest: 
____________________________________ 
Linda Finch, Assistant Clerk 
(seal) 
(c)  Contracts with municipalities. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. 
(Ord. of 3-26-2012, § 2) 
Sec. 26-39. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the Crisp County Sheriffs Office shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the chairman or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties . Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the chairman or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 120 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. The owner of land upon which a violation occurs, and each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMA director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement . Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the ordinance from which this section was derived may be enforced by the Crisp County Sheriff's Office, the EMA director and chairman of the BOC. 
(Ord. of 3-26-2012, § 3) 
Sec. 26-40. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  County business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chairman of the board of commissioners, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the board of commissioners shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chairman of the Crisp County Board of Commissioners, the county may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public's health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
(c)  Purchasing . Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chairman of the board of commissioners, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. County officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairman of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the county, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees . Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairman of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners or designees may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the county on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the county pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or chairman of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. of 3-26-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 26-41. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of the county designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the Crisp County Finance Department and the Crisp County Planning Department and secure a building permit and/or a regulatory permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the county without complying with the ordinance from which this section was derived constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $45.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security number or federal employer identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required; 
(9)  Copy of license from the secretary of state if required; 
(10)  E Verify number and date obtained and/or affidavit as required by Georgia's Security and Immigration Compliance Act. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency by the governor and local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the board of commissioners, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Ord. of 3-26-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 26-42. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the chairman until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the chairman shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The chairman shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the local emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the county; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through an emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by the EMA director or the sheriff. 
(d)  Enforceability . This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. of 3-26-2012, § 6) 
Secs. 26-43—26-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STATES OF EMERGENCY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-71—26-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OVERCHARGING 

Sec. 26-91. - Prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of a state of emergency or a subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Ord. of 8-9-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 26-92. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, services or housing, which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing, except to the extent such increase in price is attributable to increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency. For the purposes of this division, it is prima facie evidence that the accused overcharged if the price at which the goods, materials, services or housing are offered is ten percent greater than the price at which such goods, materials, services or housing were offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency. 
State of emergency means, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the board of commissioners of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-9-1994, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-93. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this division, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 8-9-1994, § 3) 
Secs. 26-94—26-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 

Sec. 26-111. - Building contractor license required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or related to building, construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the board of commissioners of the county, and having received a building contractor's license to do business as provided by this division. 
(Ord. of 8-9-1994(1), § 1) 
Sec. 26-112. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaged in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or related to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business means any building contractor engaged in business and subject to the requirements of this division if such building contractor has an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county or operates or maintains a business, either temporary, periodically or otherwise, in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto located in the unincorporated areas of the county regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency means, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the board of commissioners of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-9-1994(1), § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-113. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this division to register and apply for a building contractor license and who engages in business without first registering and receiving a license as required by this division shall be in violation of this division. Violation of this division, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 8-9-1994(1), § 5) 
Sec. 26-114. - Registration; license application; certificate. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county shall register and apply for a building contractor's license to do business. Applicants shall register and file applications with the clerk of the board of commissioners of the county or such other person designated by the board of commissioners at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. An applicant for a building contractor's license shall, under oath, provide the county board of commissioners with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Ord. of 8-9-1994(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-115. - License fees. 
There shall be no fee charged for a building contractor license. 
(Ord. of 8-9-1994(1), § 4) 
Sec. 26-116. - Transferability. 
Each license granted under this division is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the licensee under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such license shall be transferred by the county or the licensee to anyone. 
(Ord. of 8-9-1994(1), § 6) 
Sec. 26-117. - Display of license. 
Each license issued under this division shall be posted conspicuously by the licensee in the place of business of the licensee or shall be carried on the person or in the vehicle of the licensee which is used in such business. Such license shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. of 8-9-1994(1), § 7) 
Sec. 26-118. - Revocation, suspension. 
Each license granted under this division is a mere permit to engage in the business for which such license is granted while and only during such period the business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county board of commissioners reserves the right to revoke or suspend any license which has been granted under this division, if the licensee, or the licensee's agent or employee acting within the scope of employment, violates this division or any other county, state or federal law. If, after issuance of a license, the county desires to revoke such license, written notice thereof shall be given to the licensee, which notice shall specify the violation with which the licensee is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. of 8-9-1994(1), § 8) 
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide ambulance and emergency rescue services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Predisaster mitigation plan adopted. 
The Crisp County Board of Commissioners, mayor and city council of the City of Arabi, and the Cordele City Commission, adopt the Crisp County Predisaster Mitigation Plan 2004—2008. 
(Res. of 9-14-2004) 
Editor's note— Said plan is not set out herein but is on file and available for inspection in the county offices. 
Secs. 30-2—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS FOR AMBULANCE SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq.; standards for ambulances, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-34; emergency vehicle equipment, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-90 et seq. 

Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advance life support means provisions of procedures included in the cardiac technician or advanced EMT courses as approved by the state department of human resources. 
Advance life support vehicle means an ambulance that has personnel on board that meets the other requirements of the rules of the state department of human resources chapter 290-5-30 and has at least one cardiac technician or advanced EMT in charge of patient care. 
Advanced emergency medical technician (A-EMT) means a person who has been certified by the composite state board of medical examiners after having been trained in emergency care techniques in an advanced emergency medical technician training course approved by the state department of human resources. 
Ambulance means a motor vehicle which is specially constructed and equipped and is intended to be used for the emergency transportation of patients, including dual purpose police patrol cars and funeral coaches or hearses which otherwise comply with the provisions of the rules of the state department of human resources chapter 290-5-30. 
Ambulance provider means an agency or company providing ambulance service which is operating under a valid license from the emergency health section of the division of public health of the state department of human resources. 
Ambulance service means the providing of emergency care and transportation on the public streets and highways of the county for a wounded, injured, sick, invalid or incapacitated human being to or from a place where medical or hospital care is furnished. 
Cardiac technician means a person who, after having been trained and certified as an EMT and having completed additional training in advanced cardiac life support techniques in a training course approved by the state department of human resources, is so certified by the composite state board of medical examiners. 
Emergency means any circumstance calling for immediate action in which medical attention is indicated. 
Emergency medical technician means a person who has been certified by the state department of human resources after having successfully completed an emergency medical care training program approved by the department of human resources. 
Invalid car means a motor vehicle not used for emergency purposes but only to transport persons who are convalescent, sick or otherwise not ambulatory. 
Patient means an individual who is sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, group of individuals acting together for a common purpose, or organization of any kind, including any governmental agency other than the United States. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1995, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-32. - Compliance; exemption. 
No person shall operate an ambulance in the county without being in compliance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 31-11-34, the rules of the state department of human resources chapter 290-5-30, and this article. However, this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  An ambulance or ambulance service operated by an agency of the United States government; 
(2)  A vehicle rendering assistance temporarily in the case of a major catastrophe or disaster which is beyond the capabilities of available state licensed ambulance services operating within the county; 
(3)  An ambulance operated from a location outside of the county in transporting patients, picked up beyond the limits of the county to locations within the county; and 
(4)  An invalid car or the operator thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1995, § 2) 
Sec. 30-33. - Staff and equipment. 
All licensed ambulances transporting ambulance patients from origins within the county shall be staffed and equipped to provide advanced life support as defined in rules of the state department of human resources chapter 290-5-30. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1995, § 2) 
Secs. 30-34—30-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - E 911 SERVICE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions set out in art. III, §§ 30-61—30-64, were reaffirmed by resolutions adopted August 12, 2008, August 14, 2012, August 13, 2013. 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 911 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 

Sec. 30-61. - Charge; exemption. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133(a) and O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(a), the board of commissioners impose upon each exchange access facility subscribed to by telephone subscribers whose exchange access lines are in the area served or which would be served by the E 911 service in the county an amount of $1.50 per month per exchange access facility provided to the telephone subscriber. All exchange access facilities billed to federal, state or local government shall be exempt from the E 911 charge. 
(Res. of 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 30-62. - Collection. 
(a)  Each service subscriber shall, on behalf of the local government, collect the E 911 charge from those telephone subscribers to whom it provides exchange telephone service in the area served by the county E 911 system. 
(b)  As part of its monthly billing process, the service supplier shall collect the E 911 charge for each month an exchange access facility is in service, and it shall list the E 911 charge as a separate entry on each bill. 
(Res. of 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 30-63. - Partial payment. 
If the service supplier receives a partial payment for a monthly bill from a telephone subscriber, the service supplier shall apply the payment against the amount the telephone subscriber owes the service supplier first. 
(Res. of 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 30-64. - 911 charge on wireless and voice over internet protocol (VoIP) connections. 
A 911 charge is imposed upon each wireless and voice over internet protocol (VoIP) telecommunication connection subscribed to by a subscriber whose billing address is within the jurisdiction of Crisp County, Georgia, at the rate of $1.50 per month per wireless and voice over internet protocol (VoIP) connection provided to each such wireless telephone subscriber. 
(Res. of 11-12-2002; Res. of 9-10-2013) 
Sec. 30-65. - Prepaid wireless 911 charge imposed. 
(a)  Charge . In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 911 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(b)  Collection . Prepaid wireless 911 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 8, with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(c)  Depositing and use of funds. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by the county from charges imposed by this section shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Ord. of 8-9-2011, §§ 1, 2, 4, eff. 1-1-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. of 8-9-2011, §§ 1, 2, 4, was not specifically amendatory. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 30-65. The provisions set out in this section were reaffirmed by resolutions adopted August 14, 2012, August 13, 2013, August 12, 2014. 
Chapter 32 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010, was not specifically amendatory. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 32-31—32-40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL 

Sec. 32-31. - Title. 
This article shall be known as Crisp County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance. 
(Res. of 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 32-32. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best Management Practices (BMP's). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Middle South Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 32-34(c) of this article. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches of geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 32-33(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation, such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: (1) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (2) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Middle South Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Res. of 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 32-33. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968. 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in 32-34 of this article and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout steams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout water, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, definitions, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 32-34(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1)—(7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county; or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of Department of Transportation or State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. ;s 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Res. of 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 32-34. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 32-34(b) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in section 32-34(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms proper design and properly designed mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term ephemeral stream means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to Part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Res. of 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 32-35. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General . The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Crisp County without first obtaining a permit from the Crisp County Planning Department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Crisp County Planning Department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 32-34(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 32-34(c)(15) and (16) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 32-34(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits . 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 32-34(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Res. of 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 32-36. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The Crisp County Planning Department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary, and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The Crisp County Planning Department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The districts or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Res. of 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 32-37. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 32-35(b)(6). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Res. of 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 32-38. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Res. of 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 32-39. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Crisp County Board of Zoning Appeals within 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review . Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Crisp County. 
(Res. of 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 32-40. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 1st day of July 2010. 
(b)  Validity . If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not effect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability . 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Res. of 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Chapter 34 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; manufactured homes, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING IN RESTAURANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Smoking in public places, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2; authority to adopt ordinances for the purpose of preserving public health, safety and welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a). 

Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
General seating area means any area of a restaurant in which the general public is seated for dining and/or drinking. 
Restaurant means an establishment for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts or other edible products for consumption on premises and which derive at least 50 percent of gross sale from food products. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
Waiting area means any enclosed area at or near the entrance of a restaurant where guests must stand or sit prior to receiving a table for dining. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1996, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-32. - Violations. 
(a)  Any violation of this article is declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this article, the attorney for the county may, upon direction of the board of commissioners, apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this article. Such application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction, and permanent injunction. 
(b)  Any person violating this article shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1996, §§ 10, 11) 
Sec. 34-33. - Declaration of hazard. 
The board of commissioners recognizes the right and need of those who wish to breathe smoke-free air and finds and declares that the smoke of tobacco, tobacco-related products and tobacco substitutes, fillers and other plants or weeds is a hazard to the health of the general public. Accordingly, it has determined that the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the county would be furthered by the regulation of smoking in restaurants with the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 34-34. - Interpretation of article. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed, interpreted or construed to restrict or to prohibit any person in charge of any public place to designate that public place as a smoke-free environment and to prohibit smoking in areas which otherwise would be permitted by this article. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed, interpreted or construed to permit smoking in any public place or area where smoking is prohibited or restricted by any other applicable law. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1996, §§ 5, 6) 
Sec. 34-35. - Designated nonsmoking areas. 
(a)  Within each restaurant in the county with a general seating capacity of 40 or more persons, at least 60 percent of the general seating area shall be set aside and designated as a nonsmoking area. Such seating must be as contiguous as feasible, and existing barriers used to the maximum extent possible to separate smoking and nonsmoking areas. No person shall smoke within the waiting area of a restaurant or in restrooms, foyers, hallways or other areas of a restaurant not in the general seating area where smoking is permitted. Effective January 1, 1997, at least 75 percent of the seating shall be set aside as a nonsmoking area. 
(b)  No person shall smoke in any nonsmoking area designated in accordance with this section or within any restaurant that has been voluntarily designated 100 percent smoke-free. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1996, §§ 3, 4) 
Sec. 34-36. - Signs. 
Signs designated "Smoking permitted" or "no smoking" with letters not less than one inch in height shall be conspicuously posted in every room, building or other place where smoking is controlled by this article, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such room, building or other place. Such signs may have additional or different wording to explain the applicable rule in a particular room or area. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1996, § 7) 
Sec. 34-37. - Private functions. 
The restrictions of this article shall not apply to rooms, halls, facilities or restaurants which are utilized for private social functions and/or meeting space and within which the seating arrangements are under the control of the sponsor of the function or event. 
(Ord. of 3-12-1996, § 8) 
Secs. 34-38—34-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 34-71. - Purpose and intent. 
The board of commissioners of the county find that excessive levels of sound are a nuisance and are disturbing to the physical, mental and social well-being of the citizens of the county as well as to their comfort, living conditions, general welfare and safety and declares to be the policy of the board of commissioners to prohibit such excessive sounds generated from or by all sources as specified in this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 34-72. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The provisions in this article shall be applicable in the unincorporated area of the county. This article shall govern any unnecessary or excessive sounds within the county's jurisdiction, except as preempted by state or federal law. 
(b)  Any person within the limits of the unincorporated area of the county shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 34-73. - Administration, interpretations. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the county administrator to administer the provision of this article and to abate any excessive sound existing in the county, whether or not such excessive sound is specifically recognized by this article. 
(b)  The board of commissioners, upon written request, shall provide interpretations concerning provisions of this article that are unclear or in dispute. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2002, § 3) 
Sec. 34-74. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the county administrator to enforce this article and to bring to the attention of the sheriff any violations or lack of compliance with this article. Citations for violations of the article shall be issued by the sheriff or his lawful deputies, and such citations shall to tried in the magistrate court under the rules of practice and procedure in that court. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the abatement of any loud and unnecessary noise as a nuisance under state law or local ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2002, § 4) 
Sec. 34-75. - Conflict with other laws. 
If this article is found to be in conflict with any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations that impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2002, § 5) 
Sec. 34-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Ambient noise level means the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged excessive sound, at the location and approximate time at which the alleged offensive noise is to be made. 
A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The level so read is designated dBA. 
Building means any structure having a roof, supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal or goods. Where roofed structures are separated from each other by party walls having no opening for passage, each portion so separated shall be considered a building. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition or similar action. 
Continuous sound means a sound the intensity of which remains essentially constant during a given period of time. Continuous sound shall be measured by the slow response setting of a sound level meter. 
Cumulative period means an accumulative period of time composed of individual time segments, which may be continuous or impulsive. 
Daytime means the local time of the day between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit of sound intensity. The faintest audible sound is arbitrarily assigned a value of 0 dB, and the loudest sounds that the human ear can tolerate are about 120 dB. The difference in decibels between any two sounds is equal to 10 log 10 (P 1 /P 2 ) where P 1 and P 2 are the two power levels. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage that demands immediate action. 
Emergency machinery, vehicle, work or alarm means any machinery, vehicle, work or alarm used, employed, performed or operated in an effort to provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for its citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
Emergency signal device means any audible warning device, such as a whistle, siren or any air horn or any similar device. 
Frequency means the number of complete cycles of a periodic process occurring per unit of time. 
Hertz means a unit of frequency equal to one cycle per second. 
Impulsive sound means a sound of short duration, usually less that one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions and the discharge of firearms. 
Intruding noise level means the total sound level, in decibels, created, caused, maintained or originating from an alleged source at a specified location while the alleged offensive source is in operation. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or use and any accessory building and uses customarily incident to it, and including open spaces not less in extent than those required in connection therewith by the subdivision, zoning, land development or other county regulations pertaining to land development. 
Lot lines means the property lines bounding the lot. 
(1)  Front lot line means, in the case of a lot abutting upon a public street, the line separating such lot from such street right-of-way. 
(2)  Rear lot line ordinarily means that lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregularly shaped lot, the county planning department shall designate the rear lot line. 
(3)  Side lot line means any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line. 
Mobile source means any moving sound source on a public right-of-way or on property used by or open to use by the public. 
Nighttime means those hours excluded from the definition of Daytime. 
Noise means sound or a sound that is loud, unpleasant, unexpected, or undesired and affects or tends to affect the mental well-being of humans. 
Noise disturbance means any sound that: 
(1)  Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; 
(2)  Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; 
(3)  Endangers or injures personal or real property; or 
(4)  Exceeds the applicable maximum permissible sound levels as they appear in the table in section 34-78. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land owned and used by the general public, railroads or utility companies for transportation or other special use. For land platting purposes, every right-of-way established and shown on an approved final plat is to be separate and distinct from adjoining lots or parcels and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for transportation and utilities shall be dedicated to public use by the marker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
Sound means a vibratory disturbance, including an oscillation, in the pressure and/or density of a liquid or gas in the particular displacement of a solid or liquid. Such disturbance takes place at a rate between approximately 20 and 20,000 Hertz and the physiological perception of such a vibration of displacement. 
Sound amplifying equipment means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. Sound amplifying equipment shall not be construed as including a standard automobile radio when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
Sound level means that which is measured with the A-weighting network on a sound level meter unless otherwise specified. 
Sound level meter means the instrument, meeting the requirements of ANSI S1.4-1971 type II rating, used for making sound level measurements. 
Sound pressure means the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by sound energy. 
Sound pressure level means the intensity in decibels of a sound. 
Stationary source means any sound source operating or occurring on any public or private property, not including a public right-of-way. 
Vibration means any movement of earth, ground or other similar surfaces created by a temporal and spatial oscillation of displacement, velocity or acceleration in any mechanical device or equipment located upon, attached, affixed or in conjunction with that surface. 
Weekday means any day from Monday through Friday that is not a legal holiday. 
Zoning district means the scheme of land use classification contained in the Unified Land Development Code of the county (appendix A to this Code). 
(Ord. of 7-9-2002, § 6) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-77. - Loud and unnecessary noises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, assist in making, permit, continue, cause to be made or continued or permit the continuance of any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person within the unincorporated area of the county, and which is audible to such person from a distance of 50 feet or more from the origin of the sound or noise. A reasonable person is defined as a person with normal hearing ability. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2002, § 7) 
Sec. 34-78. - Measurement and control of noise. 
(a)  Any decibel measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be based on a reference sound pressure of 20 micropascals as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighted network scale at slow response. 
(b)  The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point on the affected property. Interior noise measurements shall be made within the affected unit. The measurements shall be made at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source with windows in an open position depending on the normal seasonal ventilation requirements. 
(c)  The zoning districts of the county are assigned the following maximum permissible sound levels from stationary sources: 

 
(Ord. of 7-9-2002, § 8) 
Chapter 38 - MANUFACTURED HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 34; planning, ch. 46; roads and bridges, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 66; development code, app. A; manufactured home park, app. A, § 4.08; manufactured home park design standards, app. A, § 9.04. 
State Law reference— Registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-38; removal of transportable housing from lands subject to writ of possession, O.C.G.A. § 44-7-59; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.; The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.; authority of General Assembly to classify mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. VII, § I, ¶ III(b)(2)(B). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISPLAY OF MOBILE HOME DECAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Issuance of mobile home location permits; display of decals, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. 

Sec. 38-31. - Findings. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. § 48-5-493 declares that any person who shall fail to attach and display on a mobile home the decal required by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The state department of revenue has advised the county board of tax assessors that there is evidence that a substantial number of mobile homes within the county do not display a mobile home decal, and unless there is evidence of proper vigorous enforcement before January 1, 1996, county taxpayers will be subject to an additional state levy of 0.25 mills and the county will be subject to a fine of $5.00 per parcel. 
(c)  O.C.G.A. § 48-5-493(c) provides that violations of the code section may be prosecuted in the magistrate court by citation. 
(d)  The county board of tax assessors has indicated its willingness to assist the county in enforcing the law requiring the display of a decal on mobile homes. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1995) 
Sec. 38-32. - Citations. 
(a)  Prosecutions of violations within the county of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-493 shall proceed by citation in the magistrate court of the county. 
(b)  Each staff appraiser of the board of assessors of the county is authorized to issue a citation to each owner of a mobile home who fails to attach and display on the mobile home the decal required by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. Such citation shall: 
(1)  State the time and place at which the accused will appear for trial; 
(2)  Identify the offense with which the accused is charged; 
(3)  Have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the magistrate court of the county; 
(4)  Indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service; and 
(5)  Be signed by the staff appraiser who completes and serves it. 
(Ord. of 5-9-1995) 
Chapter 42 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT 

Sec. 42-31. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in reasonable fear of receiving a violent injury. 
(2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct. 
(4)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property. 
(5)  Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(6)  Jostle or roughly crowd or push any person in any public place. 
(7)  Collect with others in bodies or in crowds for any unlawful purpose. 
(8)  Utter, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets, which by their utterance tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace. 
(9)  Use fighting words to or of another, in another's presence, which by their very utterance tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace. 
(10)  Assemble or congregate with another for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another. 
(11)  Interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of violence. 
(12)  Congregate with another in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority. 
(13)  Damage, befoul or disturb public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition. 
(14)  Consume alcoholic beverages on any public street, sidewalk or any other public property within the county. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption. 
(15)  Consume alcoholic beverages, whether in a vehicle or not, on any public or private parking lot within the county. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1992, § A) 
Sec. 42-32. - Prosecution and penalties. 
Any violation of this article may be prosecuted upon citation without a prosecuting attorney. The sheriff of the county and his deputies are authorized to issue citations for violations of this article. The original of the citation shall be personally served on the accused and a copy promptly filed with the court. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it may be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the officer who completes and serves it. Any person arrested prior to the time of trial shall be permitted to post a cash bond for his future appearance in an amount established by the chief magistrate of the county. Any person arrested who fails to post such bond shall be brought before a judicial officer within 24 hours of arrest. Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1992, § B) 
Secs. 42-33—42-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 42-51. - Purpose and intent. 
The board of commissioners of Crisp County, Georgia, (hereafter the "county") finds that excessive levels of sound are a nuisance and are disturbing to the physical, mental and social well-being of the citizens of the county as well as to their comfort, living conditions, general welfare and safety, declares to be the policy of the board of commissioners to prohibit such excessive sounds generated from or by all sources as specified in this article. 
(Res. of 7-9-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 42-52. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The provisions in this article shall be applicable in the unincorporated area of Crisp County, Georgia. This article shall govern any unnecessary or excessive sounds within the county's jurisdiction, except as preempted by state or federal law. 
(b)  Any person within the limits of the unincorporated area of the county shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in this article. 
(Res. of 7-9-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 42-53. - Administration, interpretations. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the county administrator or his designee to administer the provision of this article and to abate any excessive sound existing in the county, whether or not such excessive sound is specifically recognized by this article. 
(b)  The board of commissioners, upon written request, shall provide interpretations concerning provisions of this article that are unclear or in dispute. 
(Res. of 7-9-2002, § 3) 
Sec. 42-54. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the county administrator or his designee to enforce this article and to bring to the attention of the sheriff any violations or lack of compliance with this article. Citations for violations of the article shall be issued by the sheriff or his lawful deputies, and such citations shall be tried in the magistrate court under the rules of practice and procedure in that court. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable as provided by law with each day such violations continue constituting a separate offense. Any person who fails to comply with or violates this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each offense and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the prosecution of the violation. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violations of this article, and these remedies shall be in addition to such penalties. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the abatement of any loud and unnecessary noise as a nuisance under state law or local ordinance. 
(Res. of 7-9-2002, § 4) 
Sec. 42-55. - Conflict with other laws. 
If this article is found to be in conflict with any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations that impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(Res. of 7-9-2002, § 5) 
Sec. 42-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambient noise level means the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged excessive sound, at the location and approximate time at which the alleged offensive noise is to be made. 
A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighed network. The level so read is designated dBA. 
Building means any structure having a roof, supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal or goods. Where roofed structures are separated from each other by party walls having no opening for passage, each portion so separated shall be considered a building. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition or similar action. 
Continuous sound means a sound the intensity of which remains essentially constant during a given period of time. Continuous sound shall be measured by the slow response setting of a sound level meter. 
Cumulative period means an accumulative period of time composed of individual time segments, which may be continuous or impulsive. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit of sound intensity. The faintest audible sound is arbitrarily assigned a value of 0 dB, and the loudest sounds that the human ear can tolerate are about 120 dB. The difference in decibels between any two sounds is equal to 10 log 10 (P 1 /P 2 where P 1 and P 2 are the two power levels). 
Daytime means the local time of the day between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage that demands immediate action. 
Emergency machinery, vehicle, work or alarm means any machinery, vehicle, work or alarm used, employed, performed or operated in an effort to provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for its citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
Emergency signal device means any audible warning device, such as whistle, siren or any air horn or any similar device. 
Frequency means the number of complete cycles of a periodic process occurring per unit of time. 
Hertz means a unit of frequency equal to one cycle per second. 
Impulsive sound means a sound of short duration, usually less that one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions and the discharge of firearms. 
Intruding noise level means the total sound level, in decibels, created, caused, maintained or originating from an alleged source at a specified location while the alleged offensive source is in operation. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or use and any accessory building and uses customary incident to it, and including open spaces not less in extent than those required in connection therewith by the subdivision, zoning, land development or other county regulations pertaining to land development. 
Lot lines means the property lines bounding the lot. 
(1)  Front lot line means, in the case of a lot abutting upon a public street, the line separating such lot from such street right-of-way. 
(2)  Rear lot line ordinally [ordinarily] means that lot line opposite and most distance from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregularly shaped lot, the county planning department shall designate the rear lot line. 
(3)  Side lot line means any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line. 
Mobile source means any moving sound source on a public right-of-way or on property used by or open to use by the public. 
Nighttime means those hours excluded from the definition of "daytime." 
Noise means sound or a sound that is loud, unpleasant, unexpected, or undesired and affects or tends to affect the mental well-being of humans. 
Noise disturbance means any sound that: 
(1)  Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; 
(2)  Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; 
(3)  Endangers or injures personal or real property; or 
(4)  Exceeds the applicable maximum permissible sound levels as they appear in the table in section 42-58. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land owned and used by the general public, railroads or utility companies for transportation or other special use. For land platting purposes, every right-of-way established and shown on an approved final plat is to be separate and distinct from adjoining lots or parcels and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for transportation and utilities shall be dedicated to public use by the marker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
Sound means a vibratory disturbance (including an oscillation) in the pressure and/or density of a liquid or gas in the particular displacement of a solid or liquid. Such disturbance takes place at a rate between approximately 20 and 20,000 hertz and the physiological perception of such a vibration of displacement. 
Sound amplifying equipment means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. Sound amplifying equipment shall not be construed as including a standard automobile radio when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
Sound level means that which is measured with the A-weighting network on a sound level meter unless otherwise specified. 
Sound level meter means the instrument, meeting the requirements of ANSI S1.4-1971 type II rating, used for making sound level measurements. 
Sound pressure means the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by sound energy. 
Sound pressure level means the intensity in decibels of a sound. 
Stationary source means any sound source operating or occurring on any public or private property, not including a public right-of-way. 
Vibration means any movement of earth, ground or other similar [sic] created by a temporal and spatial oscillation of displacement, velocity or acceleration in any mechanical device or equipment located upon, attached, affixed or in conjunction with that surface. 
Weekday means Monday through Friday that is not a legal holiday. 
Zoning district means the scheme of land use classification contained in the Unified Land Development Code of Crisp County. 
(Res. of 7-9-2002, § 6) 
Sec. 42-57. - Loud and unnecessary noises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, assist in making, permit, continue, cause to be made or continued or permit the continuance of any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person within the unincorporated area of the county, and which is audible to such person from a distance of 50 feet or more from the origin of the sound or noise. A reasonable person is defined as a person with normal hearing ability. 
(Res. of 7-9-2002, § 7) 
Sec. 42-58. - Measurement and control of noise. 
(a)  Any decibel measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be based on a reference sound pressure of 20 micropascals as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighted network scale at slow response. 
(b)  The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point on the affected property. Interior noise measurements shall be made within the affected unit. The measurements shall be made at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source with windows in an open position depending on the normal seasonal ventilation requirements. 
(c)  The zoning districts of the county are assigned the following maximum permissible sound levels from stationary sources: 

 
(Res. of 7-9-2002, § 8) 
Sec. 42-59. - Peaceful demonstrations, picketing and protests. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to disturb, tend to disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of others, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, safety or peace of mind of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, and no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises owned or possessed by such person or under such person's control. 
(b)  To protect the peace and good morals of Crisp County, all peaceful and lawful demonstrations, picketing and protests with the boundaries of Crisp County shall be allowed only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. local time in Crisp County. Peaceful demonstrations, picketing and protests during all other hours shall be unlawful and a violation of this section. 
(c)  Any person or persons, organization, group or entity, etc. desiring to conduct peaceful demonstrations, picketing and protests within the boundaries of Crisp County must obtain an event permit from the Director of Finance located in the Crisp County Government Center, 210 South 7th Street, Cordele, Georgia 31015. Without such permit prior to the start of the event, the event shall not proceed. 
(d)  Peaceful demonstrations, picketing and protests, by there very nature, involve differences of opinion between persons, organizations, groups, entities, etc., which if left uncontrolled may evolve into less than peaceful events through no fault of the organizers. Therefore, in order to allow the Sheriff of Crisp County to effectively execute his duty to protect the citizens of Crisp County, the following planning times are established. 
(1)  Peaceful demonstrations, picketing and protests involving 20 individuals or less shall make application to obtain an event permit at least three full working days prior to the start of the event. 
(2)  Peaceful demonstrations, picketing and protests involving 21 to 50 individuals shall make application to obtain an event permit at least five full working days prior to the start of the event. 
(3)  Peaceful demonstrations, picketing and protests involving 51 to 99 individuals shall make application to obtain an event permit at least 14 full working days prior to the start of the event. 
(4)  Peaceful demonstrations, picketing and protests involving 100 individuals or more shall make application to obtain an event permit at least 30 full working days prior to the start of the event. 
(e)  In order to maintain good order and discipline, the time, duration and location of the event shall be approved by the Crisp County Board of Commissioners or its authorized representative. The application for an event permit must contain the proposed/requested time, duration and location of the peaceful demonstration, picketing or protest. In order to provide for adequate public safety, traffic control and the placement of opposing peaceful demonstrators, picketers or protesters, this time, duration and/or location may be approved, modified, or disapproved by the Crisp County Board of Commissioners or its authorized representative in conjunction with the Crisp County Sheriff, and at their sole discretion. 
(f)  Where peaceful demonstrations, picketing and protests are conducted along county streets or roads that are paved with curb and gutter, all activities shall be along the outside edge of the sidewalk or area designated for sidewalk purposes and not more than 24 inches from the curb. 
(g)  Where peaceful demonstrations, picketing and protests are conducted along county streets or roads that are paved without curb and gutter, all activities will be off of the county, state or federal right-of-way. 
(h)  Peaceful demonstrations, picketing and protests are not permitted in streets or roads designated for vehicular traffic and any peaceful demonstrations, picketing and protests in the streets or roads or rights-of-way of those streets or roads except as specified in subsection (e) above is unlawful and a violation of this section. 
(i)  Where peaceful demonstrations, picketing and protests are to be conducted on private property, the written permission of the lawful property owner or all owners must be presented with the application for the event permit, or the application shall be deemed unacceptable. 
(j)  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of $500.00 and/or 30 days in jail. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. of 10-12-2010 was not specifically amendatory. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 42-59. 
Sec. 42-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COURTS 

Sec. 42-61. - Indigent defense services. 
(a)  Application for indigent defense services. Each person lacking the financial ability to provide for themselves, representation in said person's defense in criminal proceedings in the Magistrate and Probate Courts of Crisp County, and desiring that the county provide such services to him or her, shall submit an application to the applicable court requesting indigent defense representation and setting forth the specifics supporting their need for such indigent representation. The application shall be submitted to a judge of the court on a form approved by the court. 
(b)  Application fee. Each applicant for indigent defense services shall pay an application fee of $50.00 to the clerk of the court in which indigent defense is being sought. Such fee must be paid either at the time the application is submitted or at the time the representation is provided. 
(c)  Waiver. The fee required by subsection (b) of this section may be waived only upon order of the presiding judge scheduled to hear the case in which the applicant is seeking a waiver of the application fee. The judge may order a waiver of the fee only upon a finding by the court that the defendant is unable to pay the fee or that paying the fee would cause hardship to the defendant. 
(d)  Transfer of funds. Within 30 days after the end of each month, the clerk of the court in receipt of application fees required by subsection (b) of this section shall remit the total of all application fees collected during the previous month to the governing authority of the county. 
(e)  Separate account. The funds remitted to the governing authority pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, shall be maintained in a separate fund for "indigent defense services" and shall be expended only for the purpose of providing legal representation to indigent defendants in the Magistrate Court or Probate Court of Crisp County. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, §§ 1—5) 
Chapter 43 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 43-1—43-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY PARKS 

Sec. 43-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to help ensure the safety and security of the Crisp County Government parks and their patrons, to help provide an enjoyable park experience, and to provide consistent guidelines and levels of service throughout the park system. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-22. - Definitions. 
For purposes of these sections, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Crisp County: The Government of Crisp County, Georgia. 
(2)  Department: The Crisp County Recreation Department. 
(3)  Director: The Director of the Crisp County Recreation Department, or his/her designee 
(4)  Administrator: The Administrator of Crisp County, or his/her designee 
(5)  Motor vehicle: Any wheeled conveyance (except a wheelchair) for transportation of persons or materials whether powered or drawn by motor such as an automobile, truck, golf cart, recreational vehicle, motorcycle or scooter. "Vehicle" does not include any Crisp County fleet or emergency vehicles operating in the course of public safety or official Crisp County business. 
(6)  Park/park property: May include, but is not limited to parks, open space, greenspace, natural areas, cultural and historic sites, playgrounds, ball fields, pools, pavilions, greenways, wetlands, floodplains, lakes, rivers, beaches or water areas, and buildings and structures which are under the control of or assigned for inspection, upkeep, maintenance or operation by the department. 
(7)  Permit: A document provided by the department granting permission for use of reserved park property and which sets forth terms and conditions applicable thereto. 
(8)  Person: Any person, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, company, corporation, entity or organization of any kind. 
(9)  Pet: Any domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
(10)  Plant: Any tree, vine, shrub, flower, fungi or related living organism. 
(11)  Special event: Any organized activity open to the public, taking place on park property and having as its purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education, such as a festival or celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade or concert. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-23. - Park hours and closures. 
(a)  All parks shall be closed to the public from sunset to 6:00 a.m. except for activities approved by the director. All parks shall be open to the public during designated hours. The opening and closing hours shall be posted at each park in order to give notice to the public. 
(b)  No person shall enter or remain on park property during hours when the park is closed. The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency personnel or department employees while in the discharge of their duties, or to any person having permission by the director to be or remain in any part of the parks between such hours. 
(c)  In the interest of public safety, the director/administrator may close parks or areas within parks to public entry or otherwise restrict use until such time as the area can be made available for safe public use. Except in emergency circumstances, notice of closure shall be posted, and only authorized persons shall enter closed or restricted areas. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-24. - Buildings and other property. 
(a)  No person shall willfully mark, destroy, deface, vandalize or otherwise damage any building or other property belonging to or used by Crisp County in any park. 
(b)  No person shall construct or erect on park property any building or structure of any kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, except as part of a department program or permitted event. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-25. - Park usage. 
(a)  No person shall enter or use any park for which an entrance or use fee has been established unless each person has first paid the fee or is otherwise authorized to enter. Entrance permits or passes shall be displayed to department staff upon request. 
(b)  The director may establish rules for the proper use of park amenities such as playgrounds, splash pads, swimming pools, skateparks, etc. which shall be enforceable by park personnel. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-26. - Use of cameras and recording devices. 
No person shall use any type of camera or similar device to record or produce a visual image in any park restroom, locker room, bath house, shower facility or other area used for dressing or changing clothes. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-27. - Authority to rent or lease parks and equipment. 
The director is authorized to rent or lease the use of park facilities to individuals and private or public organizations. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-28. - Fees. 
All department fees, to include those for entrance, admission, rental, program/activity, sales revenues, non-county residents and special service/recovery, shall be set by the Commissioners of Crisp County, as from time to time amended. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-29. - Reserved areas. 
(a)  Parks and park property shall be reserved only by permit made in accordance with the department's reservation policy. Said reserved park areas may include athletic fields, group picnic shelters and associated amenities, recreation facility spaces, and those areas requested for the use of special events. 
(b)  No person shall use or occupy a reserved space except the person or party for whom the space is reserved. 
(c)  Any person having a permit issued by the department must comply with all applicable rules and regulations. Upon request, confirmation of the reservation must be displayed to department employees charged with supervision or patrolling of parks. Violations of permit requirements may result in immediate suspension or revocation of the permit. 
(d)  Department employees, in the course of authorized business, shall have the right to enter the premises of any building, structure or enclosure on park property, including those rented or set aside for the private or exclusive use of any individual or group. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-30. - Picketing or demonstrations. 
Any person, group or organization engaged in any picketing, demonstrations, assembly, gathering, procession or other activity protected by the U.S. Constitution shall be prohibited from blocking the ingress and egress of any park or park property, from disrupting or interfering with scheduled events, or preventing or being inconsistent with the intended use of the park at the proposed site of assembly. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-31. - Commercial activities. 
(a)  No person shall conduct the commercial sale of, or offer to sell any goods, ware, drinks, food or similar items nor render or offer to render any service for hire, at any park except as authorized by contract or permit issued by the director. 
(b)  No person shall place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale, trade or display of any article, material or service within any park area unless approved by the director in conjunction with a permitted use of a reserved park area. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-32. - Noise and amplified sound. 
Patrons shall preserve the peace and quiet enjoyment of the parks by observing all local ordinances and state laws governing noise and amplified sound while on park property. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-33. - Fireworks and explosives. 
No person shall possess or use any kind of firework or other explosive material or system, except by permit, in any park. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-34. - Litter. 
No person shall dump, deposit, place or throw any garbage, glass, coals, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, waste or other trash in any park except in proper receptacles where provided. Where receptacles are not provided, same shall be carried away from park property by the person or persons responsible for its presence. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-35. - Distribution of printed material. 
No person shall hand out, distribute, post, display or affix any printed material or advertisement within any park property or on any vehicle. Exceptions to this rule include the direct distribution, without charge to the receiver thereof, of handbills to any person willing to accept it; announcements of department-sponsored or sanctioned events; authorized signs located entirely within concession structures; and signs or distribution of printed materials approved by the director in conjunction with a permitted use of a reserved park area. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-36. - Motor vehicles and bicycles. 
(a)  All applicable state and local motor vehicle laws are enforceable within parks. 
(b)  Law enforcement officers may enforce all applicable state and local motor vehicle, traffic and parking laws, and enforce all rules and regulations set forth by the director within park property. Department personnel, authorized and designated by the director, may direct traffic and enforce the rules and regulations set forth by the director within park property. 
(c)  All vehicles operated on park roads must be street legal by state and local vehicle laws. 
(d)  No motorized vehicles shall be driven on the designated greenway, or the trails or paths located within parks, except those vehicles designated for the expressed use of facilitating mobility for people with disabilities, or for emergency personnel or department employees while in the discharge of their duties. 
(e)  Bicycles/non-motorized skateboards are allowed on concrete or asphalt paths within parks. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-37. - Parking. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle on park property at any place other than in the expressly designed space provided for that particular type of vehicle, unless directed otherwise by a law enforcement officer or department employee, or by official signs or markings. 
(b)  No driver or operator of any vehicle shall leave a vehicle parked on park property after posted closing hours without permission of the director. Such permission shall be posted in a conspicuous location while the vehicle is parked after hours. 
(c)  Vehicles parked in unauthorized areas that pose a threat to patron safety may be towed at the owner's expense. 
(d)  No vehicle shall be parked on park property when the parked vehicle is for the purposes of sale or repair. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-38. - Aircraft and radio-controlled devices. 
(a)  No person shall operate, direct or be responsible for any aircraft, helicopter, glider, balloon, parachute or other aerial apparatus that shall take off from, operate within, or land within park property except in emergency law enforcement situations or when permission has been obtained from the director. 
(b)  No person shall launch or operate any radio-controlled model rocket, drone, airplane, glider, boat, car or similar vehicle without permission from the director. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-39. - Firearms and other weapons. 
(a)  Having or carrying firearms or other weapons in parks shall be enforced as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-126. 
(b)  No person shall shoot or otherwise discharge a firearm, weapon, bow, arrow or similar device from within the park, or into any park from beyond the boundaries of such park. 
(c)  Subject to the requirements of applicable state law, the director may permit the possession and use of weapons in a park for recreational, educational, wildlife or natural resource management purposes, or other departmental functions under supervision, written guidelines or agreements. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-40. - Metal detectors. 
No person shall use a metal detector in any park except for official activities authorized by the director. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-41. - Abandoned property. 
No person shall abandon a vehicle or other personal property in any park. Abandoned property shall be removed, impounded and sold in conformance to Crisp County policies, or as may be determined by the administrator/commissioners. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-42. - Pets. 
(a)  Any persons bringing a pet into parks shall keep the pet on a leash and under his or her immediate personal supervision and control. Leashes used to control pets shall not be more than six feet long. 
Exception: Pets of any kind are not allowed at facilities when programs/special events are being held unless it is an event designated for pets of that nature. 
(b)  No person shall bring a pet into an enclosed park building except those qualified as service animals under the Americans with Disabilities Act, or as part of an authorized program or event. 
(c)  Any pet not under the immediate personal supervision and control of a responsible person or any pet creating a disturbance or nuisance, may be restrained, confiscated or removed from the park by authorized personnel. 
(d)  No person shall permit a pet for which he or she is responsible to be in the water of a swimming pool or designated water play area, and no such person shall permit a pet except for those qualified as service animals under the Americans with Disabilities Act, to be within the land area or beach area adjacent to the water of a swimming pool or designated water play area. Pets are not permitted to enter any natural or constructed body of water except in areas dedicated for such purpose. 
(e)  Persons bringing pets onto park property are required to carry appropriate material to remove any fecal waste left by their pets. 
(f)  Current rabies and appropriate inoculation tags must be displayed on pets at all times. 
(g)  No person shall place, abandon or leave any pet or animal in a park. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-43. - Swimming and wading. 
No person shall swim, wade or play in any natural or built water area within a park except where specifically designated, and in compliance with such rules and regulations set by the director. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-44. - Boating and fishing. 
(a)  No person shall launch or operate a vessel on park property except in areas designated for such use by the director. 
(b)  No person shall rent, hire, or operate any vessel within park property for a commercial purpose unless so permitted by the director. 
(c)  All applicable state laws pertaining to boating, fishing and licensing may be enforced within park property, including possession of a current vessel registration and a valid State of Georgia fishing license. 
(d)  No person shall fish with any device other than a pole and line or rod and reel in any park except with permission of the director. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-45. - Camping and overnight use. 
No person may erect a tent or related shelter at any time to camp, sleep or park a vehicle overnight at any park or open space, except as authorized by permit, and only in areas designated or marked for such purpose. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-46. - Fires and firewood. 
(a)  No person may light, build or maintain a fire in any park except in a device provided, maintained or designated for such purposes, or as authorized by the director. 
(b)  Use of any other grill or cooking equipment is prohibited unless otherwise authorized by the director. 
(c)  No person may cut, gather or collect wood or other combustible material at any park for use as firewood or fuel, unless authorized by the director. 
(d)  Fires or lighted grills shall not be left unattended, and any person starting a fire shall not leave the area without extinguishing said fire. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-47. - Personal risk in natural areas. 
Personal risks associated with the natural environment are inherent in parks. Native wild animals, poisonous plants, rough terrain and other natural conditions are considered a part of the visitor's experience. Park staff will make reasonable efforts to forewarn users of natural areas where assumed risks might exist; however, park users are responsible for their own health and welfare regarding natural elements and other environmental conditions when they elect to enter such areas. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-48. - Natural resource protection and preservation. 
(a)  No person shall dig, cut, break, move, excavate, disturb, remove, destroy, harm or tamper with, nor carry within, any soil, rocks, trees, shrubs, plants, mushrooms, down-timber or other wood or materials without authorization from the director. 
(b)  No person shall harm, harass, disturb the breeding grounds or habitat of, hunt, trap or remove any animal, including mammals, fish, insects, birds, reptiles, amphibians or any other living creature, including eggs and nests, from any park except upon authorization of the director. This subsection shall not apply to fish caught by an individual in possession of a valid Georgia fishing license fishing in an area designated for this activity, in accordance with state fishing regulations. 
(c)  No person shall feed any non-domesticated animal in any park unless authorized by the director. 
(d)  Park properties that are primarily in their natural state, yet provide some means of access for visitors, shall be maintained to protect the environment as well as the user. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-49. - Pollution of waters. 
(a)  No person shall throw, discharge, disturb or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, river, stream, or other body of water within park property any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(b)  No person shall bury, discharge or intentionally dispose of a toxic or hazardous substance in parks or on park property, or the state waters found therein. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-50. - Smoking. 
No person shall smoke in parks. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-51. - Alcoholic beverages. 
Possessing, dispensing, distributing or consuming alcoholic beverages in parks is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 43-52. - Penalties. 
Any violation of this chapter shall be subject to suspension of access to parks or being removed or ejected from parks without refund, as determined by the director. Park users are subject to all applicable local and state laws. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2015) 
CRISP COUNTY PARKS 
Community Park 
1205 N. 5th St. Extension 
Recreation center—Full gym, 3,000 sq. ft. banquet room, racquetball court, dance room, activities room, and administrative offices. Cary Cason Field—Regulation size football field with scoreboard surrounded by a regulation sized track. A multi-purpose athletic field and a full size pool on site. Skate park with a 100' x 90' area and ten riding elements. 
Williams Field 
1015 E. 15th Avenue 
One football field 
Standard Field 
302 N. 2nd Street 
Acre athletic complex * One lighted softball/baseball field * One concession stand 
Reid Park 
802 Jones Avenue 
7.0-acre park/play field * One lighted softball/baseball field * One comfort station/pavilion  * One concession stand * Two lighted asphalt basketball courts 
Dr. Lee Williams Park 
502 2nd Avenue E. 
1.5-acre * Three picnic areas * Four swings 
Harmon Park 
215 E. 5th Avenue 
1.8-acre neighborhood park * Two lighted basketball courts * 800 sq. ft. open air pavilion 
19th Avenue Park 
602 E. 19th Avenue 
0.5-acre neighborhood park * Playground equipment * One lighted tennis court * Picnic area * Comfort station 
Booker Park 
701 W. 22nd Avenue 
0.3-acre neighborhood park * One asphalt basketball court 
Alberta H. Anderson Park 
310 W. 2nd Avenue 
1.8-acre neighborhood park * 800 sq. ft. pavilion * One asphalt basketball court  * Playground equipment 
Turner Park 
501 E. 24th Avenue 
5-acre neighborhood park * Two lighted tennis courts * Comfort station * 14 regulation horseshoe courts * Playground equipment * Picnic area * Girl Scout building 
Rocky Point Park 
290 Swift Creek Road 
1.0-acre community park * Concrete boat ramp * Fishing dock * Picnic area * 1,500 square foot open air pavilion * Comfort area 
Loron Williams Park 
402 Lakeshore Drive 
5.0-acre community park * Concrete boat ramp * Picnic shelter * Comfort station * 5,000 square foot swimming area * 800 square foot caretaker residence * Fishing dock 
Pickins Pool 
515 W. 20th Avenue 
1.5-acre swimming pool facility * 1,700 square foot water surface area pool * 1,500 square foot bath house * 1,600 foot open air pavilion * Picnic area * Asphalt parking lot 
Youth Ball Complex 
1512 East 8th Avenue 
77-acre site * Nine baseball/softball fields * Two concession stands and scorer's towers  * Future soccer complex 
Chapter 46 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; manufactured homes, ch. 38; roads and bridges, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 66; development code, app. A. 
State Law reference— Regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-31. - Findings. 
The board of commissioners has prepared the county comprehensive plan 1992-2012 for use as a management tool in guiding planned growth and development within the county. The Middle Flint Regional Development Center, regional review agency, the state department of community affairs, and the state review agency, have determined that such plan is in full compliance with the provisions of the Georgia Planning Act of 1989 (O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.), a prerequisite for maintaining qualified local government status. 
(Res. of 3-30-1992) 
Sec. 46-32. - Adopted. 
The duly elected board of commissioners adopts the county comprehensive plan 1992-2012. 
(Res. of 3-30-1992) 
Editor's note— The county adopted a shortterm work program update to its comprehensive plan on May 13, 1997, and was certified a "qualified local government" by the state department of community affairs effective August 22, 1997. 
Secs. 46-33—46-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLANNING DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 46-71. - Created and established; transfer of powers and duties. 
There is created and established the Crisp County Planning Department. The director of county codes and development is appointed as the planning director, who shall be responsible for supervising and administering the affairs of the Crisp County Planning Department. All functions, powers, and duties of the Cordele-Crisp County Planning Commission, as the same relate to properties in the unincorporated area of Crisp County, transfer to the Crisp County Planning Department. 
(Res. of 12-11-1990) 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq. 
Chapter 50 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county saved from repeal, § 1-6(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county saved from repeal, § 1-6(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; manufactured homes, ch. 38; planning, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 66; project design standards for streets, app. A, § 9.07. 
State Law reference— Probate court's jurisdiction involving the removal of obstructions from roads, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.1; damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; state grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq.; authority to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET NAMING AND NUMBERING 

Sec. 50-31. - Penalties. 
If the owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or building refuses to comply with the terms of this article he shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $25.00 for each day he fails to comply with this article. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1984, § 3) 
Sec. 50-32. - Selecting a name. 
Street names should be pleasant sounding and easy to read so that the public, and children in particular, can handle the name in an emergency situation, and should add to the pride of home ownership. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1984, § 1) 
Sec. 50-33. - Unacceptable names. 
The following are considered as unacceptable for naming streets within the county: 
(1)  Numerical names (1st, 2nd, etc.). 
(2)  Alphabetical letters (A, B, C, etc.). 
(3)  Frivolous, complicated or undesirable names. 
(4)  Unconventional spelling. 
(5)  Compound names (use sparingly and not on short streets). 
(Ord. of 6-13-1984, § 1(101)) 
Sec. 50-34. - Name duplication. 
Similar sounding street names are considered a duplication regardless of spelling. No duplication of street names is permitted. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1984, § 1(102)) 
Sec. 50-35. - Continuity. 
The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name. The name of a new street shall not duplicate the name of an existing street. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1984, § 1(103)) 
Sec. 50-36. - Cul-de-sac. 
No separate name is to be used for a cul-de-sac that provides street frontage for three or less lots or units. The name shall be the same as that of the intersecting street. Where there is a series of long and short culs-de-sac, however, all shall have separate names. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1984, § 1(104)) 
Sec. 50-37. - Street name signs. 
Street name signs, approved by the director of public works, shall be installed by the subdivider at the intersection of all streets and highways and at such other locations as may be determined to be necessary by the director of public works. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1984, § 1(105)) 
Sec. 50-38. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  The preliminary plat of all proposed subdivisions shall show, in addition to requirements of other ordinances of the county, the proposed name of each street. 
(b)  After approval of a preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit a street naming and numbering proposal to the codes department; the street copies of a map of the overall tract illustrating street layout; the name proposed for each street and the proposed numbering for each lot; and an alphabetical list of the proposed street names, together with an alternate name for each name proposed. The public works director shall review the proposed street naming and numbering program for duplication of names, appropriateness of names, and for overall compliance with the street naming and numbering policy. The public works director may modify or amend the program as it deems necessary in order to bring it into conformance with the street naming and numbering policy. The approved street names and numbering shall be included in the final map which is submitted for approval and for recordation, and all property numbers assigned shall be assigned in accordance with this numbering map, and no other property numbers shall be used or displayed except numbers assigned in accordance with the official numbering map. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1984, § 1(106)) 
Sec. 50-39. - Characteristics of street numbering. 
Physical characteristics of street numbering on dwelling units should be such so as to minimize problems of identification for emergency and other services. 
(1)  Street numbers shall be located so as to be visible from and oriented toward the street from which address is taken. 
(2)  Street numbers shall be affixed to dwelling units. Devices providing numbering for directional assistance may be placed throughout an apartment or condominium complex. 
(3)  Residence numbers shall be limited to as few digits as necessary to carry out a local system based on village boundaries. Residence numbers shall begin with "1" or "2" at the entrance to a street and continue to the end of the street with odd numbers on the left and even numbers on the right. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1984, § 2(201)) 
Sec. 50-40. - Property numbering map. 
A property numbering map shall be prepared by the director of public works. 
(1)  On the property numbering map, U.S. 41 is designated as the north-south axis and U.S. 280 is designated as the east-west axis. Wherever possible, 100 numbers shall be allowed to each block so that the number of each consecutive block shall commence with consecutive hundreds and one. One whole number shall be assigned for every 50 feet of ground whether improved property or vacant lot on every street. 
(2)  The numbering of arterial highways shall begin at the intersection of the axis and extend to the county line. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1984, § 2(202)) 
Sec. 50-41. - Owners to purchase numbers. 
(a)  The owner, occupant or person in charge of any house or building to which a number has been assigned will be notified in writing by the county fire department of the number assigned to the house or building. 
(b)  Within 60 days after the receipt of written notification from the county as stated in subsection (a) of this section, the owner, occupant or person in charge of a house or building to which a number has been assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous manner in a conspicuous place. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of such owner, occupant or person in charge of a house or building to which a number has been assigned upon affixing the new number to remove any different number which might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned to the structure by the commission. 
(d)  Each principal building shall display the number assigned to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance may display a separate number. 
(e)  All residence and business buildings erected after June 13, 1984, shall be assigned a number in accordance with the property numbering map, as prepared by the director of public works in section 50-40, and shall purchase and display such number as provided in this section. 
(f)  The numbers affixed by the owner shall be a minimum of two inches high. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1984, § 2(203); Ord. of 4-8-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 50-42. - Numbers for new structures in subdivisions. 
(a)  Numbers will be assigned to each proposed lot or tract on the surveyor's copies of final subdivision plats by the codes department. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until the owner or developer has procured from the county the official number of the premises. Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any principal building erected or repaired after June 13, 1984, shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1984, § 2(204)) 
Sec. 50-43. - County to provide certain number signs at right-of-way. 
(a)  The county shall place numbering signs (hereafter "county signs") at or near the entrance of the driveway from rights-of-way to each house or building located in the unincorporated area of Crisp County, which signs shall remain the property of the county. 
(b)  The county signs shall be no more than 30 inches in height and no less than 18 inches in height. 
(c)  The county signs shall be placed such that reflected numbers thereof may be seen from a vehicle driving on either side of the right-of-way. Sign placement shall be located within the right-of-way, six to ten feet from the driveway edge, on the same side of the right-of-way as the house or building being identified, and shall not be located on a mailbox or mailbox post. 
(d)  County signs for multiple houses or buildings utilizing one driveway shall be displayed in a stacked manner. 
(e)  Once the county sign is placed by the county, the property owner or occupant shall maintain the visibility of the sign for use by emergency responders traveling in either direction on the right-of-way. 
(f)  The owner or occupant of the house or building which the county sign identifies shall notify the county if the sign becomes damaged, destroyed or removed. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2003, § 2) 
Sec. 50-44. - Unlawful to deface number. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, deface or take down any number placed on any property in accordance with this article, except for repair or replacement of such number. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1984, § 2(205); Ord. of 4-8-2003, § 2) 
Secs. 50-45—50-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITIES ON COUNTY RIGHTS-OF-WAY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 

Sec. 50-71. - Permit required. 
Before any utility, public or private, may install, construct, remove or relocate any equipment facility or appliance of any kind in, on, under or over the public roads and/or roads' rights-of-way of the county, it must apply for and obtain a permit from the county codes department, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6). 
(Ord. of 6-9-1998) 
Sec. 50-72. - County administrator to promulgate rules. 
The county administrator shall promulgate such rules as he deems necessary to carry out the state law provisions referenced in section 50-71. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1998) 
Sec. 50-73. - Violation. 
Any violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1998) 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 34; manufactured homes, ch. 38; utilities, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Solid waste management plan. 
The board of commissioners adopts the Crisp County Joint Solid Waste Management Plan 2007—2019. 
(Res. of 11-9-1993; Res. of 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010) 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1. 
Sec. 54-2. - Shortterm work program adopted. 
The shortterm work program update and amendment are adopted and officially incorporated into the Multi-Jurisdictional Ten Year Solid Waste Management Plan of the county. 
(Res. of 2-9-1999) 
Secs. 54-3—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-61 et seq. 

Sec. 54-31. - Findings. 
(a)  It has been determined by the board of commissioners that there is a need in the county to continue to develop and promote the efficient and environmentally safe management of solid waste by various means including the recovery, utilization and disposition of solid waste and to promote commerce and industry by continuing the processing and disposal of solid waste in an efficient and environmentally sound manner. 
(b)  It has been determined by the board of commissioners that the financing of projects, as provided by the Regional Solid Waste Management Authorities Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-50 et seq.), is necessary for the public good and general welfare of the county and will promote the general welfare of the state. 
(c)  It has been determined by the board of commissioners that it is in the public interest and is vital to the public welfare of the people of the county and the state to collect, transport, manage and dispose of solid waste and to recover and utilize resources contained in solid waste and thereby develop and promote for the public good and general welfare, trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in the county. 
(d)  The Regional Solid Waste Management Authorities Act creates in and for each county in the state a solid waste management authority for the purpose of collection, transportation, management and disposal of solid waste including recovering and utilizing resources contained in solid waste thereby promoting the public good and general welfare of the state. 
(e)  The board of commissioners, after thorough investigation, has determined that it is desirable and necessary that a county solid waste management authority be activated immediately, pursuant to the Regional Solid Waste Management Authorities Act, in order to fulfill the needs expressed in this section. 
(f)  There is determined and declared to be a present and future need for a county solid waste management authority, as more fully described and defined in the Regional Solid Waste Management Authorities Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-50 et seq.), to function within the county. 
(Res. of 3-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-32. - Activation. 
There shall be activated within the county the public body corporate and politic known as the solid waste management authority of the county, which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Regional Solid Waste Management Authorities Act. 
(Res. of 3-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-33. - Members. 
(a)  The members of the board of directors of the solid waste management authority of the county shall consist of seven members, five from the board of commissioners and two appointed by the five members from the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Each board of commissioners member named as a director shall serve as a director for the term of the lesser of four years, or for so long as they are a member of the board of commissioners. The two directors appointed by the board of commissioners shall serve four-year terms. 
(c)  The board of directors appointed in subsection (a) of this section shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Regional Solid Waste Management Authorities Act as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Res. of 3-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-34. - Audit and review procedures. 
All actions and activities of the solid waste management authority of the county shall be subject to the same audit and review procedures applicable to the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 3-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-35. - Indebtedness or obligation of county. 
Neither bonds or other obligations of the solid waste management authority nor indebtedness incurred by the authority shall constitute an indebtedness or obligation of the county, nor shall any act of the authority in any manner constitute or result in the creation of an indebtedness of the county, all as is more particularly set forth at O.C.G.A. § 12-8-59. 
(Res. of 3-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-36. - Action taken by county. 
The action taken by the board of commissioners as specified in this article is not intended in any way to affect any public corporation, industrial development or other authority previously created by legislative act or constitutional amendment including, without limitation, its existence, purpose, organization, powers or function. 
(Res. of 3-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-37—54-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SCRAP TIRE MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1. 

Sec. 54-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires, not otherwise exempted under section 391-3-4-.19(5)(g) of the Georgia Administrative Code, for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2)(i) of the Georgia Administrative Code. 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, § I) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-72. - Violation. 
Any person violating any portion of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11, or punishment within the sound discretion of the magistrate court of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, § IV) 
Sec. 54-73. - Disposal of scrap tires. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposing of all scrap tires on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to dump or permit the dumping of scrap tires at any place in the county including, without limitations, any public or private property in the county or any waters in the county unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the board of commissioners or its duly designated agent for the disposal of scrap tires and the person is authorized to use such property; 
(2)  The scrap tire is placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare and not otherwise in violation of law. 
(c)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers or tire retailers shall comply with the provisions of section 391-3-4-.19 of the Georgia Administrative Code, and shall handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., and Georgia Administrative Code chapter 391-3-4 applicable to scrap tires. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, § II) 
Sec. 54-74. - Regulation of scrap tires. 
The following regulations apply to scrap tires: 
(1)  No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any container or receptacle unless authorized by the owner of the receptacle or the county commissioners or their designee. 
(2)  No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in such container or receptacle. 
(3)  No person shall set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle. 
(4)  No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such container or receptacle. 
(5)  No dead animals shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle. 
(6)  No person shall willfully damage or alter the location of any such container or receptacle without the written consent of the board of commissioners. 
(7)  No salvage or scavenging operations shall be conducted in or around such containers or receptacles except by written consent of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-14-1998, § III) 
Secs. 54-75—54-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - YARD TRIMMINGS DISPOSAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2. 

Sec. 54-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odorfree humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and including solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including, but not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Service area means the unincorporated area of the county and the incorporated areas of any cities within the county which have not adopted an ordinance substantially similar to this article. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and green house vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. of 9-10-1996, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-112. - Violation. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 9-10-1996, § 3) 
Sec. 54-113. - Placement and disposal; prohibitions. 
(a)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located with the service area of the county. 
(b)  Prior to the completion and operation of the solid waste processing facility proposed to be constructed by the solid waste management authority of the county, it shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the service area of the county. 
(c)  Prior to the completion and operation of the solid waste processing facility proposed to be constructed by the solid waste management authority of the county, yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting or other handling. 
(d)  Prior to the completion and operation of the solid waste processing facility proposed to be constructed by the solid waste management authority of the county, yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled, or chipped, composted, used as mulch, or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. 
(Ord. of 9-10-1996, § 2) 
Secs. 54-114—54-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CLEAN COMMUNITY STANDARDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

Sec. 54-141. - Litter, foul odor, dangerous devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass on the rights of others through the neglect of property by causing or allowing unsightly litter, foul odor, or potentially dangerous devices to remain on or emanate from the property of such person, or to discard, abandon or cause such on public property or another person's private property. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.1) 
Sec. 54-142. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Building materials means any material such as lumber, brick, plaster, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing structures. 
Bulk container means a metal container of not less than four cubic yards nor larger than eight cubic yards, made of watertight construction with doors opening on top and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by specially equipped trucks. Containers shall be kept covered at all times. Hereinafter, all new bulk containers shall meet these specifications. 
Business trash means any waste accumulation of dust, paper and cardboard, excelsior, rags or other accumulations, other than garbage or household trash, which are usually attendant to the operation of stores, offices and similar businesses. 
Commercial establishment means any retail, manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, religious, governmental or other nonresidential establishment at which garbage or trash may be generated. 
Disposal site means an area, location, tract of land or a facility used or intended to be used for the disposal of solid waste, putrescible waste, hazardous waste or other waste, except it shall not include the land or facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling in which the owner, occupant or lessee of such land or facility resides. 
Garbage means the byproduct of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
Hazardous refuse means materials such as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter and explosives. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, waste materials or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled as specified in this article. 
Loading and unloading areas means space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons. 
Multiple residential unit means any duplex, apartment, group of apartments or condominium used for dwelling places of more than one family. 
Refuse means solid waste accumulations consisting of garbage, household trash, yard trash and business trash. 
Refuse receptacle means a metal or plastic container for refuse, of substantial construction, with tightfitting lids, and provided with handles and/or wheels sufficient for safe and convenient handling. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded refuse materials. 
Single residential unit means any dwelling place occupied by one family. 
Small dead animals means cats, dogs, small household pets, and other animals of similar size. 
Tree and shrubbery trimmings means waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery, cuttings or clippings, or other usually created as refuse in the case of trees or bushes. 
Yard trash means waste accumulation of lawn, grass or shrubbery cuttings or clippings and dry leaf rakings, free of dirt, rocks, large branches and bulky or noncombustible material. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-143. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect solid waste within the county, except from his own residence or business or industrial property, without first obtaining a proper permit or license for such business operation from the state department of human resources. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.3) 
Sec. 54-144. - Collection by contractors. 
The collection, transportation and disposal of refuse in the county shall be by independent contractors under the general supervision of the county administrator, as set forth in the contract. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.4) 
Sec. 54-145. - Receptacles and containers required. 
(a)  It shall be required of every person in possession, charge or control of any place in or from which building materials, business trash, industrial waste is accumulated or produced to provide and at all times to keep in a suitable place readily accessible to the county collection crews or private collection agencies, adequate and suitable receptacles and containers capable of holding all such waste materials which would ordinarily accumulate between the times of successive collections. The county administrator, or his designee, shall determine the quantity and location of such receptacles and shall determine whether the receptacles and containers are serviceable. 
(b)  All receptacles and containers required under this section shall be of safe construction and design and shall be maintained in good and serviceable condition at all times. Any receptacles or containers which do not conform to the provisions of this section or which have ragged or sharp edges or any other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof or the public generally, after proper notice, has not been replaced, may be removed as refuse. 
(c)  Under no circumstances shall any commercial establishment permit its refuse to be stored or deposited in receptacles or containers except as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, §§ 1.5, 1.6; Res. of 1-13-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 54-146. - Precollection practices. 
(a)  Refuse. All refuse shall be placed and maintained in containers as specified in section 54-145. All containers shall be kept covered at all times with tightfitting covers. 
(b)  Garbage. All garbage being placed in containers for collection shall have drained from it all free liquid, and should be wrapped, bagged or enclosed in paper or plastic material. 
(c)  Household trash. All household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its deposit in refuse receptacles. Household trash shall be combined with garbage. 
(d)  Injurious trash items. All waste material of an injurious nature, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes, and television tubes, shall be securely wrapped to prevent injury to the collection crews. 
(e)  Hazardous refuse and building materials. No hazardous refuse or building materials shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection by the county nor shall the same be collected by the county. 
(f)  Yard trash. Yard trash may be stored for collection in suitable receptacles and containers. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.7) 
Sec. 54-147. - Storing of refuse and trash. 
All accumulations of refuse and trash shall be stored or placed for collection in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse or trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property except as stated in this article. 
(2)  Blockage of storm drains. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles or containers on, upon or over any storm drain, or so close thereto as to be drawn by the elements into such storm drain. 
(3)  Unauthorized accumulations. Any accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public street, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this article, is declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited. Failure of the owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(4)  Junk. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave outside any building or dwelling any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material, junked motor vehicle, or other item which is either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition, and which is not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. Any such item or items which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of ten days after notice of violation of this subsection shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the county without further notice. This shall not apply to authorized junk dealers or currently licensed establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning or salvaging of equipment or furniture. 
(5)  Appliances. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator or other container of any kind which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing the lock or door from such appliance, refrigerator or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
(6)  Scavenging. No person, other than the owner thereof, or an agent or employee of the director of community development, shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing refuse pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any such container from the location where the container shall have been placed by the owner thereof. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.8) 
Sec. 54-148. - Collection practices. 
(a)  Bulk container. Any commercial establishment that furnishes and maintains a bulk container suitable for handling by county equipment will be serviced by the county as stated in this article, provided that such container shall be of sufficient size as specified and be approved for collection. The containers shall at all times be kept clean, neat, painted and in a good state of repair. Service shall be discontinued to establishments failing to maintain containers appropriately. Establishments utilizing bulk containers are responsible for repairing the containers for service. No service shall be given to those establishments permitting objects, obstruction or vehicles to hinder in any way the servicing of the container. Cleaning up spilled materials shall be the responsibility of the property owner or occupant. 
(b)  Holidays. Collections shall not be made on the following holidays unless otherwise specified by the county administrator: New Year's Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(c)  Industrial waste. Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the operator of the factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing such waste. 
(d)  Hazardous refuse. No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection of refuse by the county. 
(e)  Building materials. The county shall not be responsible for the collecting or hauling of building materials originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of new buildings, alterations or additions to existing buildings of whatever type or from demolition of existing structures. Such material shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor. 
(f)  Hazardous, liquid or highly combustible industrial waste. Hazardous waste, liquid waste or highly combustible industrial waste shall not be disposed of in the Cordele-Crisp County Landfill. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.15) 
Sec. 54-149. - Scattering of refuse and littering prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Throw or deposit any refuse into any public or private street or scatter refuse about or litter any public or private street, alley, or area or place. 
(2)  Throw or deposit any refuse, trash or debris in any stream, stream bed or body of water. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials within the county to transport such materials without suitable covers. This subsection shall not apply to the transportation of poultry or livestock or silage or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock. 
(c)  Any material that cannot be self-contained in a vehicle by its own weight, other than vegetation, i.e., pinestraw, leaves, etc., will be deemed litter and will be considered a violation of subsection (b) of this section. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.9) 
Sec. 54-150. - Handbills and advertising matter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place in or on any automobile in the county any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard or other literature, except with the express permission of the owner or occupant of such automobile. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place on private property any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard or other literature, except with the express permission of the owner of the property or intended recipient. This subsection shall not apply to multipage printed publications. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tack, post or nail any paper, metal, wood or other signs for advertising material of any character on any telegraph, telephone or electric light pole on any street or alley within the county. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.10) 
Sec. 54-151. - Commercial establishments. 
All commercial establishments shall store their refuse in containers as specified in this article so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about their establishments. Approved methods of containerization include refuse receptacles, bulk containers and detachable containers. Spillage and overflow shall be immediately cleaned up by such establishment when and as it occurs. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.11) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
Sec. 54-152. - Loading and unloading areas. 
All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The number of containers necessary for each area shall be as required to maintain clean, neat and sanitary premises as directed by the county administrator. The owner of the premises and the occupant thereof shall jointly and severally maintain surveillance to ensure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept clean. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.12) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 62. 
Sec. 54-153. - Parking lots. 
(a)  Obligation to furnish receptacles. All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide refuse receptacles distributed within the parking area. The county administrator shall have the authority to determine the number and types of receptacles necessary to provide proper containerization. Such receptacles shall be weighted or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the manager of the parking lot to collect the refuse and trash deposited in such containers and store this material in an approved location. 
(b)  Obligation to use receptacles. It shall be the obligation of all persons using the parking areas to use such refuse receptacles or containers as provided for in subsection (a) of this section for the purpose intended, and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, scatter or throw upon any such parking lot any refuse, garbage or trash of any kind. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.13) 
Sec. 54-154. - Construction sites and demolition sites. 
All construction and demolition contractors shall provide onsite refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials and other trash produced by those working on the site. The site shall be kept in a litter-free condition. The number of refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers shall be determined by the size of the job. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris deposited upon any public or private property as a result of construction or demolitions shall be removed by the contractor upon completion of the construction. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.14) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
Sec. 54-155. - Special refuse disposal. 
(a)  Contagious disease refuse. The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for county collection. 
(b)  Hypodermic instruments. No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse, such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof, by wrapping or securing the syringe in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection person. 
(c)  Cardboard boxes and cartons. Prior to depositing refuse for collection in authorized containers or receptacles or in commercial containers, the person disposing of any such boxes or cartons or the person in charge of the premises shall collapse all cardboard boxes and cartons. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.16) 
Sec. 54-156. - Vehicle required for collection and disposal. 
All persons who desire to haul refuse over the county roads shall use a vehicle provided with a cover and operate it so as to prevent refuse from being dropped, blown or spilled. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.17) 
Sec. 54-157. - Responsibility of owners and agents. 
The owners or agents, tenants or lessees of all residential units and commercial establishments shall be responsible for compliance with this article. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.18) 
Sec. 54-158. - Maintenance of property. 
(a)  Property. All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a litter-free condition. 
(b)  Sweeping into sidewalks or streets. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street or sidewalk the accumulation of litter from any building or property. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 1.19) 
Sec. 54-159. - Abandoned motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful to abandon any motor vehicle as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. Any motor vehicle abandoned within the county shall be disposed of by the proper authorities as provided in O.C.G.A. ch. 36-60. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 2.1) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 62. 
Sec. 54-160. - Nuisance designated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance on his property or property occupied by him, or to allow a nuisance to remain on his property or property occupied by him. Dead animals, stagnant water, decayed vegetables or fruits, filthy privies or stables, or anything having an offensive odor, or anything that causes injury or damage to the health or life of any other person are declared nuisances. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 3.1) 
Sec. 54-161. - Trash and weeds; duty of person responsible. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain premises, including vacant lots or land, upon which trash, garbage or miscellaneous refuse is permitted or caused to accumulate in any manner which is, or may become, a nuisance, or cause injury to the health or welfare of residents in the vicinity or may injure neighboring property. Drive-in restaurants and other food establishments that permit carry-out food service shall maintain at all times on their premises sufficient receptacles for the disposal of trash, garbage and miscellaneous refuse. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, cause or permit uncut grass or weeds on any property under such circumstances that the grass or weeds are breeding places for insects, rodents or reptiles or is a fire hazard. 
(c)  If the person responsible for the conditions described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section has not acted to correct the violation after notice to him by the county administrator, the county administrator, or his agents or designee, may enter upon the premises where the violation occurs and remove the trash, garbage or refuse, or cut the grass or weeds, and the county shall assess costs incurred by it. This shall be a charge against the person responsible, and shall be a lien against the property from which the trash, garbage or refuse was removed, or the grass or weeds were cut. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 3.2) 
Sec. 54-162. - Duties and responsibilities of inspectors; penalties for noncompliance. 
The county administrator, or the inspector designated by him, shall substantiate complaints of violations of any provisions of this article. They shall determine if there has been a violation and initiate requests for compliance with this article by the person violating this article. The county administrator or his designated inspectors shall be authorized to issue citations against any violator and such citations shall conform to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. All violators of this article shall be prosecuted in the magistrate of the county. Upon conviction of a violation hereof the violator shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. The county sheriff, his lawfully appointed deputies, the county administrator or inspector appointed by him shall substantiate complaints of violations of any provisions of this article. The county sheriff, his deputies, or the county administrator or his designated inspector shall be authorized to issue citations against any violator and such citations shall conform to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 3.3; Res. of 1-13-1987, § 2) 
Sec. 54-163. - Authorized disposal sites. 
(a)  All domestic and other acceptable refuse shall be delivered and deposited at authorized disposal sites in accordance with the directions and orders of the county administrator or his representative in charge of operations, except, however, privately operated sites may be used for the sanitary disposal permits, as required by the regulations of the state department of public health, entitled "solid waste collection and disposal". 
(b)  All solid waste shall be disposed only at approved disposal sites within the county unless the board of commissioners otherwise grants permission. 
(c)  An application for permission to transport solid waste to a disposal site outside of the county or to a nonapproved site within the county must be presented to the Crisp County Board of Commissioners on a form supplied by the county landfill operator. 
(1)  The Crisp County Board of Commissioners shall approve or deny such application upon consideration of the effect of such disposal on the public health and welfare. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 4.1; Ord. No. 2005-1, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 54-164. - Designation of disposal sites. 
Public sites approved for the disposal of refuse shall be designated by appropriate signs posted near the roadside at the location of the Cordele-Crisp County Sanitary Landfill. Such sites shall be maintained in use until permanently closed, at which time additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting of signs and through the press. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 4.2) 
Sec. 54-165. - Operating hours. 
Authorized public disposal sites shall be operated Monday through Friday of each week, with the exception of the holidays listed in section 54-148(b), from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., inclusive. During such hours, acceptable refuse generated in the county shall be received for disposal from any resident of the county. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 4.3) 
Sec. 54-166. - When use authorized; ownership of waste. 
No person shall enter a disposal site except when an attendant is present and during the hours and days prescribed in section 54-165. All materials delivered and deposited for disposal on the grounds or disposal sites shall be the property of the city of county. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 4.4) 
Sec. 54-167. - Scavenging prohibited. 
No person shall be permitted to scavenge or reclaim any refuse which has been delivered to a public disposal site for disposal. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 4.5) 
Sec. 54-168. - Classification of refuse for disposal. 
(a)  Domestic refuse. The following types of refuse shall be classed as "domestic refuse" and shall be accepted for disposal: 
(1)  Garbage. 
(2)  Refuse. 
(3)  Building materials. 
(4)  Business trash. 
(5)  Household trash. 
(b)  Industrial waste. The following types of waste shall be classed as "industrial waste" and shall not be accepted for disposal: 
(1)  Industrial waste. 
(2)  Hazardous refuse. 
(c)  Building materials. Building materials shall be accepted for disposal upon payment of a fee which shall be determined by the director of community development and shall be paid at the time such material is accepted for disposal. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 4.6) 
Sec. 54-169. - Permit and acceptance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited on land under his ownership and control any refuse without first having obtained a disposal area permit as required by the regulations of the state department of public health, chapter 170-S-27, entitled "solid waste collection and disposal," and acceptance of the site for such use and purpose by the director of community development. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 4.7) 
Sec. 54-170. - General maintenance. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 4.8) 
Sec. 54-171. - Right to enter to inspect. 
The county administrator, his designated representative, or authorized representative of the department of public health, shall be permitted to enter private disposal sites at any time during normal business hours for free and unhindered inspections to determine compliance with this article and all other pertinent laws and regulations. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 4.9) 
Sec. 54-172. - Burning prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall set fire to, or burn any papers or other refuse deposited at any disposal site or on the grounds thereof. 
(b)  No garbage or other materials, from which offensive odors emanate during combustion, shall be burned outside of any building. 
(Res. of 9-9-1986, § 4.10) 
Secs. 54-173—54-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONVERSION OF LANDFILL FUND TO ENTERPRISE FUND 

Sec. 54-201. - Findings. 
The City of Cordele and the county have entered into an intergovernmental agreement providing for, among other things, the county to be the sole owner of and solely responsible for the development and operation of the county landfill, which shall include, without limitation, balefill development and operation. The revenues and expenses of the county landfill have been accounted for as a special revenue fund, as that term is defined by the governmental accounting standards board. The financial director of the county has recommended that the revenues and expenses of the county landfill be accounted for as an enterprise fund, as that term is defined by the governmental accounting standards board. The state department of community affairs has developed a system of accounting (hereafter "full cost accounting system") to help local governments comply with the various reporting requirements of the state's Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act. 
(Res. of 6-14-1996) 
Sec. 54-202. - Accounting method. 
(a)  Effective July 1, 1996, the costs and revenues of the operation of the county landfill, including any expansion thereof, shall be accounted for as an enterprise fund, which is designated and shall be known as the county landfill enterprise fund. 
(b)  The full cost accounting system developed by the state department of community affairs is adopted as the system for accounting for the county landfill enterprise fund. 
(Res. of 6-14-1996) 
ARTICLE VII. - RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 54-203. - Application. 
This article applies to the preparation, storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of all residential solid waste in the area under the jurisdiction of the county within the unincorporated areas of the county. It prescribes rules and regulations, therefore, regulates the private collection of solid waste, and prohibits the dumping of solid waste within the district. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-204. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Agreement means any agreement, including exhibits and any amendments thereto, agreed to by the county and the contractor during the term of the agreement. 
Bags means plastic sacks furnished by customer designed to store refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by top. Total weight of bag and its contents shall not exceed 50 pounds. 
Bulky waste means white goods (stoves, freezers, dishwashers, trash compactors, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, dryers, water heaters, air conditioners), furniture and other waste materials not included: (construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste or stable matter) with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for containers. (This item does not include yard waste.) 
Bundle means newspapers and magazines securely tied together forming an easily handled package not exceeding 50 pounds in weight. (May be bagged or otherwise containerized in lieu of being tied together.) 
Collection equipment means equipment used on a contract which shall not exceed seven years in age. 
Commodity means material that can be sold in a spot or future market for processing and use or reuse. Each commodity shall retain its own identity and be kept separate. 
Commodity buyer means a buyer or processor of material described in this section. 
Construction debris means waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations. 
Container—Solid waste (or roll-out solid waste container) means a roll-out receptacle with a capacity of 90 to 100 gallons constructed of plastic, metal, or fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for lifting and having a tight fitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by vectors. The mouth of a container shall have an opening greater than or equal to that of the base. The containers shall be dark green in color bearing the county's name. 
Container—Recyclable materials means a receptacle with a capacity of 18 gallons designed for the purpose of curbside collection of recyclable materials. The receptacle shall be one made of hard plastic and shall be dark green in color. 
Contract documents means the request for proposals, instructions to contractors, contractor's proposal, general specifications, the contract performance bond and any addenda or changes to the foregoing documents agreed to by the county and the contractor. 
Contractor means the person, corporation, or partnership performing or proposing to perform refuse collection and disposal under contract with the county. 
County means the County of Crisp, Georgia or Crisp County, Georgia. 
Dead animals means animals or portions thereof that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or killed for commercial or human use. 
Disposal site means a refuse depository including, but not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills, construction/demolition landfills, transfer stations, incinerators, and waste processing/separation centers licensed, permitted or approved by all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction and requiring such licenses, permits, or approvals to receive for processing or final disposal of refuse and dead animals. The disposal site is the Crisp County landfill. All waste shall be disposed of at this facility by the contractor. 
Garbage or putrescible waste means any and all dead animals of less than 20 pounds in weight, except those slaughtered for human consumption; every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable, and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains, or other animal or vegetable matter (including, but not by way of limitation, used tin cans, and other food containers; and all putrescible or easily decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to attract files or rodents); except (in all cases) any matter included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste, rubbish, yard waste, or stable matter. 
Hazardous waste means waste, in any amount, which is defined, characterized or listed as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate state agency by or pursuant to federal or state law, or waste, in any amount, which is regulated under federal or state law. The term "hazardous waste" shall also include lead acid batteries, acid, fertilizer, bulk insecticides, motor oil, gasoline, and liquid paint. 
Producer means an occupant of a residential unit who generates refuse. 
Recyclable material(s) means newsprint; aluminum and bi-metal cans; HDPE clear plastic milk jugs, and PET plastic soft drink containers. 
Refuse or residential refuse. This term shall refer to residential refuse, rubbish, and bulky waste, construction debris and stable matter generated at a residential unit unless the context otherwise required. 
Residential unit means a dwelling within the unincorporated area of Crisp County occupied by a person or group of persons comprising not more than four families. A residential unit may be deemed occupied by the county when either water or domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether of single or multi-level construction, consisting of four or less contiguous or separate single-family dwelling units, shall be treated as a residential unit, except that each single-family dwelling within any such residential unit shall be billed separately as a residential unit. 
Rubbish means all waste wood, wood products, chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials not included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, garbage, hazardous waste or stable matter. 
Stable matter means all manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable, or any animal, livestock, or poultry enclosure, and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry, or livestock. 
Yard waste means leaves, brush, grass, clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silva cultural operations. Yard waste may be bundled, stacked, or bagged. The maximum size on yard waste will be limbs less than three inches in diameter and three feet long. This item does not include land clearing debris. 
White goods means freezers, dishwashers, trash compactors, refrigerator, stoves, water tanks, water heaters, washers, dryers, and similar items. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-205. - Findings. 
The board of commissioners hereby finds that the public health of the citizens of the county would be adversely affected should individual citizens be allowed to dispose of solid waste upon their own private property. The board of commissioners finds that it would be in the public interest for the board to pass an ordinance further regulating garbage and solid waste collection and disposal in the district. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-206. - Boundaries, qualified private company. 
The boundaries of the district shall be all of the property situate, lying and being in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-207. - Use of receipts. 
All fees imposed herein below within the district shall be used and appropriated to pay the cost of collection, storage and/or disposal service within the district, and the necessary related expenses associated therewith by the county, franchisee, contractor collector, or county's designee, including, but not limited to, the purchase of solid waste collection, storage, and/or disposal vehicles, trailers and other equipment; the construction and operation of solid waste collection, storage, and/or disposal collection and/or transfer stations; transportation costs to the disposal site and/or transfer site; tipping fees and disposal charges; and such other costs and expenses as may be deemed needed from time to time by the board of commissioners in order to collect, store and/or dispose of solid waste generated within the district. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-208. - Preparation and storage generally. 
It shall be the duty of both the occupant and owner of every residential unit located in the district to keep all solid waste generated by each such residential unit, pending collection and disposal by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee, as follows: 
(1)  Solid waste shall be free from excessive liquid and placed in plastic bags, containers, or bundles or roll-out solid waste container. One 90—100-gallon roll-out solid waste container shall be provided to each residential unit by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee for use by that residential unit only, for solid waste storage and disposal purposes. 
(2)  Solid waste shall be bagged and placed in the roll-out solid waste container. Such containers must be kept clean by the residential unit. Yard waste consisting of leaves and grass clippings shall be placed in bags for collection and disposal. Solid waste containers must be placed at curbside by 5:00 a.m. on regular collection days or on the next collection day, if the regular collection day falls on a holiday. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-209. - Collection of refuse generally. 
(a)  The county shall have the exclusive right to collect and dispose of all residential solid waste within the district either through employees of the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee issued to a person engaged in the business of residential solid waste collection and disposal. No person shall collect or dispose of any residential solid waste within the district except as provided for herein and except with the express permission of the county. Any waste carried directly to the Crisp County landfill must be tarped or otherwise covered to prevent litter and debris from leaving the vehicle. 
(b)  The county, franchisee, contractor collector, or county's designee will collect solid waste within the district under the following conditions: 
(1)  Garbage will be collected once each week from residential unit. Yard waste shall be collected from each residential unit two times per month on regularly scheduled days. 
(2)  The county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee may decline to collect: 
a.  Garbage and rubbish contained in containers larger than 100 gallons; 
b.  Any containers that contain excessive liquid; or 
c.  Any garbage or rubbish not properly placed on the collection day. 
(3)  The county shall not be responsible for collection of: 
a.  Construction debris; 
b.  Commercial solid waste; or 
c.  Bulky waste. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-210. - Fees generally. 
(a)  The fees for collection of residential solid waste levied pursuant to the terms of this article, and all late charges accruing thereon are hereby levied severally against the owner and occupant of each residential unit, including all residential units located in mobile home courts and/or trailer courts. 
(b)  The fees and late charges, prescribed in this section shall constitute a continuing lien against the real property upon which each residential unit is located; on the personal property composing a residential unit, and upon the personal property of the occupant of each residential unit, until paid. 
(c)  The fees and late charges, prescribed in this section shall be billed in the following manner: Each residential unit or premises shall be billed by separate bill. Failure to pay the aforesaid sanitation services shall result in the collection of the aforesaid fees by any and all legal remedies available to the county. 
(d)  The monthly fees for solid waste collection hereby levied shall be due and payable as instructed on the bills, and if the same are not paid by 60 days after the due date, there is hereby levied a late charge equal to 25 percent of the amount due. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-211. - Fee rates. 
The fees for the collection and disposal of residential solid waste within the district shall be established from time to time by action of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-212. - Reserved. 
Sec. 54-213. - Payment. 
The county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee shall prepare and mail to each residential unit in the district, a quarterly bill showing the amounts of the monthly installments due in advance for residential solid waste collection services. These statements shall be prepared quarterly in advance and each quarterly payment shall be paid in advance by the owner or occupant of each residential unit. A late payment penalty shall be imposed upon each account for which payment is not made within the time limits prescribed thereon. Service may be terminated to accounts not paid within 30 days after the due date. Accounts remaining unpaid more than 60 days after the due date are subject to penalties as provided in section 54-221 herein. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-214. - Non-liability. 
(a)  Whenever the owner or occupant of a residential unit from which solid waste is collected by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee authorizes or permits the use of private driveways or other portions of private property for such collection, such authorization or permission, whether express or implied, shall be deemed to constitute a waiver on the part of the owner or occupant of the residential unit of any claim for damages against the county, its officers, agent, employees, franchisees, and contractors which result from the use of such private property in the collection process. 
(b)  The county or any person or entity acting as its franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee pursuant to franchise or contract shall be deemed to have been invited and authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collection of solid waste in those cases where other than curbside collection has been requested by the owner or occupant of a residential unit and approved by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-215. - Use of facilities required. 
The owner and occupant of each residential unit, including residential units located in mobile home courts and trailer courts, shall dispose of solid waste only by means of a collection and disposal service provided by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-216. - Termination of service. 
Whenever a residential unit becomes vacant, destroyed by fire or other casualty, or is demolished or for some other similar reason no longer generates solid waste, it is incumbent severally upon the owner and former occupant of such residential unit to notify the county of the same. The county may cause such investigation of the report as it deems appropriate and if the county finds the same to be consistent with the provisions hereof, the residential unit in question shall be removed from the solid waste collection list and the fee charge shall thereupon cease. Until such notice shall have been received by the county, however, the fee shall continue to be charged and shall continue to be collectible, notwithstanding the fact that service is not in fact rendered to the residential unit. Similarly, if service has been discontinued pursuant to a notice as provided in this section, but is thereafter resumed, or if land which previously vacant has been improved with a residential unit and begins to receive service, it shall be incumbent on the owner and occupant, severally, to notify the county of such commencement of or resumption of service. The fee prescribed in this article shall be payable for such property from and after the date of resumption of service, whether or not notice has been received. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-217. - Resumption of service. 
The county may charge a fee for resumption of service to the owner and/or occupant of a residential unit where service has been previously discontinued. The amount of such fee shall be that as set from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-218. - Unlawful disposal of refuse, garbage, or rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or bury or cause to be dumped or buried any garbage, refuse, solid waste, or rubbish anywhere in the area of the district not previously approved by the appropriate state authorities. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-219. - Violations of article generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and intentionally violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully and with intent to defraud the county, to evade or defeat or attempt to evade or defraud any fee, penalty, or interest due the county or the payment thereof, imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-220. - Unlawful burning. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or attempt to burn or cause to be burned any material of any nature in any container belonging to or used by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee for residential solid waste collection purposes. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-221. - Penalty for violations. 
Each violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. Violations may be tried upon citations with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-6, et seq. Citations shall be issued by the sheriff's department or its designee. Service upon corporations, partnerships, or other entities and organizations shall be affected by serving any managing agent located in the county, or by serving the registered agent, or any officer or partner of the corporation, partnership, organization or entity. The provisions of this article may also be enforced through the use of other remedies, such as injunctive relief, provided by the laws of this state. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-222. - Reserved. 
Sec. 54-223. - Violations by entities. 
Whenever a corporation, partnership, organization or other entity shall violate any of the provisions of this article such violations shall be deemed to be also that of the individual directors, officers, or agents of such corporation, partnership, organization or other artificial entity who shall have authorized, ordered or done any of the acts constituting in whole or in part such violation. In such cases, service shall also be made upon the individual director, officer, or other agent accused of authorizing, ordering, or doing acts constituting in whole or in part violations of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-224. - Placement. 
The owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of each residential unit shall, no later than 5:00 a.m. on the normal pickup days designated by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee, place the containers at the location established by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee for pickup. Containers shall be removed from the location to the premises of the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of each such residential unit no later than 24 hours after pickup on the normal day of pickup, subject only to the exceptions enumerated in section 54-225. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-225. - Placement—Exceptions. 
The following are excepted from section 54-224. 
(1)  Any person with documented disabilities, because of age or physical condition, living in a residential unit where there is no resident or occupant thereof physically capable of placing the container at the designated pickup location shall notify the county and if the county shall find that there is no one in or upon the residential unit on a regular basis physically capable of placing the container at the designated pickup location, then the county may arrange for the solid waste to be picked up at the place on the premises of the residential unit where the container is maintained by the occupant. 
(2)  The county may establish exceptions for designated residential unit which are determined to be unsuitable for curbside pickup, taking into consideration the terrain, features or other physical impediments, and at such premises, pickup service shall be provided to residential units as determined by the county; or in the alternative, the occupant may be instructed to place only plastic; securely tied bags at a designated location on a scheduled pickup days. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-226. - Removal from premises. 
The roll-out solid waste container furnished by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee shall not be removed from the premises of the residential unit to which they are delivered and it shall be the duty of the occupant of the residential unit, if the dwelling is to be vacated by the occupant, to notify the county seven days prior to the vacancy. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-227. - Replacement. 
If a container previously furnished by the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee to any residential unit is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of the residential unit to immediately notify the county and to cooperate with the board of commissioners and the county sheriff in investigating the cause of the damage, destruction, or theft. Further, the owner or occupant shall, if requested to do so, appear in the appropriate court as a witness should a prosecution result from the investigation. A replacement container shall be furnished to the residential unit and such unit may be charged a replacement fee as determined by the county. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-228. - Additional containers. 
Additional containers may be obtained by each residential unit upon payment of an additional monthly fee to the county, franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee as may be set from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Sec. 54-229. - Damaging containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and intentionally damage or destroy or to allow or permit damage to or destruction of any container provided by the county, its franchisee, contract collector, or county's designee. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2013; Ord. of 8-2-2013) 
Secs. 54-230—54-250. - Reserved. 
Chapter 58 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(14); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-221 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Procedures for correction of errors found in county tax records. 
The board of commissioners does hereby approve the following policies relative to the correction of errors in the Crisp County tax records and the making of adjustments as to taxes, penalties, and interest due by taxpayers, so long as, in the case of claims, said claims are made within three years of the date of the payment of the tax, penalty or interest, as follows: 
(1)  Uncollectible bills for taxes due on personal property and prebilled mobile homes that are no longer located within Crisp County, and where neither property nor the taxpayer can be located within the state and made subject to levy or garnishment, shall be added to the insolvency list by the tax commissioner, which list shall be submitted to the governing authority under oath at least annually to be approved by the governing authority and placed in the minutes so as to authorize the purging of such uncollectible accounts from the tax commissioner's digest. Upon approval by the board of commissioners, the tax commissioner shall send a copy of the insolvency list to the board of assessors, in order to remove such accounts from future digests. 
(2)  Obvious clerical errors in the Crisp County tax records may be corrected by the board of assessors with such officers thereafter reporting such changes or corrections to the board of commissioners and to the respective taxing authorities. 
(3)  In a disputed case where there is no obvious error, the board of assessors shall forward a recommendation for approval or non-approval to the board of commissioners, and shall provide the information set forth at subsection (4) hereof. 
(4)  Any and all adjustments, other than those specified hereinabove, shall be submitted by the tax commissioner and board of assessors to the board of commissioners with the recommendations for the relief (if any) to be granted whether it is the forgiveness of tax, penalty or interest or the refund of any such items. Each such request shall be accompanied by a claim for refund or cancellation form, with a sufficient statement of circumstances so as to convey to the commission the reasons for the requested adjustment. 
(5)  For adjustments set out in subsection (2) of this section, the board of assessors shall forward the forms to the tax commissioner's office for change. For adjustments set out in subsection (3), the board of assessors office shall forward the forms to the board of commissioners. After the decision of the board of commissioners pursuant to subsection (3) or (4), the forms shall be returned to the board of assessors' office for adjustments (if any) for future digests and to the tax commissioner for notification to the taxpayer. 
(Res. of 2-8-2005) 
Secs. 58-2—58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 58-31. - Levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of the depository financial institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Depository financial institution shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 58-32. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution, pursuant to section 58-31, shall be $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 58-33. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to the tax required by this article shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. The return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1983, § 3) 
Sec. 58-34. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 58-33 unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1983, § 4) 
Sec. 58-35. - Administrative provisions. 
The office of the board of tax assessors of the county is designated as the office to administer the assessment and collection of the taxes levied pursuant to this article. The chief appraiser of the county is directed to forward a copy of this article to each depository financial institution in the county and to the home office of each such depository financial institution if located outside the county. 
(Ord. of 10-11-1983, § 5) 
Secs. 58-36—58-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 

Sec. 58-71. - Enumeration of exempt tangible personal property. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2, there shall be exempt from taxation 100 percent of the value of the tangible personal properties set forth in this section unless changed by further resolution of the board of commissioners: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the state. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing or production operations in the state. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside the state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the state from outside the state. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in the state. 
(Res. of 12-8-1987) 
Secs. 58-72—58-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JOINT SALES AND USE TAX 

Sec. 58-101. - Authorization. 
A joint sales and use tax at the rate of one percent is levied pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-8-82 effective January 1, 1980. 
(Res. of 11-15-1979) 
Secs. 58-102—58-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL COUNTY ONE PERCENT SALES AND USE TAX 

Sec. 58-131. - Sales and use tax. 
There is authorized to be levied and collected within the county an additional sales and use tax in the amount of one percent on all sales and uses as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq. for a period of 20 consecutive calendar quarters commencing on the date of the expiration of the sales and use tax currently in effect. 
(Res. of 5-9-2000) 
Editor's note— The ordinance providing for the sales and use tax is being published in an abbreviated form for reference. An official copy enumerating the projects authorized to be financed, their estimated cost, manner of election, and other matters is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Secs. 58-132—58-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXCISE TAX ON ROOMS, LODGINGS AND ACCOMMODATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 1-12-2016 amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, §§ 58-161—58-168, pertained to hotel-motel excise tax and derived from Res. of 1-12-1988, §§ a—i, k—m; Res. of 2-8-1988. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 58-161. - Title. 
This article may be cited as the Crisp County Excise Tax on Rooms, Lodgings and Accommodations. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-162. - Authorization citation. 
This article is enacted by virtue of the powers set out in O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 13, art. 3, § 51(a)(3). 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-163. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to enact an excise tax upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by or required to pay business or occupational taxes to, the county for operating within the special district a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, rental cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-164. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein, except when the context clearly indicates a contrary meaning. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means the primary documentation produced by a hotel or other facility that demonstrates interaction between the operator and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room means a room or rooms occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel/motel/cabin/residence/lodge means any structure or any portion of a structure including any lodging house, studio, hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, rental cabin, or private club containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. 
Hotel motel tax supervisor means the individual appointed by the county, or the individual of any office of the county which may in the future be designated as the administrative entity to collect the tax. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Operator/innkeeper means any person operating a hotel/motel (as set out herein) in Crisp County, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sub lessee, lender in possession, licensee, online travel companies, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel/motel, including private owners who rent or lease private residences for more than two days in any one year. 
Occupant means any person (or persons utilizing as a single unit) who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess, any room or hotel or motel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, agreement or otherwise. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or motel, or the right to use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or apartment. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who as of a given date shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guest room in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust receiver, trustee, syndicate, business entity, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, to include the plural as well as the singular number, excepting, however, the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the governing authority of Crisp County is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent means the considerations or value received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of all kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-165. - Tax rate. 
There is hereby set and levied on the occupant of a guest room of any hotel/motel/cabin/residence/lodge located within the special district a tax in the amount of five percent of the gross rent for such occupancy. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-166. - Effective date. 
The tax herein imposed shall be paid upon any occupancy occurring on or after October 1, 2011, including, but not limited to such occupancy that was entered into pursuant to a contract, lease or other agreement entered into prior to such date. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-167. - Exemption from tax. 
No tax shall be levied pursuant to this article under the following situations: 
(1)  No tax shall be levied under this section for the use of meeting rooms. 
(2)  No tax shall be levied under this section for the use of any jail cell, detention center or other building where such housing or detention is under legal restraint. 
(3)  No tax shall be levied under this section for the use of any hospital medical treatment facility. 
(4)  No tax shall be levied under this section upon the fees or charges for any room, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days to the State of Georgia employees or officials when traveling on official business. 
(5)  No tax shall be levied under this section upon the fees or charges for any room, lodging or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days to local government employees or officials when traveling on official business. 
(6)  No tax shall be levied under this section for rentals over 30 consecutive days. 
(7)  No tax shall be levied under this section upon any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty or natural disaster. 
(8)  No tax shall be levied under this section where the room, lodging or accommodation is within the city limits of the City of Cordele, for and during such period of time that the City of Cordele shall have imposed a similar tax. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-168. - Exemption—Permanent residences. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-169. - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator providing lodging accommodations within the jurisdictional boundaries of Crisp County to collect and remit the tax on occupants as imposed herein. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-170. - Registration of operator. 
Every person engaging in or about to engage in the business of providing lodging accommodations, as above defined, in the special district shall immediately register said business with the Crisp County Finance Director, as the duly authorized representative of Crisp County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, on a form provided by the Crisp County Finance Department for such purpose. Persons engaged in such business must so register no later than 30 days after the date this section becomes effective, but such grace period for the filing of the registration after the effective date of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of such tax on and after the date of imposition thereof. 
(1)  The required registration hereunder shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business; the location of the place or places of business, the mailing address of the business, the principal contact person at said business and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(2)  The registration shall be signed by the owner (if a natural person), by an officer (if a corporation) or a partner (if a partnership). 
(3)  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. However, a realtor offering cabins for rent shall be deemed to be one place of business and shall not require a separate registration for each cabin rented. 
(4)  An operator offering more than one cabin or unit for rent under the same federal and state tax identification number shall be required to file the same number of returns as required by the State of Georgia for the filing of state sales tax returns. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-171. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator as hereinabove provided, the Crisp County Finance Director as the duly authorized representative of Crisp County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, shall issue to such operator a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupant. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business or person to which it relates. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-172. - Due date and required report. 
All taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable to the Crisp County Board of Commissioners monthly, on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective month in which taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for a period, and such other information as may be required by the Crisp County Finance Director or governing authority of Crisp County. 
In the event that an operator is permitted under applicable state guidelines to make quarterly sales tax returns to the State of Georgia, said operator shall be permitted to make quarterly sales tax returns to Crisp County, Georgia. At the time of registration, the operator shall indicate that he is permitted to make quarterly sales tax returns together with month and day said quarterly returns are due. The failure of the operator to indicate that he is permitted under applicable state statue to file quarterly reports will infer that monthly reports are due and collectable. 
At the time any such report is due, the operator shall file a copy of the corresponding state sales tax return for the sole purpose of verifying the sums reported and due. 
In the event an operator is permitted under applicable state guidelines to file annual excise, or lodging tax returns, to the State of Georgia, said operator is required to file monthly or quarterly returns for lodging tax to Crisp County, Georgia. 
In the event there are no rentals in a reporting period, lodging providers are required to file a return to Crisp County, Georgia stating they had zero rentals for the period. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-173. - Deposit to general fund. 
No later than 60 days following the last day of each fiscal year, the finance director shall transfer to the general fund such excise taxes as have been paid under the provisions of this article, and the statute-required portion of such funds shall thereafter at the direction of the board of commissioners be expended for the promotion of the tourism industry in Crisp County, or such funds at the direction of the board of commissioners of Crisp County, Georgia, may otherwise be expended for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions and trade shows as provided by statute. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-174. - Collection fee allowed operators. 
Operators collecting the tax levied hereunder shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and payment of the amount due. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-175. - Penalty and interest. 
The operator, in the event of operator's failure to pay tax when due, shall pay interest on the total amount of delinquent taxes at the rate of 12 percent per annum. In addition, the operator shall not be entitled to the collection fee allowed in this article. The late penalty will be strictly enforced. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-176. - Further penalties against the operator. 
(a)  If any operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this section, the county shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in which the operator failed to file the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the county. 
(b)  The Board of Commissioners of Crisp County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia or its designated representative(s) shall give to the operator written notice of determination as herein provided. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the operator at his/her/its last known address as it appears on any of the county's records. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(c)  The amount of the determination made hereunder shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or a fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the day of payment. 
(d)  In addition, a penalty of five percent of the tax due or $5.00 whichever is greater for each 30 days or fraction thereof of delinquency, not to exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater, shall be assessed and paid by the operator to the county. 
(e)  The estimated tax together with applicable penalties and interest may be collected utilizing any of the enforcement methods allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-177. - Lodging operator records. 
Each operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this section shall keep for a period of at least three years all records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers setting forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the county may, in writing, from time to time require. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-178. - Duties of local government authority. 
The Board of Commissioners of Crisp County or its designated representative(s) shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To examine, or authorize the examination of, books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any operator subject to this article, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(2)  To require the filing of reports by any person or persons having in their possession or custody information relating to rentals which are subject to the tax herein levied; and 
(3)  To allow a credit on any amount due payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but who were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Sec. 58-179. - Legal obligation of this article. 
(a)  At any time within three years after any tax or any portion of such tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, the county attorney at the direction of the board of commissioners may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the county to collect such amount due together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  If any operator becomes liable for any amount required to be paid by this section and subsequent thereto sells or quits the business, the successors or assignees of such operator shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount due. In the event said purchaser of the business fails to withhold the required amount, he/she/it shall become personally liable for the extent of the tax owed, together with any applicable penalties and interest. Any operator or person who ceases to operate the entity under which the same is registered with the county, said operator or person must notify the finance director in writing within 30 days of closing said enterprise. 
(c)  (1)  Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this article or who shall fail to do anything required by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Magistrate Court of Crisp County and upon conviction, shall be assessed with any penalty, including fine, confinement, or both, allowed by law for the violation of Crisp County resolutions or ordinances each and every day that such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(2)  In order to enforce this article or to correct or abate any violation of the resolution, the Board of Commissioners of Crisp County, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016) 
Secs. 58-180—58-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICT 

Sec. 58-201. - Findings. 
(a)  Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶ VI authorizes the board of commissioners to create special districts for the purpose of providing services within such districts; and further authorizes the county to levy fees, assessments and taxes within such districts to pay, wholly or partly, the cost of providing such services therein and to construct and maintain facilities therefor. 
(b)  The county has, pursuant to the Service Delivery Strategies Act, entered into an agreement with the City of Cordele whereby the county will create a special district for the purpose of providing fire protection, garbage collection and planning and zoning services to the portions of the county which do not lie within the corporate limits of a state municipality, and will fund such services only from fees or other income generated by the services, insurance premium taxes, county franchise fees, grants or taxes levied on the property located within the special district. 
(c)  The county has created a special district (the special district) comprised of all property located within the county that is not located within the corporate limits of the City of Cordele or the Town of Arabi. 
(d)  The county shall provide fire protection, garbage collection and planning and zoning services (the services) to the special district as the county shall from time to time determine to be in the best interests of the residents of the special district. 
(Res. of 9-3-1999) 
Sec. 58-202. - Levy of ad valorem tax. 
Effective the 1999 tax year, the county shall levy an ad valorem tax (the special district tax) upon property, real and personal, having its tax situs in the special district to fund the difference between the cost of providing the services and revenues received by the county from the fees, assessments, grants, income generated by such services, and the franchise fees and insurance taxes attributable to the service area, which tax shall be in addition to the general county ad valorem tax levied upon all property located in the county. 
(Res. of 9-3-1999) 
Secs. 58-203—58-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OCCUPATION TAX AND REGULATORY FEES 

Sec. 58-301. - Business registration required for businesses operating in Crisp County, Georgia; occupation tax required for business dealings in Crisp County. 
(a)  For the year 2006 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the unincorporated areas of Crisp County Georgia, whether with a location in the unincorporated areas of the county or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall register and, if applicable pay an occupation tax and administrative fee for such business, trade, profession or occupation and shall receive a county license, which county license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, such county license shall be shown to the Crisp County Finance Director or to any Crisp County Sheriff's Officer or their respective designees upon request. 
(b)  Upon registration, the director or their respective designee(s), shall as soon as practicable inspect such registrant's business location or job site(s), and perform a reasonable investigation of such registrant's business activities to insure that such activities comply with all applicable site or local building, health, or safety codes; to determine whether such registrant has in effect any and all required insurance coverage, and any required state or federal licenses or permits; that the registrant has complied with all sections herein; and to determine whether such registrant's business, trade, profession or occupation poses any threat to safety, welfare, or public health of the citizens of Crisp County. Inspection need not be completed prior to issuance of a county license, but such license is subject to suspension if upon inspection the director or their respective designee(s), finds the registrant has not complied with any and all applicable local, state and/or federal ordinances, regulations and laws or has failed to pay the regulatory fees required below. 
(c)  Upon registration, each registrant shall pay an annual regulatory fee in the amount of $45.00 to defray the costs of inspections contemplated at subsection (b) above. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-302. - Advertising. 
Any person advertising by signs, card, circulars, newspaper advertising or otherwise that they are in business of any kind within Crisp County, shall be liable for the business registration, tax and administrative fee required for the business. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-303. - Transient merchants, itinerant merchants and itinerant vendors. 
It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant, itinerant vendor, peddler, contractor or door-to-door sales person to engage in such business within the county without first obtaining a county license therefore in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-304. - Going uninvited onto premises; constitutes offense and nuisance. 
The act or practice of entering upon or going into the private homes, or offices, shops, stores and other places of business for the purpose of soliciting and/or selling any article of merchandise or service by itinerant solicitors, vendors or hawkers of any kind or character of goods, articles or merchandise, is declared to be a nuisance, and as such nuisance an offense against this section and punishable as provided in section 58-323 of this Code; and such nuisance shall and may be suppressed as hereinafter provided. Nothing herein contained shall prevent or prohibit any person from entering upon or going into the private homes or offices or other places of business between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. for the purpose of soliciting or selling any article of value, after first having obtained a county license, and after having stated his mission and having first obtained the permission from the owner or occupant of such residence or office or other place of business. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-305. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "county" is used in this article, such term shall be construed to mean the unincorporated areas Crisp County Georgia. This article applies to those portions or areas of the county not within the corporate limits of a municipality. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax, which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
(2)  a.  Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation to the following: 
1.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
2.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
3.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
4.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; 
5.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
b.  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
1.  Sales, use or excise tax; 
2.  Sales returns, allowances and discounts; 
3.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
4.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; 
5.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
6.  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
(3)  Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle in the county where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a customer or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
(4)  Occupation tax means a tax levied by a local government on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue-raising purposes. 
(5)  Regulatory fees mean payments, whether designated as license fees or permit fees or by another name, which are required by local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined O.C.G.A. §36-71-2(I) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(6)  Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, which is the major and principal source of income of such business. 
(7)  Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations, which utilize 100 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
(8)  Practitioner of a profession or occupation means a person who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(9)  Peddler means a person who goes from place to place within the county exhibiting his wares or goods and actually selling them to the consumer or end user within the county, provided that the term "peddler" shall not include a route salesperson who services a route or repeat customers in the county on a monthly basis or more frequently. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-306. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $50.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, annual renewal, reopening or registration of those accounts. The administrative fee is not included in the occupation tax amount outlined in section 58-307 and shall be due and payable in accordance with the same provisions as are applied to the payment of such tax under section 58-316. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on all applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-307. - Occupation tax levied; occupation tax structure; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated areas of Crisp County and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: Gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule; profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts. The tax rate determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the county finance director and approved by the Crisp County Board of Commissioners: 

 
(c)  Restrictions on imposition of occupation tax. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its location. 
(2)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business's gross receipts. 
(3)  No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the taxing jurisdiction and who sell property inside the taxing jurisdiction. 
(5)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any manner other than that described in this section. 
(6)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the taxing jurisdiction or in the State of Georgia. 
(7)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 which are reasonably attributable to sales or services in the State of Georgia. 
(8)  For the year 2006 and each year thereafter no annual occupation tax shall exceed $1,500.00. The Crisp County Board of Commissioners may update the maximum annual occupation tax from time to time. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-308. - Exemption for veterans and blind persons. 
Veterans of the armed services and blind persons holding a certificate of exemption, issued by the commissioner of veteran's services, shall, before doing business thereunder in the county, exhibit such certificate and register annually with the Crisp County Finance Department and receive a no-fee license from the county. To be exempt from paying a license fee under this article, a veteran or blind person must qualify under and comply with O.C.G.A. §§ 43-12-1—43-12-8, as amended. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-309. - Issuance of tax certificate; proper zoning required. 
(a)  Under the payment of the occupational taxes assessed in this article, it shall be the duty of the Crisp County Finance Department to issue to each person a county license, provided that all information required has been furnished; and provided further that the applicant is not disentitled to such under other provisions of this Code, or federal or state law. Any corporate applicant may be required to produce a certificate from the Secretary of State of Georgia that such corporation is in good standing according to the records of his office. 
(b)  No tax certificate shall be issued unless the business and premises for which such application is made shall comply to all respects with the county comprehensive land use and zoning ordinance and with all other laws and ordinances applicable thereto of whatever jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-310. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia; exemption for tax paid in other state. 
(a)  Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in Crisp County and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(b)  Any business or practitioner of a profession with no location or office in the State of Georgia, is subject to the registration requirements, but shall be exempt from assessment of an occupation tax under this article if such business or practitioner submits proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state on the business's or practitioner's sales or services in the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-311. - Lines of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the jurisdiction of the county shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the county finance department and that line of business being noted by the county finance department upon the county license, which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-312. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in Crisp County. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of an occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-313. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in section 58-307 this article. 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that the practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the county relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  The election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done prior to June 30 each year. Failure to make the election for any then current year shall result in a tax for the then current year based on subparagraph (2). 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-314. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state or instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-315. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations, which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the county pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-316. - When registration and tax due and payable; penalties and interest; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration and occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 2006 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration shall be filed and the applicable administrative fee and occupation tax shall be payable April 1 of each year and shall, if not filed and paid by June 30 of each year, be subject to penalties and interest for delinquency. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in Crisp County in 2006 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent and subject to penalties and interest for delinquency, if not obtained prior to the commencing date of business. 
(b)  The penalty on any amount delinquent shall be in the amount of ten percent of the administrative fee and occupational tax determined to be due and owing under the provisions of this article. Such delinquency shall also bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent for each month or partial month of such delinquency. Penalties provided herein shall be in addition to any other penalties, civil or criminal, which may be applicable. 
(c)  The business registration herein provided for shall be issued by the Crisp County Finance Director and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in Crisp County, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the judge of a court of competent jurisdiction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(d)  In addition to the above remedies, the county may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-317. - Exemption on grounds that business is a nonprofit organization. 
Any nonprofit organization shall be exempt from the levy of occupation tax under this article, provided that such business is operated for a charitable purpose with the entire net proceeds from the business being devoted to such purpose and provided that the organization has obtained nonprofit status from the Internal Revenue Service. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-318. - Exemption on grounds that business holds a valid Crisp County distilled spirits license. 
Those licensed retailers holding a current, valid distilled spirits license under the provisions of the Crisp County beverage license policy shall be exempt from the levy of occupation tax, administrative fees and/or regulatory fees under this article for the establishment to which the distilled spirits license applies. This exemption applies to those establishments offering for sale only those products and commodities as identified by the Crisp County beverage license policy for holders of distilled spirits licenses. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-319. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of a proper and current state license before the county occupation tax registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-320. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, sales tax certificates, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-321. - Registration of businesses exempt from tax. 
It shall be the duty of any person authorized under the laws of the state to engage in business in the county without paying an occupation tax for the privilege, before engaging in business in the county, to register with the county finance director, pay any applicable registration fees and/or receive a tax exempt county license. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-322. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for the business as described in this article and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this article before commencing the business; and any person transacting or offering to transact in the county any such kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained the registration shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-323. - Penalty of article violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the judge of a court of competent jurisdiction, be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00. 
(b)  Continued violation of the provisions of this article may be enjoined by instituting proceedings for injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction, not withstanding that adequate remedies at law may exist, the remedies contained in this article being cumulative in nature. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-324. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article, but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-325. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-326. - Occupation tax levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied under this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the current calendar year. However, for convenience of both the county and the taxpayer, each business subject to the occupation tax levied in section 58-307 hereof shall, on or before the dates hereinafter set forth, file with the Crisp County Finance Department the return hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager or secretary officer of the business subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before April 1 of the calendar year, file with the Crisp County Finance Department, on a form furnished by said officer, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return will be used to determine the occupation tax for the current year. 
(c)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be used to calculate the receipts on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the gross receipts of the business for the preceding calendar year in establishing the business tax liability for the current calendar year. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-327. - When occupation tax due and payable; payment options 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the county at the office of the county finance department on April 1 each year and shall be delinquent if not paid on or before June 30 each year. The tax shall be payable in a single installment, shall expire on March 31 each year and is nonrefundable. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-328. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time within boundaries of Crisp County in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross receipts of the business from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid in a single installment prior to the commencing date of business and shall expire on March 31 each year. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-329. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and each line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-330. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of Crisp County, or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of said return said return shall be confidential and open to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of Crisp County using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the county shall be classed as "employees". Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the county officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the State of Georgia, the United States and other local governments. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-331. - Business and practitioners required to provide certain information to Crisp County; inspection of books and records. 
(a)  All businesses and practitioners doing business within Crisp County shall provide to the Crisp County Finance Department: 
(1)  The address of any location or office maintained by such business or practitioner within the county; 
(2)  A description of the business or types of business conducted or occupation or profession performed at such location; and 
(3)  The payment of any business or occupation tax or regulatory fee to any other county. 
(b)  In any case, the Crisp County Finance Director, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which returns are made under this article to determine the accuracy of the return as provided in this article. The county shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the county and upon demand of the county such books or records shall be submitted to the county finance director for inspection within 30 days. Failure to submit such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the county. Adequate records shall be kept within the boundaries of Crisp County, Georgia, for examination by the county at its officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of ten percent of tax due will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-332. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
(a)  Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by Crisp County under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by Crisp County for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the county in accordance with provisions found in section 58-331. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(b)  Checks, used to pay for the license, and returned from the bank for any reason, will result in the revocation of the license. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall have the right to revoke any license issued under this Code whenever the business conducted is in violation of any law of the state or the county, or is being conducted in a manner detrimental to the moral and general welfare of the citizens of the county. The license shall stand revoked until the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners, at which such action in the premises either shall be sustained by action of the board and the license shall be permanently revoked or it shall be restored. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-333. - Change of address. 
Any person moving from one location to another shall notify the county finance department of this move and the new address in writing no later than 30 days after moving. The same occupational tax certificate will be valid at the new location provided the person still complies will all land use and zoning laws and with all other laws and ordinances applicable thereto of whatever jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-334. - Transfer of tax certificate. 
No tax certificate may be transferred from one person to another. Additions to or deletions from the ownership of a business, which do not affect the liability of the principal ownership of a business for which the certificate is issued, may be made without canceling the old occupational tax certificate and applying for a new certificate. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-335. - Termination of business. 
It shall be the duty of each business and practitioner subject to fees and occupation taxes under this article, when it shall cease to do business or practice, to return its current occupation tax certificate together with a statement as to the date of termination of doing business or practice, to the Crisp County Finance Department. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-336. - Amendment or repeal of article; additional taxes. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the Crisp County Board of Commissioners to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts of tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the county of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-337. - Payment of other taxes and fees prerequisite to payment of occupation tax. 
(a)  A condition to the issuance of any license shall be payment by the applicant of all past due licenses. 
(b)  A person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the county, whether with a location in the county or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, will not be allowed to pay an occupational tax for a new calendar year until all outstanding or delinquent balances of ad valorem taxes, regulatory fees or any other form of taxes are paid. The nonpayment of this occupational tax will prohibit a business from continuing its operation until all such outstanding balances are paid. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-338. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the Crisp County Finance Department and the Crisp County Sheriff's Department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the finance department and the Crisp County Sheriff's Department and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the county, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 58-339. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2005) 
Secs. 58-340—58-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ENERGY EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 58-351. - Energy excise tax definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms "dealer," "energy," "local sales and use tax," and "purchaser" shall have the same meanings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012(1), § 1) 
Sec. 58-352. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-111, an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage, or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012(1), § 2) 
Sec. 58-353. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
(a)  Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the governing authority of Crisp County pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114 and as provided in this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rate of such excise tax shall be phased in over a four-year period as follows: 
(1)  For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 25 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 50 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)  For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 75 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)  On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 100 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2(c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in subsections (b)(1), (2), and (3) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in subsection (b)(4) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016 limitation in that subsection (b)(4). 
(d)  (1)  Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of Crisp county shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two percent. 
(2)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two percent to one percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(3)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one percent to two percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012(1), § 3) 
Sec. 58-354. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c), such excise tax shall be: 
(1)  Imposed only at the time sales and use tax on the sale or use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  Due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., except as other provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; 
(3)  A debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
(4)  Remitted to the governing authority of Crisp County by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
(5)  A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012(1), § 4) 
Sec. 58-355. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)  The governing authority of Crisp County, or the collecting officer appointed under section 58-358 of this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. No penalty shall attach to such provider for failure to collect the excise tax under this article when it has properly collected and remitted local sales and use taxes on such energy where the purchaser would have qualified for the uniform exemption certificate but failed to apply for such certificate or where the purchaser received such certificate but failed to file it with the energy provider. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012(1), § 5) 
Sec. 58-356. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on January 1, 2013 and shall be due and payable to the governing authority of Crisp County monthly on or before the 20th day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012(1), § 6) 
Sec. 58-357. - Allocation, distribution, and expenditure of proceeds. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b), the excise tax proceeds shall be allocated and distributed by the governing authority of Crisp County at the end of each calendar month. An amount equal to one percent of such proceeds collected by Crisp County shall be paid into the general fund of Crisp County to defray the costs of collection and administration. 
(b)  The remainder shall be distributed in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement as required under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b) and (c). Within 30 days following the end of each calendar month, the remainder shall be distributed to the general fund of Crisp County and the general fund of each participating municipality in accordance with the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(c)(1) or (2) as follows: 
(1)  If two local sales and use taxes are in effect in the special district, an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds shall be distributed to the general fund of Crisp County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the first local sales and use tax and an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Crisp County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in such county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the second local sales and use tax; or 
(2)  If only one such local sales and use tax is in effect in the special district, then the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Crisp County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the local sales and use tax. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, proceeds of the excise tax deposited in the general fund of Crisp County may be expended for any lawful purpose as determined by the governing authority of Crisp County. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012(1), § 7) 
Sec. 58-358. - Administrative provisions; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
(a)  The governing authority of Crisp County shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer, or the designee of the collecting officer, is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this article. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012(1), § 8) 
Chapter 62 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; clean community standards for loading and unloading areas, § 54-152; abandoned motor vehicles, § 54-159; off-street parking, app. A, § 7.01 et seq. 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, report of disposition, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; Parking Law for Persons with Disabilities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq.; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; sirens, whistles and bells prohibited on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70(b); responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11. 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 62-2. - Speed detection devices. 
The board of commissioners declare the desirability of and approve the use of speed detection devices by the county sheriff department to enforce the state and county regulations and laws concerning motor vehicle traffic on roads located within the county. 
(Res. of 6-14-1988) 
Secs. 62-3—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED ZONES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 62-31. - Violations. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1998) 
Sec. 62-32. - Established. 
(a)  The following speed zones are established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law: 
(1)  On-system: 
State Route 7 (US 41) from Turner-Crisp County line (milelog 0.00) to a point 2,535 feet south of City Street 602 (2nd Avenue, Arabi south city limits, milelog 1.46) a distance of 1.46 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 7 (US 41, Bedgood Avenue) from south city limits of Arabi (milelog 1.46) to a point 1,320 feet south of City Street 602 (2nd Avenue, milelog 1.69) a distance of 0.23 mile shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 7 (US 41, Bedgood Avenue) from a point 1,320 feet south of City Street 602 (2nd Avenue, milelog 1.69) to City Street 602 (2nd Avenue, milelog 1.94) a distance of 0.25 mile shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
State Route 7 (US 41, Bedgood Avenue) from City Street 602 (2nd Avenue, milelog 1.94) to City Street 612 (1st Avenue, milelog 2.96) a distance of 1.02 mile shall be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
State Route 7 (US 41, Bedgood Avenue) from City Street 612 (1st Avenue, milelog 2.96) to a point 1,109 feet north of County Road (Warwick Road, milelog 3.21) a distance of 0.25 mile shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
State Route 7 (US 41, Bedgood Avenue) from a point 1,109 feet north of County Road (Warwick Road, milelog 3.21) to a point 2,693 feet north of County Road 356 (Warwick Road, north city limits of Arabi, milelog 3.51) a distance of 0.30 mile shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 7 (US 41) from a point 2,693 feet north of County Road 356 (Warwick Road, Arabi north city limits, milelog 3.51) to a point 158 feet south of City Street 591 (27th Avenue, Cordele south city limits, milelog 11.29) a distance of 7.78 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 7 (US 41) from a point 528 feet north of County Road 337 (Pecan Grove Road, Cordele north city limits, milelog 14.33) to Crisp-Dooly County line (milelog 17.04) a distance of 2.71 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 30 (US 280) from Crisp-Sumter County line (milelog 0.00) to County Road 233 (Fish Hatchery Road, milelog 8.11) a distance of 8.11 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 30 (US 280) from County Road 233 (Fish Hatchery Road, milelog 8.11) to a point 211 feet west of City Street 551 (15th Street, Cordele west city limits, milelog 8.54) a distance of 0.43 mile shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
State Route 30 (US 280) from a point 53 feet east of City Street 651 (Turton Road, Cordele east city limits, milelog 12.03) to Crisp-Wilcox County line, milelog 19.60) a distance of 7.57 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 33 from Crisp-Worth County line (milelog 0.00) to State Route 7 (US 41, milelog 7.74) a distance of 7.74 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 33 Connector from State Route 33 (milelog 0.00) to State Route 401 (I-75, milelog 1.81) a distance of 1.81 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 90 from Crisp-Wilcox County line (milelog 0.00) to a point 422 feet south of County Road 365 (24th Avenue, Cordele city limits, milelog 10.78) a distance of 10.78 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 257 from a point 475 feet east of City Street 659 (Self Road, Cordele east city limits, milelog 0.40) to Crisp-Dooly County line (milelog 4.90) a distance of 4.50 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 300 from Crisp-Worth County line (milelog 0.00) to a point 1.24 miles north of the Crisp-Worth County line (milelog 1.24) a distance of 1.24 miles shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
State Route 300 from a point 1.24 miles north of the Crisp-Worth County line (milelog 1.24) to County Road 105 (Antioch Road, milelog 1.74) a distance of 0.50 mile shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
State Road 300 from County Road 105 (Antioch Road, milelog 1.74) to a point 0.58 mile north of County Road 355 (Old Hatley Road, milelog 12.74) a distance of 11.00 miles shall be zoned for 65 miles per hour. 
State Route 300 from County Road 355 (Old Hatley Road, milelog 12.74) to the end of State Route 300 (milelog 13.18) a distance of 0.44 mile shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 401 (I-75) from Crisp-Turner County line (milelog 89.32) to south city limits of Arabi (milelog 91.02) a distance of 1.70 miles shall be zoned for 70 miles per hour. 
State Route 401 (I-75) from south city limits of Arabi (milelog 91.02) to north city limits of Arabi (milelog 92.07) a distance of 1.05 miles shall be zoned for 70 miles per hour. 
State Route 401 (I-75) from north city limits of Arabi (milelog 92.07) to Crisp-Dooly County line (milelog 105.18) a distance of 13.11 miles shall be zoned for 70 miles per hour. 
Signs shall be erected by the state department of transportation. 
(2)  Off-system: 
County Road 1 (Pateville Road) from County Road 356 (Antioch Road, milelog 3.14) to a point 1,320 feet south of County Road 390 (milelog 10.12) a distance of 6.98 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 1 (Pateville Road) from a point 1,320 feet south of County Road 390 (milelog 10.12) to County Road 390 (milelog 10.37) a distance of 0.25 mile shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
County Road 1 (Pateville Road) from County Road 390 (milelog 10.37) to County Road 236 (milelog 10.85) a distance of 0.48 mile shall be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
County Road 11 (Buford Road) from State Route 33 (milelog 3.28) to County Road 12 (Pipkin Road, milelog 6.72) a distance of 3.44 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 19 (Mud Road) from County Road 1 (Pateville Road, milelog 1.93) to County Road 110 (Jamestown Road, milelog 4.33) a distance of 2.40 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 23 (Cross Road Store Road) from State Route 30 (milelog 0.00) to County Road 415 (Albany Road, milelog 2.39) a distance of 2.39 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 25 (McKinney Road) from County Road 415 (Albany Road, milelog 0.00) to County Road 362 (Scenic Route Road, milelog 4.42) a distance of 4.42 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 30 (Lake Shore Way) from County Road 358 (Coney Road, milelog 0.00) to County Road 223 (Lake Shore Way, milelog 0.72) a distance of 0.72 mile shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 33 (Arabi-Warwick Road) from State Route 300 (milelog 0.00) to County Road 356 (Antioch Road, milelog 8.60) a distance of 8.60 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 61 (Sirmons Road) from County Road 62 (Dockweiler Road, milelog 0.00) to County Road 360 (Williford Crossing Road, milelog 3.82) a distance of 3.82 miles shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
County Road 62 (Dockweiler Road) from County Road 65 (Listonia Road, milelog 2.25) to County Road 354 (Tremont Road, milelog 5.59) a distance of 3.34 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 63 (Dorough Road) from County Road 123 (McKenzie Road, milelog 0.00) to County Road 353 (Cemetery Road, milelog 4.39) a distance of 4.39 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 67 (Old Penia Road) from Cordele city limits (milelog 0.55) to a point 1,531 feet west of County Road 182 (Freeman Road, milelog 0.80) a distance of 0.25 mile shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
County Road 67 (Old Penia Road) from a point 1,531 feet west of County Road 182 (milelog 0.80) to County Road 63 (Dorough Road, milelog 3.60) a distance of 2.80 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 71 (Amboy Road) from County Road 351 (Brock Road, milelog 0.00) to County Road 359 (Hawpond Road, milelog 3.55) a distance of 3.55 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 80 (Hatley Road) from Crisp-Wilcox County line (milelog 0.00) to State Route 90 (milelog 4.79) a distance of 4.79 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 82 (Wiley Road) from County Road 83 (Freeman Road, milelog 0.76) to State Route 90 (milelog 1.94) a distance of 1.18 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 96 (Parker Road) from County Road 96 (Dooly County Line Road, milelog 3.96) to County Road 354 (Tremont Road, milelog 4.97) a distance of 1.01 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 97 (Twin Pines Road) from County Road 117 (Penia Road, milelog 0.00) to County Road 353 (Cemetery Road, milelog 1.15) a distance of 1.15 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 97 (Twin Pines Road) from County Road 354 (Tremont Road, milelog 2.66) to County Road 96 (County Line Road, milelog 3.83) a distance of 1.17 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 101 (Raines Station Road) from County Road 33 (Warwick Road, milelog 0.00) to State Route 300 (milelog 3.73) a distance of 3.73 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 105 (Antioch Road) from County Road 223 (Lake Shore Way, milelog 0.00) to County Road 109 (Jamestown Road, milelog 4.55) a distance of 4.55 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 117 (Penia Road) from State Route 90 (milelog 4.64) to County Road 172 (Midway Church Road, milelog 11.19) a distance of 6.55 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 120 (Odessa Road) from County Road 360 (Williford Crossing Road, milelog 0.00) to Crisp-Wilcox County line (milelog 1.03) a distance of 1.03 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 123 (McKenzie Road) from County Road 63 (Dorough Road, milelog 2.80) to State Route 90 (milelog 5.10) a distance of 2.30 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 140 (Brock Road) from State Route 90 (milelog 0.00) to County Road 80 (Hatley Road, milelog 2.00) a distance of 2.00 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 172 (Midway Church Road) from State Route 257 (milelog 0.00) to County Road 117 (Penia Road, milelog 1.31) a distance of 1.31 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 223 (Cork Ferry Road) from State Route 300 (milelog 0.00) to County Road 358 (Coney Road, milelog 0.56) a distance of 0.56 mile shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 223 (Cork Ferry Road) from County Road 358 (Coney Road, milelog 0.56) to County Road 39 (Ray Road, milelog 1.35) a distance of 0.79 mile shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
County Road 223 (Cork Ferry Road) from County Road 39 (Ray Road, milelog 1.35) to County Road 224 (Lake Shore Drive, milelog 4.74) a distance of 3.39 miles shall be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
County Road 224 (Lake Shore Drive) from State Route 300 (milelog 0.00) to a point 1,320 feet north of County Road 341 (Hurt Drive, milelog 3.19) a distance of 3.19 miles shall be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
County Road 224 (Lake Shore Drive) from a point 1,320 feet north of County Road 341 (Hurt Drive, milelog 3.19) to State Route 300 (milelog 3.76) a distance of 0.57 mile shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
County Road 237 (Pecan Street) from County Road 355 (Old Hatley Road, milelog 0.00) to Cordele city limits (milelog 1.44) a distance of 1.44 miles shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
County Road 350 (Cannon Road) from State Route 30 (milelog 0.00) to County Road 364 (Drayton Road, milelog 4.23) a distance of 4.23 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 351 (Brock Road) from Turner County line (milelog 0.00) to State Route 90 (milelog 5.03) a distance of 5.03 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 353 (Cemetery Road) from State Route 257 (milelog 0.00) to Wilcox County line (milelog 8.43) a distance of 8.43 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 354 (Tremont Road) from State Route 257 (milelog 0.00) to County Road 360 (Williford Crossing Road, milelog 7.50) a distance of 7.50 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 355 (Old Hatley Road) from State Route 7 (milelog 0.00) to County Road 123 (McKenzie Road, milelog 5.45) a distance of 5.45 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 356 (Antioch Road) from County Road 109 (milelog 2.61) to County Road 1 (Pateville Road, milelog 6.06) a distance of 3.45 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 357 (Hawpond Road) from Arabi city limits (milelog 1.89) to State Route 90 (milelog 7.59) a distance of 5.70 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 358 (Coney Road) from State Route 300 (milelog 0.00) to State Route 30 (milelog 6.23) a distance of 6.23 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 359 (Coney Road) from State Route 30 (milelog 0.00) to Crisp-Dooly County line (milelog 5.46) a distance of 5.46 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 360 (Williford Crossing Road) from State Route 90 (milelog 0.00) to Crisp-Wilcox County line (milelog 11.44) a distance of 11.44 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 361 (Farmers Market Road) from State Route 7 (milelog 0.00) to State Route 257 (milelog 3.22) a distance of 3.22 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 362 (Scenic Route Road) from County Road 358 (Coney Road, milelog 0.00) to County Road 26 (Pine Road, milelog 6.81) a distance of 6.81 miles shall be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
County Road 362 (Ferry Landing Road) from County Road 26 (Pine Road, milelog 6.81) to County Road 247 (milelog 7.24) a distance of 0.43 mile shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
County Road 362 (Ferry Landing Road) from County Road 247 (milelog 7.24) to Coney city limits (milelog 8.01) a distance of 0.77 mile shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 363 (Fenn Road) from County Road 359 (Coney Road, milelog 0.00) to State Route 7 (milelog 3.37) a distance of 3.37 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 364 (Drayton Road) from Crisp-Dooly County line (milelog 0.00) to County Road 352 (milelog 9.37) a distance of 9.37 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 364 (Drayton Road) from County Road 352 (milelog 9.37) to State Route 7 (milelog 10.29) a distance of 0.92 mile shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
County Road 365 (24th Avenue) from State Route 30 (milelog 0.00) to Cordele west city limits (milelog 0.97) a distance of 0.97 mile shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
County Road 415 (Albany Road) from State Route 300 (milelog 0.00) to State Route 30 (milelog 3.44) a distance of 3.44 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 416 (Joe Wright Drive) from State Route 7 (milelog 0.00) to a point 105 feet south of County Road 273 (Culpepper Road, milelog 1.58) a distance of 1.58 miles shall be zoned for 55 miles per hour. 
County Road 416 (Joe Wright Drive) from a point 105 feet south of County Road 273 (Culpepper Road, milelog 1.58) to Cordele south city limits (milelog 1.83) a distance of 0.25 mile shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
(3)  City of Arabi, off-system: 
First Avenue from 5th Street to State Route 7 (US 41, Bedgood Avenue) a distance of 0.68 mile shall be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
First Street from State Route 7 (US 41, Bedgood Avenue) to Industrial Boulevard a distance of 0.47 mile shall be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
First Street from Industrial Boulevard to the east city limits of Arabi a distance of 1.42 miles shall be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
Industrial Boulevard from Second Avenue to First Street a distance of 0.74 mile shall be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
Signs shall be erected by the county. 
(b)  To the extent that the roads described in subsection (a) of this section lie within the corporate limits of the Town of Arabi, this article adopts speed limits established by the Town of Arabi pursuant to proper resolution of the mayor and city council of the Town of Arabi, and the enforcement of such speed limits by the county sheriff, pursuant to his contract for provision of law enforcement services with the Town of Arabi, is consented to. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1998) 
Secs. 62-33—62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RAILROADS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197. 

Sec. 62-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Train includes a railroad engine or propelling unit with or without cars attached, and shall include two or more railroad cars when attached together, whether or not there shall be an engine or propelling unit attached thereto. 
Vehicular traffic means all motorized traffic upon the streets of the county, not including trains or railroad cars. 
(Res. of 8-16-1988, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-62. - Violation. 
(a)  Placing responsibility on employer. The spirit and intent of this article is in keeping with O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197, and where there is a violation of this article by a member of a train crew, yard crew, or engine crew of a railroad, which is a common carrier, and such member shall offer reasonable proof that such violation was necessary to comply with the orders or instructions either written or oral of his employer or its officers or supervisory officials, the responsibility for such violation shall be upon such employer or railroad. 
(b)  Excused acts. No act which is caused by a break down of equipment or other mishap, nor any act done to prevent personal injuries or property damage, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Res. of 8-16-1988, §§ 7, 8) 
Sec. 62-63. - Blocking streets. 
(a)  Combined time of moving and while stopped. It shall be a violation of this article for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same so that it shall stop at an intersection with a public street or road within the county longer than ten minutes, including the time such train is in motion and the time such train is stopped. 
(b)  Leaving crossing gates down. It shall be a violation of this article for any railroad company or corporation to allow crossing gates maintained or operated by such company or corporation at any intersection of its tracks with any street or road in the county to remain down so as to control traffic upon any such street or road an uninterrupted period of time longer than ten minutes, regardless of whether or not a train or trains, or railroad car or cars are, or have been, within the area of such intersection within such period of time. 
(c)  Leaving warning device activated. It shall be a violation of this article for any railroad company or corporation to allow any warning device maintained or operated by such company or corporation and installed to control vehicular traffic at any intersection of its tracks with any street or road in the county to remain active so as to control vehicular traffic upon any such street or road for an uninterrupted period of time longer than ten minutes, regardless of whether or not a train or trains or railroad car or cars are, or have been, within the area of such intersection within such period of time. 
(d)  Switching or other intracounty transit. It shall be a violation of this article for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same while engaged in local switching or any intracounty transit in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street or road within the county for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes. 
(e)  Clearing in case of fire alarm. In case of fire alarms, railroad crossings shall immediately be cleared. 
(Res. of 8-16-1988, §§ 2—6) 
Chapter 66 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; health and sanitation, ch. 34; manufactured homes, ch. 38; planning, ch. 46; roads and bridges, ch. 50; utilities on county rights-of-way, § 50-71 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 54; development code, app. A; public utilities, app. A, § 9.11; installation of stormwater drainage facilities, app. A, § 10.06. 
State Law reference— Water Resources Center, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; Waterwell Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; authority to provide for the development, storage treatment, purification, and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); authority to provide stormwater, sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide stormwater, sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER RATES AND SERVICE RULES 

Sec. 66-31. - Rate schedule. 
(a)  Effective July 1, 1996, and the duration of the loan from USDA Rural Development (RD) regarding the construction of the county water system, there is adopted the following monthly water rate schedules for the county: 
WATER RATE SCHEDULE 

 
(b)  The rate schedule set forth in subsection (a) of this section contemplates a single user, such as a one-family dwelling, a one-farm dwelling with appurtenances, or one commercial operation. 
(c)  Extraordinary circumstances, such as multiple dwelling units, industrial users and fire protection shall be governed by special contract agreements made by the board of commissioners on recommendation of the county engineer except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Res. of 7-1-1996, § 1; Res. of 6-16-2006, §§ 1, 2; Res. of 5-14-2013(1), § 1) 
Sec. 66-32. - Application for water service; security deposit. 
The consumer shall make application for water service, in person, at the office of the county water system and at the same time shall make a cash security deposit for water service as follows: 

 
(Res. of 7-1-1996, § 2) 
Sec. 66-33. - Tap fee. 
(a)  In addition to the security deposit provided in section 66-32, each customer subscribing to use the water service of the county shall pay a connection fee (tap fee) as follows times the number of connections desired for water service: 

 
(b)  The fees stated in subsection (a) of this section shall take effect July 1, 1996. 
(Res. of 7-1-1996, § 3) 
Sec. 66-34. - Minimum charges. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule in section 66-31, shall be made for such connection subscribed for under this article. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the county shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Res. of 7-1-1996, § 4) 
Sec. 66-35. - County's responsibility and liability. 
The county shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line, where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 66-33, will be made. 
(1)  The county may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(2)  The county may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the county's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(3)  The county reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipes are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(4)  Under normal conditions, the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the county. 
(Res. of 7-1-1996, § 5) 
Sec. 66-36. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
Water furnished by the county shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use such water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(1)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(2)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(3)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(4)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the county water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the county water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the county, covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the county they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the county water system. 
(5)  Prior to the installation of water lines, a developer is required to provide the county with an acceptable layout plan and specifications for construction utility and specifications for construction utilizing and tendering an acceptable water line easement. During construction, it is necessary for the county to make periodic inspections and to observe the pressure testing when water is placed in lines. Upon approval by the county of the plans, specifications, tests and acceptance of the water line easement, the county will accept the water mains for maintenance and will operate same in accordance with the rights granted in the respective water line easement subject to all other rights and reservations contained in this article. The substance of this provision was adopted by the board of commissioners by its action of May 14, 1996, and shall continue and be in full force and effect upon adoption of this article. 
(Res. of 7-1-1996, § 6) 
Sec. 66-37. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the county shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing county property, inspection of piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the water system shall be granted only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the county an acceptable permanent easement or right-of-way across any property traversed by the water lines. 
(Res. of 7-1-1996, § 7) 
Sec. 66-38. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given in person or in writing at the office of the county water system to discontinue water service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Res. of 7-1-1996, § 8) 
Sec. 66-39. - Bill collecting; penalties for nonpayment. 
(a)  Bills to customers of water service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the county. The failure of water users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment within ten days from the due date will be subject to a penalty of $5.00. 
(2)  Nonpayment within 40 days from the date due will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. 
(3)  Nonpayment for 60 days after original due date will allow the county, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate agreement, and in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the county obligated to supply, any water under this article. 
(b)  Water service shall not be reconnected until the customer's delinquent bill, including penalty, has been paid in full. Should such customer thereafter desire to be reconnected to the water system, a reconnection charge of $35.00 shall be collected. Bills shall be paid at the office of the county water system or other designated locations and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent or relieve the consumer from payment of same. 
(c)  A minimum service charge of $10.00 will be made when county employees are called upon by a consumer to perform services. 
(Res. of 7-1-1996, § 9) 
Sec. 66-40. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water services are discontinued and all bills are paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the county. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the county toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the county may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(c)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the board of commissioners is made, and a service charge of $35.00 is paid for each meter reconnected. 
(d)  The county reserves a right to discontinue water service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)  The consumer's willful disregard of the county's rules. 
(3)  Emergency repairs. 
(4)  Insufficiency of the water supply due to circumstances beyond the county's control. 
(5)  Legal processes. 
(6)  Direction of public authorities. 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, war or unavoidable accident. 
(Res. of 7-1-1996, § 10) 
Sec. 66-41. - Complaints; adjustments. 
If a consumer believes his bill is in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the office of the county water system before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of services provided under this article. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and such payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(1)  The county will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee of $10.00; however, if such special reading discloses that the meter was overread, no charge will be made. 
(2)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the county of the actual costs of making the test; however, if the meter is found to overregister beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the county's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Res. of 7-1-1996, § 11) 
Sec. 66-42. - Floodplain prohibition. 
Structures constructed within the floodplain area, as specified in the flood damage prevention ordinance adopted by the board of commissioners on April 4, 1996, and the Sumter County Board of Commissioners on March 12, 1996, shall not be connected to the water system. 
(Res. of 7-1-1996, § 12) 
Secs. 66-43—66-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE CITY OF CORDELE 

Sec. 66-71. - Rate schedule. 
The rates for water and sewer services provided by the City of Cordele in the unincorporated areas of the county shall be according to the fee schedule adopted by the Cordele City Commission and on file in the City of Cordele Clerk's Office. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 2) 
Sec. 66-72. - Application for water and sewer service. 
The customer shall make application for water service, and sewer service where provided, in person, at the Cordele City Hall, 501 North Seventh Street, Cordele, Georgia, and shall make a security deposit for such service as provided by the fee schedule adopted by the Cordele City Commission on file in the City of Cordele Clerk's Office. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 3) 
Sec. 66-73. - Meter and tap fees; commencement of service. 
In addition to the security deposit provided in section 66-72, each customer subscribing after January 1, 2000, to use the water (and sewer, if applicable) service provided by this article shall pay meter and tap fees as provided by the fee schedule adopted by the Cordele City Commission on file in the City of Cordele Clerk's Office. Users must come on to the system within three days after the water meter/tap is installed and shall be billed for availability on a monthly basis. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 4) 
Sec. 66-74. - Minimum charges. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the fee schedule adopted by the Cordele City Commission on file in the City of Cordele Clerk's Office, shall be made for each connection subscribed for. Water (and sewer service where applicable) furnished for a given lot or location shall be used on that lot or location only and, except for fire protection, the City of Cordele shall not for any reason whatsoever furnish water free of charge to anyone. If a customer is approved for installment payments to pay for the water meter fee and/or sewer tap fee, the maximum time to complete such installment payments shall not be longer than six months after approval of same. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 5) 
Sec. 66-75. - Fire protection. 
The City of Cordele will not provide fire protection for unincorporated areas of the county; however, the county fire department may use water from the system regulated by this article for fire protection only. Such use by the county fire department is subject to water availability, and shall be loaded into fire apparatus only at designated fire hydrants to which a backflow prevention device and meter, which has been installed by the city, or a backflow prevention device and meter which has been installed on the county's firefighting apparatus that withdraws water. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 6) 
Sec. 66-76. - City's responsibility and liability. 
The City of Cordele shall run service lines from its distribution line (and sewer line if applicable) to the property line where the lines exist or may be constructed. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 66-73, will be made. 
(1)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of costs for the extensions according to the fee schedule adopted by the Cordele City Commission on file in the City of Cordele Clerk's Office. 
(2)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line, or, at the city's option, on the customer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(3)  The city shall refuse service unless the customer's water line provides a backflow prevention device approved by the city at or near the customer's side of the meter. 
(4)  The city will make a reasonable effort to notify the customer of any anticipated interruptions of service. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 7) 
Sec. 66-77. - Customer's responsibility and liability. 
Water furnished by the City of Cordele shall be used for consumption by the customer, members of his household and employees only. The customer shall not sell or give water to any other person or permit any other person to use such water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregarding this rule, in addition to penalties for violation of this article, shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(1)  Plumbing permits from the county and inspections by the county are required on all new or renovated construction involving water and sewer service and new water meters installed, including meters for yard irrigation. Appropriate backflow devices shall be required. 
(2)  When a meter or meter boxes are placed on the premises of a customer, a suitable place shall be provided by the customer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(3)  The customer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the customer's side of the meter. 
(4)  The customer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the customer at the customer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the adopted plumbing codes and other applicable ordinances of the county. 
(5)  In order to be received as a customer and entitled to receive water from the water system controlled by this article, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of such water system, and all applicants, by becoming customers of the city, covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be customers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the water system controlled by this article. 
(6)  Prior to the installation of water lines, a developer is required to provide the city with an acceptable layout plan and specification for construction of water lines (and sewer lines, if applicable) in the proposed development. During construction, it is necessary and required that the city make periodic inspections and to observe the pressure testing when water is placed in lines. Upon approval by the city of the plan, specifications, tests and acceptance of the water line easement (and the sewer line easement, if applicable) the city will accept the water lines for maintenance and will operate same in accordance with the rights granted in the respective water line easements subject to all other rights and reservations contained in this article. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 8) 
Sec. 66-78. - Access to premises; extensions of systems. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city, designated by the city manager, shall have access at all hours to the premises of the customer for the purpose of installing or removing property of the City of Cordele, inspection of piping, reading and testing meters, and for any other purpose in connection with the water and sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be granted only with a customer who shall grant or convey, or cause to be granted or conveyed, to the City of Cordele, an acceptable permanent easement or a right-of-way across any property traversed by water and sewer lines. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 9) 
Sec. 66-79. - Changes of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given in person or in writing at the Cordele City Hall, 501 North Seventh Street, Cordele, Georgia, to discontinue water service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises. In addition to penalties of violations of this article, this section will make the new occupant liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 10) 
Sec. 66-80. - Bill collecting; penalties for nonpayment. 
Bills of customers of water service (and sewer service, where applicable) shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. The failure of utility users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Payment after the due date will be subject to a penalty in an amount provided in the fee schedule adopted by the Cordele City Commission on file in the City of Cordele Clerk's Office. 
(2)  Nonpayment after the shutoff date will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. 
(3)  Water service shall not be reconnected until the customer's delinquent bill, including penalties, has been paid in full. Should such customer thereafter desire to be reconnected to the water system, a reconnection charge, in an amount determined from time to time by the city commission, shall be collected. Bills shall be paid at the Cordele City Hall, 501 North Seventh Street, Cordele, Georgia, or at the mailing address printed upon the bill. Failure to receive bills or notices mailed to the billing address shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent or relieve the customer from payment of the same. The city may, but is not required, on a case by case basis, allow a delinquent bill to be paid on an installment schedule. 
(4)  When city employees are called upon by a customer to perform services, a fee will be charged in an amount provided in the fee schedule adopted by the Cordele City Commission on file in the City of Cordele Clerk's Office. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 11) 
Sec. 66-81. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water services are discontinued and all are bills paid, the security deposit will be refunded to the customer by the City of Cordele. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills for water service, the security deposit may be applied by the City of Cordele toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the customer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in any way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(c)  Service discontinued for nonpayment of bills for water service will be restored only after the bills are paid in full, such security deposit as required by this article is made, and a service charge paid for each meter reconnected, such charge being in an amount set from time to time by the Cordele City Commission, and being the same as charged to customers within the City of Cordele. 
(d)  The City of Cordele reserves the right to discontinue service provided by this article without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)  The customer's willful disregard of rules provided by this article. 
(3)  Emergency repairs. 
(4)  Insufficiency of the water supply due to circumstances beyond the control of the City of Cordele. 
(5)  Legal processes. 
(6)  Direction of public authorities. 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, war, unavoidable accident or force majeure. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 12) 
Sec. 66-82. - Specific article violations. 
It shall be a violation of this article to fail to abide by any provision of this article, and in addition, it shall be a violation of this article to: 
(1)  Tamper with meters, lines and devices belonging to the systems regulated by this article or required by this article. 
(2)  Reconnect services when services have been discontinued or turned off for nonpayment of bills. 
(3)  Use of any bypass, device, scheme or false representation to avoid payment in full for water and sewer services. 
(4)  Using a false, fictitious or unauthorized name for connection of services to avoid payment for charges for services previously used. 
(5)  Use of the name of a minor for connection of services. 
(6)  Use of a hose, pipe or other device to obtain or render unauthorized water service. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 13) 
Sec. 66-83. - Designation of representatives; citations. 
The City Manager of the City of Cordele and his designees shall carry out the provisions of this article and shall be authorized to issue citations for violations of this article. Citations shall be returnable to the magistrate court of the county. The citation forms shall be provided by such court. Use of citations shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, or as such section may hereafter be amended. If the judge of such court requires that a prosecuting attorney must be provided in a particular case, the City Attorney for the City of Cordele shall provide such prosecution. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 14) 
Sec. 66-84. - Violations. 
Any person found guilty of a violation of this article shall, upon conviction in the magistrate court of the county, be punished by the judge of such court within the limits provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60, or as such section may hereafter be amended. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 15) 
Sec. 66-85. - Complaints; adjustments. 
If the customer believes his bill is in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the Cordele City Hall, 501 North Seventh Street, Cordele, Georgia, to the person designated by the city manager for hearing utility complaints. Such claim shall be presented by the customer before his bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of services provided under this article. The customer may pay such bill under protest and the payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(1)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a customer for a fee of $10.00; however, if such special reading discloses that the meter was overread, no charge shall be made. 
(2)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the customer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; however, if the meter is found to overregister beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge shall be made. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the customer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other data considered proper under the circumstances by the City of Cordele. 
(4)  If an estimation of water usage is necessary because of a major leak, such estimation shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the Cordele City Commission on file in the City of Cordele Clerk's Office. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 16) 
Sec. 66-86. - Floodplain prohibition. 
Structures constructed within the floodplain area, as specified in the floodplain damage prevention ordinance adopted by the board of commissioners on April 4, 1996, shall not be connected to the utilities regulated by this ordinance, unless the structures to be served were constructed prior to the effective date of such ordinance or has been constructed in compliance with the ordinance. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 17) 
Sec. 66-87. - No waiver of service delivery strategies laws. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no fees, rates, penalties or other charges to customers located outside the geographic boundaries of the City of Cordele shall be arbitrarily higher than the fees charged to the customers receiving such service which are located within the geographic boundaries of the City of Cordele and the board of commissioners specifically reserves its right to contest any such differentials as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-70-24(2). The board of commissioners expressly finds that the city's present schedule of fees, rates, penalties and other charges to customers outside the geographic boundaries of the City of Cordele is not arbitrarily higher than the schedule of the same for customers within the geographic boundaries of the City of Cordele. 
(Res. of 1-9-2001, § 18) 
Secs. 66-88—66-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 

Sec. 66-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
On-site sewage management system means a sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system, whether serving single or multiple buildings, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, residences or other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. Included are conventional septic tank systems, privies, experimental and alternative on-site sewage management systems, portable toilets and other systems that may be approved by the county board of health. 
(Res. of 6-9-1987, § 2.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-102. - Violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be tried in the magistrate's court of the county, and if convicted, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Res. of 6-9-1987, § 7.01) 
Sec. 66-103. - System required. 
Where public or community sewage treatment systems are not available, the owner, or lessee or agent thereof of every building, residence or property, designed, used or intended to be used for human occupancy or congregation, shall provide an approved on-site sewage management system sufficient for persons normally expected to use or frequent the building, residence or other property for two hours or more. 
(Res. of 6-9-1987, § 3.01) 
Sec. 66-104. - Standards required. 
New installations of on-site sewage management systems shall meet all standards and provisions, except the subdivision portions thereof, set forth by the county board of health and the state department of human resources. No person may begin the physical development of a lot or structure thereon, where an on-site sewage management system will be utilized, nor install a new on-site management system, without first having applied for and obtained from the county board of health, a construction permit for the installation. No person may cover or use an on-site sewage management system until final inspection has been made by the county board of health to determine compliance with the provisions and standards of construction, and written approval has been issued by the county board of health. 
(Res. of 6-9-1987, § 4.01; Res. of 3-14-1989, § 4.01) 
Sec. 66-105. - Subdivision and mobile home parks. 
No person may sell, offer for sale, lease, rent, begin construction or otherwise begin the physical development of a subdivision or mobile home park where public or community sewage treatment systems are not available or contemplated to be available to serve the proposed development until proposals and plans for the water supply and sewage disposal method to be provided or installed have been submitted to and written approval has been obtained from the county office of codes and development, which shall consider the recommendations of the county board of health. Plans and proposals must meet the requirements of the land subdivision regulations of the county, and the zoning resolution of the county. 
(Res. of 6-9-1987, § 5.01; Res. of 3-14-1989, § 5.01) 
Sec. 66-106. - Prohibited discharge. 
No person shall allow the unapproved discharge or spillage of sewage, nor shall an on-site sewage management system be used or maintained in such manner that will allow the seepage or discharge of effluent from such system to any ground surface, water well, abandoned well, watercourse, drainage ditch, open trench, canal, storm drain or storm sewer, leak, stream, river, groundwater or other body of water. When, in the opinion of the county board of health, an existing on-site sewage management system presents an eminent or probable threat to public health, use of such system shall be discontinued and corrective measures shall be taken to preserve public health. 
(Res. of 6-9-1987, § 6.01) 
Secs. 66-107—66-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITIES PROTECTION CENTER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The membership agreement referred to in this article has been omitted from this codification. An official copy of the subject agreement is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 

Sec. 66-141. - Findings. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq. authorizes utilities, including municipal and counties, to participate as members of the Utilities Protection Center, Inc., a state nonprofit corporation (the UPC). 
(b)  The county has constructed the Lake Blackshear water system and is constructing water systems in other areas of the county, and is therefore a utility that qualifies for membership in the Utilities Protection Center, Inc. 
(c)  The board of commissioners has investigated the benefits of membership in the Utilities Protection Center, Inc., and has determined that such membership would be beneficial to the county. 
(Res. of 2-9-1999(1)) 
Sec. 66-142. - Membership. 
The county shall become a member of the Utilities Protection Center, Inc., upon the terms and conditions set forth in the membership agreement attached to this article and incorporated by this reference. 
(Res. of 2-9-1999(1)) 
Sec. 66-143. - Execution of membership agreement. 
The chairman or vice-chairman is authorized to execute and deliver a membership agreement on behalf of the county. 
(Res. of 2-9-1999(1)) 
Sec. 66-144. - Attestation and sealing. 
The county administrator is authorized to affix the seal of the county to any writings executed by the chairman in connection with this article, and to attest the same, but such attestation and/or sealing is not required to evidence the same as the act and deed of the county. 
(Res. of 2-9-1999(1)) 
Secs. 66-145—66-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OUTDOOR WATER USE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 12-14-2010, Arts. I—VII, was not specifically amendatory. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 66-166—66-172. 

Sec. 66-166. - Definitions. 
When used in this article: 
Address means the house number (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. Even-numbered address means a house number ending with number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. Odd-numbered address means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010, Art. I) 
Sec. 66-167. - Applicability of article. 
This article applies to any entity, and its customers, permitted by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) for water withdrawal or for operation of a drinking water system. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010, Art. II) 
Sec. 66-168. - Outdoor water use schedule during non-drought periods. 
(a)  Restrictions on outdoor water of landscape. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010, Art. III) 
Sec. 66-169. - Outdoor water use schedule during declared drought response levels. 
(a)  The director of the environmental protection division is authorized to make drought declarations. 
(b)  During declared drought conditions, outdoor water use other than activities exempted in Rule 391-3-30-.05, shall occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days. 
(c)  Declared drought response level one. Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(1)  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
(2)  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(3)  Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
(d)  Declared drought response level two . Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
(1)  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesday, Thursdays and Sundays. 
(2)  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(3)  The following uses are prohibited: 
a.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
b.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways except when necessary for public health and safety. 
(e)  Declared drought response level three . Outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
(1)  The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday. 
(2)  The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways is Saturday. 
(3)  The following uses are prohibited: 
a.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
b.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
c.  Filling installed swimming pools except when necessary for health, care or structural integrity. 
d.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts. 
e.  Washing buildings or structures except for immediate fire protection. 
f.  Non-commercial fund-raisers, such as car washes. 
g.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls except when necessary to support aquatic life. 
(f)  Declared drought response level four . No outdoor water use is allowed, other than for activities exempted in Rule 391-3-30-.05, or as the EPD director may order. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010, Art. IV) 
Sec. 66-170. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Capture and re-use of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances; and 
(2)  Re-use of gray water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(b)  The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedule of this article. 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater; and 
(2)  Irrigation of personal food gardens. 
(c)  Newly (in place less than 30 days) installed landscapes are subject to the following: 
(1)  Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during drought response level four. 
(2)  For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply. 
(d)  The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this article: 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(2)  Irrigation of fairways during times of non-drought and declared drought response level one; 
(3)  Irrigation of tees during times of non-drought and declared drought response levels one, two and three; and 
(4)  Irrigation of greens. 
(e)  The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this article: 
(1)  Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractor, and sports turf landscapers: During installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. 
(2)  Irrigation contractors: During installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only. 
(3)  Sod producers. 
(4)  Ornamental growers. 
(5)  Fruit and vegetable growers. 
(6)  Retail garden centers. 
(7)  Hydro-seeding. 
(8)  Power-washing. 
(9)  Construction sites. 
(10)  Producers of food and fiber. 
(11)  Car washes. 
(12)  Other activities essential to daily business. 
(13)  Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010, Art. V) 
Sec. 66-171. - Violations and penalties for non-compliance. 
(a)  Enforcement . 
(1)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(2)  The county administrator or persons designated by him shall determine if there has been a violation and initiate requests for compliance with this article, by the person violating the article. The county administrator or his designated inspectors shall be authorized to issue citations against any violator. 
(3)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(b)  Penalties for violation. 
1st offense: Warning 
2nd offense: Fine of $50.00 
3rd offense: Fine of $300.00 
(c)  Additional remedies. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Crisp County Board of Commissioners and the Crisp County Water Works from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violations; such as injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate action; to include disconnection of service. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010, Art. VI) 
Sec. 66-172. - References. 
This article includes and incorporates by reference the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-30, Outdoor Water Use. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010, Art. VII) 
APPENDIX A - UNIFIED LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The November 9, 1999, Unified Development Code of Crisp County was amended in its entirety and readopted on January 1, 2009. The 2009 code is not set out herein but is available for inspection in the county offices and on the county's official web site. 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-6(10); any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-6(11); development authority, § 2-101 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; manufactured homes, ch. 38; planning, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60; authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 